Excited for Kasai Grappling 3 Tomorrow night! A great night of grappling tomorrow night in NYC kasaigrappling in the Hammerstein Ballroom. The headline bout will be between outstanding Australian grappler Craig Jones and Brazilian powerhouse Rousimar Palhares. Mr Palhares was supposed to weigh in at 185 pounds but showed up at 218, apparently unaware that he had to make a weight limit. Mr Jones will probably weigh a little over 200 pounds. They have very different body types, demeanors and styles, so it should be a fascinating match. Mr Jones has been training in the basement with the squad in addition to being one of the most talented grapplers on the circuit, he is also a genuinely good person wishing him the best of luck in what will doubtless be one of the most anticipated matches of the year. The squad juniors are out in force doing what we like to see working on their skills and letting hard work, skill development and ambition get them to a higher level. Ethan Crelinsten, Nick Ronan, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau all take on very tough opponents in this elite level event as they continue their drive to the next level. Two former RGA students, Gianni Grippo and Jon Calestine will showcase two very different styles in a great match up as well. Congratulations to kasaigrappling for getting a such a great card in such a great venue. While the athletes work hard to take themselves to a new level, Kasai are helping take the sport as a whole to a new level. Thank you for giving all these outstanding athletes a venue to showcase their skills.It starts before you even make contact The moment you slap hands in a competitive match it s on. Even before you make contact you should be scheming for advantage. Too often we just lackadaisically reach for grips without thinking and take a let s see what happens approach. This is fine for daily training with friends, but make sure that kind of thinking does not permeate into your actions in a more competitive setting, for it will quickly expose you to problems. Even as you approach an opponent you should be looking for advantage and positioning yourself accordingly. As you approach, you should be FORMULATING A PLAN and POSITIONING YOURSELF TO ENACT IT. If you cannot see an opening, this is the time for minor delaying tactics until you do formulate a plan or see an opening develop. Remember always, THE FIRST CONTACT YOU HAVE WITH YOUR OPPONENT IS VISUAL CONTACT use that to begin the battle for advantage from the outset.Don t miss the chance to learn the secrets of the system thats taking the Brazilian JiuJitsu world by storm directly from legendary BJJ Coach and Renzo Gracie Black Belt John Danaher at the John Danaher 2018 Asia Super Camp at Evolve MMA on November 510!The single biggest problem that beginning jiu jitsu students face When people begin the study of jiu jitsu they often see it as a matter of learning a sufficient number of moves in sufficient detail to be able to hold their own on the mat with their classmates. Certainly there is a lot of truth to this. When coaching however, I see the main problem a little differently. The human body has some fundamental and very important ASYMMETRIES. An obvious example is the left sideright side asymmetry. People are either right handed or left handed and will be stronger and more coordinated on their strong side. Another extremely important asymmetry is that between UPPER BODY AND LOWER BODY STRENGTH AND COORDINATION. We are all much stronger in the lower body than upper body. If I asked you to walk several times across the dojo you could do this easily and with little effort. If I asked you to walk several lengths of the dojo on your hands in a handstand, even if you had the balance skills to do so, it would be a strenuous and tiring workout. If I asked you to sign your name on paper with your hand, you would do so easily; if I asked you to sign your name holding the pen in your toes it would be a real struggle. HUMANS ARE MASSIVELY STRONGER AND LESS COORDINATED IN THE LOWER BODY THAN UPPER BODY. This has clear ramifications for jiu jitsu. We must learn to grapple predominantly with our lower body legs. This means we have to overcome the lack of lower body coordination that most of us bring into the sport. As a beginner, YOU MUST PUT YOUR PRIMARY FOCUS UPON DEVELOPMENT OF COORDINATION AND DEXTERITY IN YOUR LEGS SO THAT YOU LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH YOUR LEGS IN ORDER TO MAKE USE OF THEIR SUPERIOR STRENGTH AND ENDURANCE. You must overcome the natural beginners tendency to grapple with the upper body and learn to let your legs do most of the work. Every time you drill moves, BE MINDFUL OF LETTING YOUR LEGS DO THE MAJORITY OF THE WORK INVOLVED. There is no shortcut here it will take time; but let me assure you that FORMING A STRONG CONNECTION OF YOUR MIND TO YOUR LEGS knowledge to action WILL BE THE SINGLE BIGGEST DETERMINANT OF YOUR PROGRESS IN JIU JITSUThe originals Most people these days know me as a grappling coach working with the squad. In fact, the first part of my career long before the squad was the interface between jiu jitsu and MMA. It began with the young Georges StPierre in his quest to become UFC welterweight champion and went from there to the incredible title run of Chris Weidman to take on and defeat the other main contender for UFC greatest of all time, Anderson Silva. In that time i has the honor of working with so many incredible visiting athletes such as Rory MacDonald, Frankie Edgar and Roger Gracie it was only when Mr StPierre retired and Mr Weidman opened his own gym deep in Long Island that I switched to focus to pure grappling with the squad. I consciously avoided social media throughout this time. These MMA fighters were genuine superstars so there was no need for me to write about them and their achievements. When the squad began, first with Eddie Cummings and then Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, they were unknowns in a fledgling sport, so I joined social media to see if i could help get them recognition for their amazing achievements in the grappling world. From there the squad grew and interest in our philosophies and methods expanded. Still, I never forget where I came from and the thrill of those early days in MMA. This is a shot taken during the mature part of Mr StPierre s career, when Mr Weidman was making his remarkable unbeaten run through the middleweight division with his eyes on Anderson Silva an epic story that we can all draw inspiration from. Practice is over and UFC athletes georgesstpierre chrisweidman davidbranch32 and johncholish relax with renzograciebjj and JZ Calvacante and Magno Garma and other RGA athletes. Great training days different priorities, same passion, different problems, same methodology of solutions. I am blessed to have been a small part of that time and those people their quests, drive, brilliance and hard work carried me far higher than could have done alone. Your training roots will give rise to future flowering branches as you grow and change in the sport cherish and remember them.The great divide There are two approaches to winning in jiu jitsu. The first are PROACTIVE methods. Here the idea is to INITIATE THE ACTION. You set the goal and start the work towards it. So if I favor arm bar attacks, I will begin with set ups that PUSH THE ACTION TOWARDS ARMBARS. This stands in contrast to REACTIVE approaches. Here, I passively observe my opponent s actions. He initiates and as I observe I see OPPORTUNITY ARISE IN THE COURSE OF THE ACTION. I then match the opportunity with the appropriate technique and score. Let s understand something very important about these two different approaches. Proactive approaches generally require A SMALL SET OF FAVORITE MOVES ENCASED IN A LARGE COLLECTION OF SET UPS THAT ENABLE YOU TO FORCE THEIR APPLICATION AGAINST SOMEONE EXPECTING THEIR USE. Reactive approaches on the other hand, generally require A LARGE SET OF MOVES TO COVER ANY SITUATION OUR OPPONENT PUTS US IN, BUT VERY LITTLE SET UP AS THE OPPONENT CREATES THE OPPORTUNITY FOR US. This means the stylistic difference between the two can be quite dramatic. Proactive games are all about creating the conditions for a few favorite moves. Reactive methods are all about patience, pacing, sensing opportunity and having the breadth of technique to cover whatever opportunity emerges in front of you. There have been great champions using both approaches and indeed great champions who merged both approaches together. Understanding which approach you want to master will help give you a sense of what kind of training program you must adopt to make good progress.Soul of a champion This past weekend saw one of the greatest UFC champions ever lose his belt in an extraordinarily close bout after a record eleven title defenses. This post is not about the match, how it should have been scored or whether Demetrious Johnson is the best pound for pound fighter in the world. This is just about how we all can improve ourselves by looking at Mr Johnson as a role model. When I first started seeing Mr Johnson at UFC events he showed inconsistent brilliance. He beat Japanese Superstar Norifumi Yamamoto to show he was a great talent. Then in his next match against Miguel Torres he showed great takedowns but then got swept into mount on multiple occasions. Yet despite the early flaws EVERY TIME HE WENT OUT TO COMPETE YOU COULD LITERALLY SEE THE FLAWS BEING REPLACED BY NEW STRENGTHS. He had the work ethic and in conjunction with his coach Matt Hume, the wisdom to see what needed to be improved and the best way to do it. This was an athlete who was not satisfied with winning. He recognized that only flawless wins would give him the resources he would need later at championship level. The second great trait that I saw in him was his overall positivity. Mr Johnson had a hard upbringing and many personal difficulties in his life that he never talks about. He could legitimately feel encumbered by them but never does. I have never met a person so strong in his ability to see positive elements in challenging circumstances. For him, everything was a blessing and a test of his character to be surpassed through self improvement. This is a man who dominates the circumstances of his life through his positive attitude rather than allow the circumstances of his life to dominate him. We don t know much about the future but for person with traits like these it s always forwardI am very excited to announce that I will be teaching at the Evolve Gym super camp 2018 in Singapore November 5th to 10th. Over the five days there will twice daily training culminating in a three hour seminar Saturday twenty three hours of work to cover techniques, tactics and training methods that will not only create performance increases, but enable you to make progress on your own long after the camp has finished. evolvemma is hosting this event with people from all over the world coming in. This is an exciting opportunity for me to help spread our approach to the sport made famous by my brilliant students. Evolve Gym provides the perfect location for a well run week of training and fun with people from all over the world united by a love a jiu jitsu and a desire for self improvement in their sports performance at whatever level they bring and aspire to. Hope to see you there!Getting ready Craig Jones has been training hard in the blue basement getting ready for his showdown against the formidable Rousimar Palhares at kasaigrappling in two weeks in NYC at the Hammerstein Ballroom. That s a very glamorous venue for the outstanding athletes that Kasai has brought together until then it s the much less glamorous blue basement Mr Jones has shown admirable drive in training and is making rapid progress. There is a sense in which his experience now is also your experience as you battle towards your own aspirations just on a lesser scale for now. The idea is the same CHOOSE A DATE AS A DEADLINE FOR A PERFORMANCE WHETHER IT IS PUBLIC COMPETITION OR PRIVATE GYM PERFORMANCE IS NOT IMPORTANT THE REAL COMPETITION IS WITHIN YOU CREATE A PLAN TO IMPROVE YOUR PERFORMANCE BY THAT DATE AND EXHIBIT THE DISCIPLINE AND WISDOM TO GET IT DONE. It s a wonderful opportunity for the juniors to train with a such an outstanding grappler and a good daily test for Mr Jones to test the skills in a very leg lock heavy room that he will need to build and exhibit against such a tough and talented opponent. This is the notion of mutual benefit in action. Remember always that best kind of benefit is MUTUAL BENEFIT. Only then can the relationships needed to build skills and strength over time be sustained long enough to make significant progress in any enterprise in which you take part.Finishing mechanics A distinctive feature of my coaching style is an unusually heavy emphasis on FINISHING MECHANICS for all the major submission holds my athletes use. So often I see talented athletes do a fine job of entering into a submission and controlling their opponent, but then exhibit weak finishing mechanics at the crucial moment when submission victory was within their grasp. You must have a very clear understanding of the mechanical details that make a given submission work against determined resistance. Perhaps more than any other aspect of jiu jitsu the submissions game is the one where the smallest errors of placement of lever and fulcrum and application of directions of force will have the most detrimental effects. Study your favorite submissions with an eye for detail that surpasses all other aspects of the game and you will soon find that opponents who used to easily slip away from you are now trapped and helpless when you get to your finishing positions. MAKE YOUR PRIMARY FOCUS TIGHTNESS, RESTRICTION OF MOVEMENT AND PRECISION IN PLACEMENT OF FULCRUM AND LEVER RATHER THAN APPLICATION OF POWER. Observe the impressive tightness of the rear strangle used by Garry Tonon to win his second MMA fight it looks as though a tourniquet has been wrapped around his opponent s neck, such is the precise placement of hands, Head and elbows, along with the rotational direction of force that we favor. Take pride in your finishing mechanics once you master them you will have a set of weapons that opponents will fear and upon which you can attach great faith.New England summer I spent the weekend with Bernardo Faria and the team at BJJ Fanatics filming the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series THE FRONT HEADLOCKGUILLOTINE. Two days of filming in a beautiful New EnglandBoston setting a ton a footage featuring the squad s approach to the front headlockguillotine game. I always insist that my students have strong attacks out of front headlock all of them excel at it. In the gym it is one of our most successful systems when our students spar each other and has been featured in some of the squad s biggest successes. Can t wait to see how this one comes out I feel this one will have very wide applicability for many students as guillotine attacks and other strangles from the front are among the most popular and successful in the sport. Our step by step approach to the position will make it easy for you to use them in a more systematic fashion. Now it s back to the train station and five hours back to NYC a wonderful ride through New England in summer for a full day of teaching tomorrow in the basement of hope and despair wishing you all the best from Boston!Mentors I am a huge believer in the idea of taking on grappling mentors outstanding figures in the sport who you believe have some characteristics that strongly appeal to you or which you believe could greatly improve your performance and direction if you were to implement them. A truly great grappler who dazzled the sport when he entered ADCC and blitzed his weight division on several occasions was the inestimable Jean Jacques Machado. It was not just that he won that was so impressive it was the WAY he won. There was not a moment wasted on the mat he embodied what I take as the ideal of jiu jitsu PURPOSEFUL MOVEMENT DIRECTED TOWARDS CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUSTAINED ATTACKS CULMINATING IN SUBMISSION. Nobody demonstrated this ideal better than Mr Machado. If you wanted to show a curious friend what great grappling looks like and were looking for exciting and technically flawless matches you could not do better than those world championship winning performances. From the start of the match until the inevitable submission finish it was a hustling bustling flurry of well directed attacks in combinations that flowed evenly between position and submission and created tactical pressure rather than physical pressure watching this pressure crack his opponents was one of the most instructive lessons of my own development. Trying to recreate that sense of efficient and unrelenting attack has been a big part of my work and it should be yours too. What a pleasure to see the great man visit the blue basement and show his knowledge to new generations of students alongside my Sensei Renzo Gracie they grew up together in jiu jitsu now they share it and improve it on opposite sides of America I will always be grateful to the mentors who provided insight, inspiration and example to me through study and training their work can become yours find them, study them and cherish them.Knowing what to expect This is a photo of Garry Tonon roughly three hours prior to his second MMA fight practicing his outside hook kosoto gake takedown against the fence. Most fight promotions allow the athletes access to the cage prior to the event so they can warm up and get a general feel for the arena prior to their bout. Later that night, Mr Tonon would use that exact same takedown to good effect on multiple occasions. Remember this TO A DEGREE, COMBAT SPORTS ARE CHAOTIC AND WE DON T REALLY KNOW WHAT WILL HAPPEN BUT WITHIN THAT CHAOS THERE ARE MANY THINGS THAT ARE VERY LIKELY TO HAPPEN WE NEED TO FOCUS A LARGE PERCENTAGE OF OUR TRAINING TIME UPON THOSE. However confusing the game may seem at times, there are many things about it that are known and predictable. Patterns of behavior that are often repeated. TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS FOREKNOWLEDGE AND USE IT TO HELP YOUR DEVELOPMENT AND EFFECTIVENESS. There are certain moves, scenarios and movement patterns that occur in almost every match KNOW THEM WELL AND TRAIN THEM AND THEIR COUNTERS MORE THAN OTHER TECHNIQUES. once you think this way some of the mystery goes out of the sport and you will soon see performance increases.Back in the blue basement Great to see outstanding Australian grappling sensation Craig Jones craigjonesbjj back training with the squad in preparation for his upcoming super fight in the upcoming kasaigrappling show in NYC against leg locking powerhouse Rousimar Palhares. Senior squad member Garry Tonon had an epic match against the Brazilian juggernaut that showcased the leg lock game probably better than any other match. Mr Tonon did it weighing only 168 pounds that night in England. What better place for Mr Jones to prepare for the same challenge than the basement of hope and despair at RGA? This should be a fascinating match up. Mr Jones has a much bigger and longer body than Mr Tonon so there will be both differences and similarities in the preparation should be extremely interesting. Today he mixed it up with the squad juniors in some great training. Here, he and Oliver Taza get into a great sparring session and exchange attacks. Next few months has a slew of tournaments with various rule sets to make for very interesting training sessionsTeaching time What better way to cap off a wonderful weekend watching my student and teacher decisively win their respective MMA fights in the best tradition of jiu jitsu, than to partake in the pleasure of teaching local jiu jitsu students our systems based approach to the sport. I was very impressed to see the high interest level in our leg lock game and the enthusiasm and dedication of local students. It s always a wonderful experience coming out to Asia and being in the home of the great martial arts traditions that gave so much to the West it s an honor to give a little back. The Philippines has a unique distinguished history of martial arts development and the great show put on by onechampionship gave local fighters and fans an opportunity to show that. Heading to the airport now for the long twenty five hour journey home. Tired but happy. Thank you to our Filipino hosts, thanks to all the local students who came out in force to learn our game and thank you to you my loyal readers for your interest and support for what we do. Best wishes from the Philippines and see you soon to my students back in the basement in NYC Victory in Manila! Garry Tonon won his second MMA fight here in the Philippines tonight. He took on a very tough and big Rahul Raju and won via rear strangle in the third round. It was an interesting bout, Mr Raju had a big reach advantage and staked his chances on a powerful counter rear hand. Mr Tonon attacked the legs hard in submission exchanges looking to cause enough damage to prevent him sitting on his heavy punches. As the damage to the legs accrued the takedowns came easier and then Mr Tonon switched to back attack system to get the break through. This ends only the seventh month of his MMA training I am happy he got more time in the cage in this fight and got to feel some of the adversity of a longer fight all important steps in an athlete s development. Congratulations to Mr Tonon on a very nice win and deeper progress into the game. Thanks so much to all the sparring partners who helped the preparation and thanks to all of you for taking an interest in our approach to the game and your support of what we do hope you all enjoyed the show! Wishing you all the best from the Philippines!Press conference The rise of OneCampionship show You can always tell a lot about the interest level for a given show by prior media attention. The media presence is a strong indicator of initial public attention and then they amplify that through their channels to compound it. In the main press conference yesterday, onechampionship CEO, Chatri Sityodtong presided over a veritable horde of media correspondents here in Manila. There is a sense of real growth in Asian MMA. Mr Sityodtong expounded his long term vision for growth of the sport in Asia and beyond. His main goal is to reconcile the modern sport of MMA with traditional martial arts values to create greater social acceptance and support in a way that can create massive growth over time and make MMA a true mainstream sport. The vision for the athletes is one of killers in the cage, but gentleman outside; and where the athletes are the draw both as fighters and as people. It is very interesting to observe the differences from American MMA culture where a much more confrontational attitude outside the cage is seen as essential to selling a show. Here in the Philippines this approach seems to be working very well, as a sold out show projected to a huge television audience across Asia and covered by a media swarm bigger than I ever saw in North America takes shape. I have always believed that to get to the top you have to stand out and represent something different from the others. Mimicry can get you only so high at some point you have to do things your own way if you want to reach your full potential. OneChampionship looks to be doing exactly that. Excited to see them setting up the big show!!I am very excited to announce the release of my new instructional video BACK ATTACKS ENTER THE SYSTEM today from BJJFanatics the second video in the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. There is a link in my instagram bio that you can follow if you wish to order it. Most of you know that I greatly favor the back as the ultimate attackingsafety position in grappling and fighting. Whenever my students take on bigger and stronger opponents I always counsel them to make their primary focus attacks upon the back and the legs everything else is secondary. I present here the complete system. As always, I teach the why of everything so as to give a clear conceptual understanding in addition to the how via explicit techniques. The video is around nine and half hours long. It covers all the main aspects of working from the back with a particular emphasis on finishing skills. My intention is to give you all a complete systems based training resource you can keep coming back to for years rather a flavor of the month collection of moves that will amuse you for a while and then be forgotten. As always, this work is dedicated to all my teachers and mentors along with my outstanding students who have always done an incredible job of displaying the techniques and concepts in this video. Without their hard work, dedication and individual brilliance I would just be a fool tinkering away in my sensei s basement. I was always very proud that in the numerous EBI competitions that my students competed in, they had by a landslide the highest rate of wins and submissions in the tricky overtime rules on every occasion they chose the back now you will see why.Sparring with a purpose The vast majority of jiu jitsu athletes enter every sparring session with a let s see what happens attitude. Let me tell you something whenever you enter sparring with a let s see what happens attitude, YOU WILL SIMPLY END UP DOING THE SAME THINGS YOU DID IN ALL YOUR PREVIOUS SPARRING SESSIONS. Left to their own devices, ATHLETES WILL ALWAYS GO BACK TO THEIR HABITS. The idea of progressive training is to create NEW habits, not simply repeat old ones. Change within yourself has to be FORCED, it won t happen by itself. The best way to make this happen is to have a clear goals when you spar. Usually the goals are very modest a new grip, a new set up for a favorite move, perhaps a new move you think has potential. Only by bringing in new material and improving old material will you make progress. This is best done by having a notion of what you want to accomplish before you slap hands and commence sparring. Of course there are days where you just want to spar with an open and relaxed mind and have fun seeing what happens that s fine and healthy. However, make sure a healthy percentage of your sparring sessions involve clear prior goals to prevent them degenerating into more of the same sessions where you walk out the same the same as you walked in the door.Study Every Jiu Jitsu athlete studies moves. Remember this ANY GIVEN MOVE HAS FOUR CRITICAL STAGES First set ups and precursors Second entry Third execution Fourth if the move should fail and realistically the majority of your attempts will fail on someone your own size and skill level exitentrance to subsequent move Only when you study moves in this four step pattern will you realize their depth and use that to succeed with them.The neck An essential feature of jiu jitsu is the idea of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE UPON A VULNERABLE TARGET THAT, IF SUCCESSFULLY ATTACKED, WOULD END THE FIGHT. There is no part of the human body that is more vulnerable to the attacks of grappling than the NECK. The neck is relatively small in circumference around fifteen to twenty inches for most male athletes yet within it are packed together some of the most vital components of the hum body. The body does a good job of protecting key components like heart and lungs behind the bony rib cage. The crucial spinal cord is well protected by the spine. The brain by the thickness of the skull. The neck on the other hand, houses the critical carotid arteries, vertebral arteries, jugular veins, trachea and the spine itself, along with a host of other very important components all packed in close to each other with NO PROTECTION and close to the surface. As such, the neck is the single best target for attack when grappling when strikes are involved you can argue that the jaw and other targets becomes more important. All jiu jitsu students must make a serious study of neck anatomy and the means of attacking the vulnerability of this greatest of all targets. In grappling, The human body is CONTROLLED at the head, but it is best FINISHED at the neck. NO OTHER PART OF THE BODY OFFERS SUCH A DENSELY PACKED MASS OF CRITICAL COMPONENTS HOUSED IN SUCH A SMALL SPACE AND SO UNPROTECTED BY ANY OTHER ELEMENTS OF OUR PHYSIOLOGY. I teach my students to fight like vampires the neck is always the first target. Once opponents fear your neck attacks their defensive reactions will often make other favored targets such as legs, much easier to snatch.Here is a short clip from my upcoming video instructional BACK ATTACKS ENTER THE SYSTEM. As you know from the incredible work of my hard working students, I put a very heavy emphasis of back mastery in my training programs. In particular, my students have shown remarkable finishing prowess from the back. This is the result of a specialized system of subtle arm traps that make breakthroughs with the single most important submission hold in the sport the rear naked strangle much easier to achieve. So many students come to me expressing frustration with the common problem of being able to get to the back quite readily, but then failing to finish successfully from there. I teach the complete system I believe this is a nine hour video on both a conceptual level to give students a clear understanding of the WHY of their actions and a technical level to give students a clear understanding of the HOW of their actions. I actually had to film this video twice as the first one had faulty audio, but now it has superb audio and much improved production It was fun going up to Boston to film with Bernardo Faria and his team at BJJ Fanatics. I hope you have as much fun watching as we had making it, and more importantly, the happiness of good results on the mat. As always, thanks so much to my sensei, Renzo Gracie and my students, who made the grappling world take notice of the back system and whose innovative brilliance keeps it growing and improving, and to all of you, my students outside the basement for taking interest in our work. Video will be released early next week Getting ready Garry Tonon goes through another sparring session in preparation for his upcoming bout in One FC onechampionship in Manila Philippines in two weeks. He will take on Rahul Raju. On the same card, my sensei, Renzo Gracie will take on the great Yuki Kondo in a battle of masters. Working the interface between grappling and MMA has always been one of my greatest interests so its a pleasure to watch over the preparation of Mr Tonon. He is only seven months into his MMA training so every day something new is learned. It s rather similar to our first days in jiu jitsu, where every class you see and try things you have never done before and everything is completely new. That spirit makes for exciting training sessions and a great sense of development and growth. It can be frustrating at times new skills never come easily, but so long as a person has a sense of forward progress towards a desired goal , I believe they can endure any frustration and disappointment and keep in the game. Just one more week of training in NYC and then it s off to the Philippines! Another marathon plane fight any person raised in Australia or New Zealand is used to that! It will be nice to be back in the Southern Hemisphere again! Keep that spirit of your first six months of training alive within yourself keep those feelings of amazement, growth, frustrationdesire and your game will never grow stale and will grow alongside you.Victory in London! The squad has a great night in London at the O2 Arena polarisprofessional grappling Championships. Nicky Ryan made superb use of his triangle sankaku and armbar skills to take a fine submission win over UFC veteran Phil Harris and advance to the next stage of the Polaris 145 pound championship. Oliver Taza defeated talented Australian grappler Lachlan Giles via decision after dominating most of the action through a great match he now moves to the final for the welter weight title. Both Mr Ryan and Mr Taza will have bouts in a future Polaris event to try to win those titles. Outstanding work from these two youngsters great to see their hard work in the gym paying off on the stage I have been telling people for the longest time about the skills of the Ryan brothers in triangle attacks good to see them going public with it! Oliver Taza has some of the best gym performances I see every week great to see him taking those on stage more and more. Both athletes work in the best spirit of jiu jitsu constant attacks looking for submissions at all times. Well done!The back Reconciliation of two fundamental approaches There is no question that the single most successful attack from the back in jiu jitsu is the rear naked strangle mata leaohadaka jime. The essential nature of this attack is one of A SINGLE HIGH PERCENTAGE MOVE ATTACKING A SMALL AREA IN AN ENTIRELY PREDICTABLE MANNER. Such is the positional control afforded by this method of attack, that even though it is known to all, it is still very difficult to stop. When it DOES fail, we need to shift our method entirely to DIVERSIFIED ATTACKS OVER A WIDE AREA the very opposite of the initial approach. Learning to play these extremes of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE with rear naked strangle in one hand and DIVERSITY OF ATTACKS AND LOCATION OF ATTACKS on the other, is the heart of a successful back attack program. We have to recognize the simple fact that one submission deserves the majority of our attention, but that we need back up attacks in different areas to get a breakthrough when the big gun fails. Learning how to reconcile these two different approaches to the back is crucial for your success. Here, young athletes Mikey Wilson and Liam Zeh show how it is done with excellent switches between rear naked strangles and rear triangles ushiro sankaku both essential elements of our back attack system. Everything begins with the rear naked strangle, but where things finish is often determined by the directions of resistance.Working from neutrality to advantage The basic insight behind all martial arts is that of gaining some form of prior advantage before committing to an attack. In truth however, our opponents strongly and craftily resist any attempt on our part to gain any form of advantage and so we spend the majority of our time on the mat in neutral positions. It is important to understand that EVEN WITHIN POSITIONS THAT ARE CLASSIFIED AS NEUTRAL no points scored THERE CAN STILL BE MINOR ADVANTAGES GAINED THAT CAN ACCUMULATE TO A DEGREE WHERE A BREAKTHROUGH CAN BE ATTAINED AND POINTS SCORED OR A SUBMISSION APPLIED. Often it may be something small, an advantageous grip, foot position, head placement anything that affords you a greater degree of control over him than he has over you, no matter how small. Understand this ANY GIVEN NEUTRAL POSITION IS IN PRACTICE, ONLY AS NEUTRAL AS THE RELATIVE SKILL LEVEL OF THE TWO ATHLETES. Learn to go beyond seeing POSITIONS as dominant or advantageous and start to look for ACTIONS AND PLACEMENTS that are advantageous. These are less obvious, less well defined, but against skilled opponents, they will be the resource you call upon more than any other. Here, Georges StPierre and Garry Tonon work from neutral position for leg control. Small nuances in grip, limb positioning, placement of wedges and directionality of force will determine winner and loser in these situations.What do you look for? Though i write in copious amounts about my work as a coach, The basis of any coaching program can be put in a single word PROGRESSION. Everything I do is simply an attempt to take a group of athletes from one level to higher level, no matter how small that uplift may be be every single day and then let time work it s magic as days become weeks and months and years. Those small daily progressions will make big changes. Just as seemingly small interest rates compounded over time can make you wealthy, so too, can daily changes where each new skill compounds with existing skills until you go from unknown amateur to someone whom people will pay to watch. What is required more than anything is A CLEAR SENSE OF WHAT IS DEFICIENT OR PROBLEMATIC TODAY AND A CLEAR PLAN TO FIX THAT FOR TOMORROW. My job is to see where the problems are now and address them tomorrow and then check short term progress in those areas. All this is done on a daily basis but this has to be reconciled with long term goals and a vision of what the athlete wishes to achieve in the long run. This daily log of problems and deficiencies is the basis of my observations. Then instruction and drilling of potential solutions followed by more observations, this time looking for results compared with previous days. ABOVE ALL THERE MUST BE A SENSE OF CONTINUITY FROM DAY TO DAY SO THAT PROGRESS CAN BE MADE OVER TIME. If the observations of today are not linked to yesterday and tomorrow they are without value. Don t observe for entertainment or excitement observe for PROGRESS only when observations are linked to past and future can you do this.When Chuck Norris does leg locks he doesn t bother with ashi garami he just tells your leg to break itself...and it does...Great to see Georges StPierre meet the man who has done so much for the growth and popularity of martial arts around the world and who played a key role in the early development of BJJ in North America. He was a kind and gracious host to my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie along with many other members of Gracie and Machado families back when no one in the United States even knew what BJJ was. I remember him coming to do a class with Mr Gracie in NYC and being impressed by his quiet and thoughtful demeanor and his incredible work ethic in In continuing to learn new aspects of martial arts despite already being an established legend an amazing example to us all. Though he is mostly remembered for his martial arts movies, he was a Karate tournament champion in the early days the martial arts explosion in the late sixties and early seventies and had the adaptability to stay at the forefront of martial arts development through the nineties and beyond. Great to see him meet the face of the modern multidiscipline approach to MMA. The back coaching a mindset Most of my coaching work is the development of physical skills. These will always form the backbone of any training program since without them, all the other aspects of the game tactics, strategy, game plans etc etc cannot be enacted. Nonetheless, you must recognize this fundamental truth EVERY DELIBERATE PHYSICAL MOVE ON THE MAT MUST BE PRECEDED BY THE MENTAL ACT OF RECOGNIZING THE OPPORTUNITY TO EMPLOY THAT MOVE, WHETHER IT BE CONSCIOUS OR UNCONSCIOUS. If you never identify the opportunity, you will never attempt the move. It is crucial therefore, THAT YOU TRAIN YOURSELF TO SEE AND IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITY, for only then will the physical action follow. The more opportunities you see, the more that move will fire for you. SO JUST AS IMPORTANT AS THE VARIOUS TECHNIQUES FOR TAKING THE BACK IS THE SKILL OF RECOGNIZING THE CONDITIONS THAT MAKE TAKING THE BACK A POSSIBILITY. An athlete who can see opportunities and who has the physical skill to make it happen is a dangerous opponent indeed. Conversely, an athlete who has well developed physical skills but who is blind to opportunity to actually employ is harmless to his opponent. Since I favor the back above all positions, unsurprisingly I constantly emphasize to my students the need to see opportunities to get there so that they see opportunities where others don t. This heightened state of awareness for the back is a big part of your success rate in actually getting there in a matchNothing beats the back When it comes to control and submit a tough and dangerous opponent nothing will beat getting behind him and strangling him. The back is the single safest place to be in a one on one fight without weapons whether it be grappling, MMA or a real fight. Nowhere else is there such a massive imbalance between your ability to attack them and their ability to attack you. Of course other positions have their own great value, especially when striking is permitted, but the back will always be my favorite due to the imbalance in attacking potential between the two athletes and the incredible power and success rate of the main weapon used from the back the rear naked strangle mata Leaohadaka jime. No other weapon in the jiu jitsu submission arsenal offers such variation in severity of application as the backstrangle combination. It can go from a mild holddownimmobilization to a safe means of rendering an uncontrollable opponent safely unconscious; to a truly brutal elbowstotheback ofthe head beatdown position to a lethal strangle in a life or death struggle. No other submission offers this mix of versatility allied with safety and high percentage success rate. As such, the back and the mata leao strangle are the most symbolic representation of jiu jitsu. If I could only pick one submission hold for the rest of my life unquestionably I would choose this one and I believe the overwhelming majority of other jiu jitsu players of all levels and all sizes and skill levels would do the same. Understanding the many nuances of the back both the positional element and the submission element is a huge part of my coaching program. Nothing shows me more clearly the speed of a student s progress than A PROPENSITY TO RUTHLESSLY HUNT FOR THE BACK AT ALL TIMES IN A MATCH, THE PHYSICAL SKILLS TO GET THERE AND STAY THERE, ALONG WITH THE KNOWLEDGE AND INTENSITY TO BREAK THROUGH DEFENSES AND FINISH IN THE MOST DECISIVE AND CONTROLLING WAY POSSIBLE FROM THERE. Here, Gordon Ryan, who has truly devastating control to submission sequences from the back, locks in a characteristically tight stranglehold from behind.The dualities of jiu jitsu part two top and bottom position Jiu jitsu is unusual among the main grappling style insofar as it is neutral between top and bottom position. There is no penalty for simply coming out at the start of match and sitting down. The core assumption of the sport is that TOP AND BOTTOM ARE OF EQUAL VALUE PROVIDED THE BOTTOM ATHLETE CAN MAIN CONTACT WITH HIS OPPONENT WITH HIS LEGS. Only when the top athlete clears the legs is it understood that he has advantage with his top position. As such, the sport is played almost entirely with one athlete working from top position trying to clear the legs guard and a bottom athlete trying to maintain control with his legs and attack from underneath with sweepreversals and submissions. Most athletes have a preference for one over the other BUT NOBODY CAN ONLY BE SKILLED AT ONE AND RISE HIGH IN THE SPORT. As early as possible in your development you must make a commitment to excellence in both top and bottom positions. If you feel your development is uneven in this regard and your skill in one is noticeably higher than the other YOU MUST ADDRESS THIS, for continuing on without resolving this issue will prove a real problem in the future. Make your first goal the ability to HOLD AND MAINTAIN your guard against passing pressure from bottom and MAINTAIN BALANCE, POSTURE AND TOP POSITION against sweeping and submission pressure from underneath. All the other moves sweeps, passes, submissions etc have to be built upon the bedrock of GUARD MAINTENANCE on bottom and BALANCEPOSTURAL MAINTENANCE on top. Only when you can retain your guard for long periods of time against pressure will you be able to employ the various moves from guard you won t sweep or submit anyone from guard if your opponent blows past your legs in seconds nor will you pass anyone s guard if you are immediately knocked out of balance and posture broken. Remember always that jiu jitsu requires excellence in both top and bottom don t fight against this basic truth train and develop in accordance with it.The dualities of jiu jitsu Much of the essential nature of jiu jitsu is revealed by its many notable dualities. One of the most fundamental and important is that between offense and defense. It is critical that you become equally adept at both as inadequacies in one will make you incapable of revealing your strengths in the other. If i know my defense is weak I will always be unwilling to take the risks required for strong offense for fear of ending in a vulnerable position that I cannot defend. If my offense is weak I will hide behind my defense and never exhibit the ability to carry the fight to my opponent and take victory. It is your duty then, to approach the learning of every move from BOTH the viewpoint of offense and defense THE MORE YOU LEARN ABOUT ONE, THE MORE YOU WILL UNDERSTAND ABOUT THE OTHER. Every move in jiu jitsu has two faces offense and defense if you see only one you are growing at only half your potential.Elevating There is an essential prerequisite if I wish to enter into ashi garami from bottom position MY OPPONENT S KNEES MUST BE OFF THE MAT. Due to the fact that many athletes pass guard in standing positions, this creates many opportunities to leg entries from bottom. In cases where my opponent keeps two knees on the floor IT IS UP TO ME TO GET HIS KNEES OFF THE MAT. The single best method of doing so is some form of ELEVATION. This is a truly essential skill that must be thoroughly mastered if you wish to be considered proficient in the leg lock game. Daily drilling getting a partner up into the air will quickly get you proactively creating opportunities to enter the legs from underneath so that every day you have numerous opportunities to attack and develop your skills. Get your opponent up high and watch your leg locking skills go higher still!Body Tension Your ability to judge when to relax your body and when to lock it tight in maximal tension is a critical factor in your development in the sport. Tension in the body is absolutely necessary WHENEVER YOU ARE TRYING TO INHIBIT THE MOVEMENT OF YOUR OPPONENT. In most other cases it is undesirable, as it costs you greatly in endurance and efficiency of movement. The clearest examples of a time when you want to shut down your opponent s movement is during the application of a submission hold so unsurprisingly, this is a time when there ought to be considerable tension locking your body into the hold until the application is complete. This explains why failed submissions, particularly in long combinations, are among the most tiring aspects of a match. Learning to keep your body relaxed when you want to generate movement, and then switch to maximal tension when you want to lock the opponent down and complete a given move is a big part of your shift from beginner to expert. Jiu jitsu is a typically played out as long cycles of relatively relaxed periods interspersed with short bursts of maximum tension as critical moves are attempted. Just make sure those periods of great tension are kept short and spaced apart or you will quickly exhaust yourself. The most dangerous part of maximal tension is the natural habit most people have of HOLDING THEIR BREATH UNDER TENSION be very careful once you go into oxygen debt it is very hard to get out of debt under the stress of a tough match. Monitor your breathing careful and keep breathing even when your body is fully locked in a deep submission hold. Here, Georges StPierre shows an excellent degree of body tension as he locks in a tight inside heel hook in an inside sankaku variation of cross ashi garami. Notice that although his BODY is exhibiting strong tension, his FACE is not this is usually a good sign that breathing is uninterrupted and that the tension is being applied in the correct places.The iron law of competence and context One of the most commonly asked questions I receive runs like this, I love what the squad does in grappling competitions with leg locks, but would those leg locks work in MMA? There seems to be an odd conception among many people that leg locks are somehow DIFFERENT from all other grappling techniques insofar as they are workable in grappling, but unworkable in fighting. I never hear people say for example, That armbars work in grappling but don t work in MMA, or Darce strangles, or half guard passes etc etc. Here is a point so important it ought to be written in large bold letters on the wall of every jiu jitsu academy in the world THE COMBAT EFFECTIVENESS OF ALL THE MAIN MOVES OF JIU JITSU, INCLUDING LEG LOCKS, IS NEVER DETERMINED BY THE MOVES THEMSELVES THEY ALL WORK WELL BUT RATHER BY THE COMPETENCE AND CONTEXT IN WHICH THEY ARE EXECUTED. The truth is, ANY jiu jitsu move can result in catastrophic failure if applied incompetently or at the wrong time or on the wrong person. This is just as true of arm bars and strangles as it is of leg locks. Worry less about your technique selection and worry more about your technique execution do you perform it well? Do you select it at the appropriate time and against an appropriate opponent? Do you make the necessary adjustments to lessen the danger of striking technique being used as you apply it? Do you have a realistic follow up if it should begin to fail? These are the more important questions. Here, Outstanding MMA fight Joao Zeferino, who has trained regularly with the squad for a long time, shows great execution of heel hooks in MMA at WSOF lightweight Grand Prix in 2015, submitting to two opponents in one night, including MMA legend, Jorge Macaco Patino with fine technique well adapted for the different pressures of the cageThe higher you go....The higher you go in the sport of jiu jitsu, the less you will concern yourself with the standard techniques of the sport. Your first challenge when you begin jiu jitsu is to develop strong skills in the basic operations of the game to develop skill in the basic MOVES. So for example, you work hard to develop a good arm bar, a tight triangle, a reliable elbow escape etc etc. By the time you get to a good level you will come to realize that in the majority of cases, THERE IS NEAR UNIFORMITY IN THE ABILITY OF MOST ATHLETES TO PERFORM THE BASIC MOVES OF THE SPORT. If you watch the current world champion perform a basic move, say for example, an arm bar from closed guard, there is little to distinguish it from a local black belt. At the higher levels, IT IS MUCH MORE ABOUT YOUR ABILITY TO OUTPERFORM OTHERS AT THE SET UPS AND PRECURSORS TO THE TECHNIQUES RATHER THAN THE TECHNIQUES THEMSELVES. Among competent black belts, EVERYONE has a strong arm bar, a strong kimura etc. What makes one stand out from the others is mostly about the small and subtle skills and tactics that enables him or her TO GET INTO A SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN ACTUALLY APPLY THAT MOVE. Due to the fact that the vast majority of your opponent s defense to any given move comes from the integrity of his stance, the single most important skill at the higher levels becomes THE ABILITY TO SUBVERT, NEGATE AND DEGRADE YOUR OPPONENT S STANCE only then will you be able to actually apply the basic moves of the sport. Beginners must focus on moves, but as you gain in expertise, YOU MUST SHIFT YOUR FOCUS TO BREAKING YOUR OPPONENT S STANCE AND STRUCTURE only then will the opportunity to apply those moves arise. My teaching reflects this fact moves are taught in great detail, but always embedded in a coherent system of preliminaries that make them work in competition.Learning from a distance You guys know I am a firm believer in the possibility of a mentor having a massive influence on the direction of your life even in a short meeting Dean Lister played this role in my leg lock development for me, he provided the spark from which the current leg lock blaze burns. I am also a tremendous believer in the power of self starting, independently minded individuals to see information from a distance and USING THAT AS A STARTING POINT, GO ON TO MAKE INCREDIBLE PROGRESS ON THEIR OWN OVER TIME. That is why I am so enthusiastic about teaching seminars and making instructional videos I truly believe in their ability to make a difference in your grappling life. Here is an amazing example all the way from Australia. A few years ago I went to visit family and taught some impromptu leg lock seminars in Sydney and Melbourne turn out and enthusiasm was fantastic. A young man named Jeremy jeremypaulskinner came to one of them and impressed me with his movement and thirst for knowledge. Since then he went on to greatly develop his game, based on seminar notes, watching the senior squad members in action and most importantly, his own hard work. Now he teaches alongside Craig Jones at absolutemmamelb Here he is the recent boa super 8 tournament in Australia demonstrating a perfect rendition of a classic squad maneuver into cross ashi garami utilizing double trouble to completely control his opponent into a fine finish! What a fine example of long distance learning married to hard work and initiative to get super results! Great to see this and I hope it drives you to be confident that an initial help can be the impetus to create something great within yourself and get you to your goals and dreams. Well done, Jeremy! Stay compact Probably one of the biggest problems beginners in jiu jitsu face is that of extending their bodies at times that make them very vulnerable to attack. Most of the fundamental postures of jiu jitsu, particularly the defensive ones, involve CONTRACTION of the body spine rounded, elbows and knees tucked in tight. Learning to trust in this contraction as the best means of slipping your limbs INSIDE your opponent s limbs as the most high percentage route to escape and evasion is a big step for the beginner in jiu jitsu. As you progress the problem will change from that of GETTING TO a safe contracted posture to that of MAINTAINING this strong posture throughout the course of a long tough match against a skilled opponent who is doing everything he can to subvert that posture either way, learning and fighting to keep your limbs in tight at the appropriate time will be a constant theme of your training. Just as a good boxer constantly keeps his chin tucked, shoulders high and rounded to protect his jaw and elbows in tight to protect his torso when in danger; so a good jiu jitsu player puts his or her primary effort into sound defensive structure before anything else. Here, young Nicky Ryan presents me with a wall of knees and elbows that prevents me exploiting the angle I have gained. His well rounded spine will give him the mobility he needs to quickly recover his legs and square up to me so that he can immediately shift from a defensive cycle to an offensive one. Posture before all and in defense when in doubt contract and pull everything in tight.Changing the leg lock game Probably the single biggest influence on the leg lock game that myself and my students had was to promote the idea that the leg lock TECHNIQUES employed by an athlete were not as important as the overall SYSTEM of tactics, supporting techniques and mechanical details that actually make the basic techniques work repeatedly against skilled opponents; so that the standard leg lock techniques are seen as being only as good as the support system in which they are embedded. They say it takes a village to raise a child well, similarly, it takes a system to land a heel hook. If that was the biggest influence there is another that could well be a strong second place. When i first began a serious study of leg locks almost twenty years ago, the overwhelming majority of leg attacks were done from top position as a means of attacking someone who was playing from guard position. Thus leg locking was seen as contrary to spirit of jiu jitsu, which always strongly emphasized passing guard first and submissions second. The few people using leg locks at high level scored all their greatest successes from top position or standing position. What I did was to push the leg locking game from bottom position. Many popular and proven guard positions such as butterfly guard, X guard, half butterfly guard etc are based on inside position that can easily be adapted to ashi garami based leg locks. Using these inside control based guards as a starting point, I added the notion of kuzushi off balancing from guard position, rather than the standard idea of sweeping from guard. This forced opponents to base out wide with arms and legs and made entries into leg locks from bottom position very easy. You can clearly see that among all my students, the vast majority of their leg lock entries are from bottom position. This nullified the old criticism that leg locking was a bad idea because it would result in loss of top position if it failed. It also meant that people stopped seeing leg locking as a weapon to be used AGAINST guard position anti jiu jitsu and started seeing it as I do, as a weapon used FROM guard position that only makes jiu jitsu stronger.How much can I really learn from a video? Quite often I am asked whether someone can learn technique from video instruction. An interesting insight into answering this question comes from my demonstration partner Uke in the new version of my leg lock instructional video. Placido Carl Santos was a great partner to film the series in Boston, where he trains with my black belt student, Travis Stevens. This weekend he entered a local grappling tournament and won via...leg lock! A very nicely applied heel hook sequence that he learned by having it demonstrated on him by me during filming! It is a good example of how I believe video instruction can greatly help a student and provide new directions in their mat work. Now, let s be clear watching a video and then doing nothing will do little to help you improve performance. What is need is TO GAIN INSIGHT, TECHNIQUES, AND TACTICS THAT IN CONJUNCTION WITH YOUR OWN PRACTICE CAN HAVE A DRAMATIC IMPACT ON YOUR SKILL LEVEL OVER TIME. Think of it as an extra teacher or mentor. Just as even the finest teachermentor will be unable to help you if you do not put time and effort into your training, neither will a video instructional. However, if you take that video as a teaching resource and work hard on the material i am extremely confident you will get great results. I base this confidence on my experience as an instructor. I was very fortunate to begin my training in the 1990 s with one of the best senseis in the world, surrounded by world champions, so I never needed outside help, but I knew MANY people who lived in other parts of the country with no teachers. They learned almost entirely from video instructionals and many had excellent results. Nowadays I often see visiting students come by RGA and exhibit skills they tell me they learned from online courses and demonstrate very good skills obviously learned from the various champions whose video courses they follow. Wonderful to see Placido show how he learned from being there at the filming of the video and wishing the best to the all long distance video students who follow their favorite jiu jitsu teachers spreading their message to a wider audience!Handicapping yourself to make yourself better One of the most valuable methods of improving your skills is to handicap yourself in same way that forces you to adjust in some way that encourages skill development in other critical areas. I usually find that most beginning students are HAND and ARM dominant in almost every aspect of the game. This is a natural consequence of the fact that most tasks we perform in everyday life are predominantly performed with hands and arms. However this usual handarm bias is not acceptable in jiu jitsu. Trying to perform the moves of jiu jitsu with hands and arms quickly leads to fatigue and failure. THE SOURCE OF ALL POWER AND ENDURANCE IN THE HUMAN BODY IS IN THE LEGS AND HIPS. Only when you become leg and hip dominant in the performance of jiu jitsu moves will you excel. In the case of heel hooking, a simple test for me as a teacher as to whether or not a student is performing the move predominantly with legs and hips is to make him or her perform the heel hook with ONE HAND. This immediately forces the student to properly apply legs and hips in the move they cannot compensate for failures in hip and leg work with their hand strength. When you can easily submit an opponent with a single handed heel hook, breaking an opponent with two hands is easy work. There are MANY ways to use this simple training principle in jiu jitsu. Use it often. It will teach you a LOT about how the other parts of your body are involved in any given move. When you remove the handicap and come after your opponent with full force they will feel the jump in performance you have made.Rerelease of LEG LOCKS ENTER THE SYSTEM Today BJJ Fanatics puts out the new and greatly improved version of my leg lock instructional video showing the complete approach to leg locking as it was taught to my students and used so brilliantly for so long by all of them. The first edition had some problems with audio quality so I completely re shot them and added almost two hours of new bonus content along with faster delivery of information. My intention is to change the nature of video instruction in this ENTER THE SYSTEM series. Instead of showing a few random moves I want to put out longer videos that package a complete set of moves IMBEDDED IN A CONCEPTUAL AND TACTICAL FRAMEWORK THAT ALLOWS YOU TO ACTUALLY GET THEM WORKING IN LIVE SITUATIONS IN A SHORT TIME. Because the videos are longer they can can function as a learning resource for years to come rather than be a flavor of the month superficial input. In addition you actually get FAR more minutes of instruction per dollar spent than a conventional video twelve hours for two hundred dollars vs two hours for eighty dollars. The production quality is outstanding this time. It is free for anyone who bought it already and anyone buying now will also get the original as well for free. Hope you all enjoy the new look video and I look forward to seeing the skill level of leg locking massively increase around the world over the next few years!!! There is a link above in my instagram bio if it is something you are interested in.Knowing what you want to do Imagine a Genie came to you and said he would give you both a tremendous blessing and a tremendous curse. You ask him what the blessing is and he says, I will give you all the skills to accomplish whatever you want in life! You are overjoyed at this wonderful news and the powers it will give. Then you ask, So what s the curse? He replies, You will have no ability to decide what you want to do. Will you ever accomplish anything with those new incredible skills of yours? No not a thing. SKILLS CAN ONLY BE IMPLEMENTED WHEN YOU HAVE A NOTION OF WHAT YOU WANT TO DO. That is, A SENSE OF DIRECTION IS A NECESSARY PRECURSOR TO SKILL IMPLEMENTATION. So often I see people teach and learn jiu jitsu as though it were only a set of skills. THOSE SKILLS ARE ONLY AS USEFUL AS YOUR ABILITY TO CLEARLY IDENTIFY WHAT YOU WANT TO ACCOMPLISH. It is worthless to teach skills without giving an athlete a general sense of direction so that he or she can actually put them into operation. That is why I always imbed skills in general tactical plans. The best way to do this is in short and simple sequences that give order and direction to the skills. So for example, in ashi garami based heel hooking skills, there are four basic tasks arranged in a sequence that are necessary for the successful completion of the move. First, you have gain entry and connection to the opponent s legs and hips. Second, you have to expose the heel. Third, you have to negate the various lines of resistance, usually by undermining the defensive potential of the secondary leg. Then last, break the opponent. When the athlete is absolutely clear conceptually as to what needs to be done he or she will naturally exhibit the skills they have trained to get it done. CONFUSION AT THE LEVEL OF DIRECTION WILL ALWAYS PARALYZE THE STUDENT AT THE LEVEL OF EXECUTION. Here, Gordon Ryan has clearly formed a solid connection, exposed the heel of Keenan Cornelius, compromised resistance by interfering with secondary leg all that remains is to go for the finish. Crystal clear sense of direction creates quick and positive action one without the other is worthless.No one does it alone One of the best things you can ever do to advance your level in jiu jitsu is create strong partnerships with other people of similar dispositions and goals to use as feedback for ideas and skills that you work on to improve yourselves. The most productive relationships in life are almost always based on the concept of MUTUAL BENEFIT. Nobody likes a parasite try always to give as much as you receive and these friendships will last years and create more advances in you than you could ever have done alone. Partners on the mat can be so much more than drilling and sparring partners try to form bonds where they become RESEARCH PARTNERS as well I promise you it will benefit you greatly. I was always greatly blessed in this regard. I had truly outstanding senseis and mentors. My senior class mates where outstanding and after twenty five years I still know and see and learn from almost all of them. So to with my students past and present. They are an incredible means of testing ideas and the feedback I get from their adventures on the mat and the stage is a huge part of my own advancement in knowledge over the years. Don t do it alone THE GREATEST RESOURCE YOU HAVE IS YOUR OWN INQUIRING MIND AND THE SECOND GREATEST IS THE PEOPLE AROUND YOU WHO ENABLE YOU TO MAXIMIZE ITS USE. Here I am scheming some dastardly improvements to my front headlock game with trusted partner in crime Shawn Williams himself a great innovator and one of my favorite people to run ideas by and test theories and concepts. Sharing the journey not only makes it more fun it takes you further than you could have gone alone.Ryan Gracie and the navigation principle I have had the benefit of one great sensei, Renzo Gracie, and many fine mentors in my years of development in jiu jitsu. A very important mentor was Ryan Gracie. It was from him that I saw the great value of what I call for want of a better term the navigation principle. Mr Gracie was one of the most explosive, dynamic and intuitive grapplers I ever trained with. He had an uncanny sense of first creating a scramble and then in what appeared to be a chaotic situation where neither person had control of the other, somehow navigate himself directly into a submission hold. This made him very dangerous at all times in a match and lead to a very high submission rate per minute of sparring. I was very impressed by this and worked hard to implement it into my game and that of my students. Let s define a scramble as ANY SITUATION WHERE THE TWO ATHLETES HAVE CLOSE CONTACT WITH OTHER IN DYNAMIC MOVEMENT, BUT NEITHER HAS A GREATER ABILITY TO CONTROL THE OTHERS MOVEMENT. Most people just follow their instincts in these situations and hope something good emerges in the course of the movement. Better athletes may work with a general insight that confers some form of advantage in a scramble, such as keeping higher position throughout the scramble. In the sport of jiu jitsu, the best outcome in any situation is submission so it is very valuable indeed to train your mind to SEE SUBMISSION ENTRIES IN THE CHAOS OF A SCRAMBLE SO THAT YOU EMERGE AT THE END IN A WINNING POSITION. This is no easy task. We are not born with this as an instinct. It has to be developed. The way to develop it is to choose one submission. Understand what the PRECURSORS to that submission are and then start training yourself to see those precursors in the midst of dynamic scrambles and move into that submission. When you are confident with one, add another, until you have an arsenal. Your aim is to be able to automatically navigate in a fast moving scramble straight to a preferred submission. Once mastered, this will prove a truly valuable skill to you. It will make you a very dangerous opponent on the mat and give you a sense of direction in chaos.Frank Rosenthal wins Onnit Invitational in Texas Outstanding junior, Frank Rosenthal won the prestigious Onnit Invitational grappling event last night two matches by heel hook and one by strangle to take gold and shekels in fine form. Mr Rosenthal has been on s leg locking mission of late, doing an incredible job of embodying the core themes of my system to secure numerous impressive victories. The Onnit Invitational was always one of the big hurdles used by the squad to prepare developing athletes for big endeavors. It seems like yesterday that a young Gordon Ryan was preparing himself for this challenge it s great to see Mr Rosenthal taking those same big steps on his journey towards his goals and dreams. This theme of planned development and progress is critical for all of you. Everything works better with a coherent and rational plan. Of course there will be impediments and derailments along the way, that s to be expected; but adapt to each one and keep pressing forward and you shall get there with results like this.Seven fundamental axioms of my leg lock system Nowadays most people are willing to admit that the new approach to leg locking that I teach and which was so brilliantly exhibited by my students, is a highly effective addition to the jiu jitsu arsenal that I am confident will make jiu jitsu even more effective as a martial art that prides itself upon its ability to defeat opponents by submission. It can be very instructive to ask what did we do differently? Why did it suddenly happen that a group of people were able to do so well with techniques that were considered low percentage for generations? My approach is built around some core insights that motivate and give substance to the system overall. 1 My approach to leg locking is HOLISTIC. The effectiveness of a leg lock will be proportional to the system of set ups and follow ups and a vast array of tactics and techniques in between. Teaching leg locks as MOVES was largely ineffective for generations. Teaching them as a SYSTEM around a move was extremely effective. 2 I strongly distinguish between the means of CONTROL ashi garami and SUBMISSION the actual lock employed eg heel hook 3 Doing so encourages the use of MULTIPLE ASHI GARAMI PER LOCK so that the different respective tasks of each heel hook can be covered by a different ashi garami well suited to that task. 4 The direction of force of the ashi garami must DIRECTLY OPPOSE the direction of force of the lock so as to immobilize the opponent and create ideal breaking conditions 5 The break must involve opposing forces BOTH UPON THE KNEE THROUGH THE ASHI GARAMI against the direction of the lock AND THE FOOT through the grip you employ to create a simultaneous pushpull 6 I also seek to control BOTH LEGS whenever possible. By distinguishing between a PRIMARY leg to be attacked and a SECONDARY leg to be controlled, athletes can immobilize opponents and attack at their own pace. 7 I strongly emphasized BOTTOM POSITION ENTRIES usually from butterfly, X and half guard over traditional top position entries so that POSITIONAL LOSS was never an issue for my students. All they had to do was establish grips and inside position on bottom and attackAngle A theme that runs throughout all the combat sports is that of ADVANTAGEOUS ANGLE. The human body is constructed in such a way that it deals well with threats from directly in front, but poorly with threats from behind. Any angle to one side that gets us closer to inherently advantageous rear positions is generally a good thing. Defensive positions that seem impervious from the front often prove quite easy to attack from an angle. This is particularly true of leg lock attacks from bottom position. Typically we begin encounters facing square to our opponent. After an initial engagement to secure grips and kuzushi off balancing, LOOK IMMEDIATELY TO SECURE AN ANGLE TO FACILITATE ENTERING THE LEGS AND THEN EMERGE WITH THE LEG UNDER YOUR CONTROL via ashi garami AND AT AN ANGLE WHERE YOU CAN EXPLOIT THAT CONTROL WITH A STRONG ATTACK. Here, you can see that I have elevated my opponent and forced him to carry his own weight on his hands. This frees me up to turn to an angle that makes entry easier and creates a dilemma between straight and cross ashi garami attacks he can only avoid one by giving me the other. In addition this greatly reduces the need for flexibility and athleticism on my part to lock a tight ashi garami that s a good thing for a fifty one year old with a hip replacement and soon to be knee replacement . Make ANGLE a serious part of your study of submissions. Identify which holds require it and make a study of how you can attain it under the conditions you can expect when hunting for it you will soon find situations that used to frustrate you bring success.What is your best skill? Yesterday we looked at the problem of lagging skills in our game. Today we shall look at our strong points. What is your best skill on the mat? Is it a positional move? Eg a guard pass or sweep or a submission move eg Americana lock. How did it become your best skill? Was it a natural result of your body type? Your personality? Perhaps some technical insights from a coach, a mentor or self experimentation? We are all proud of our best skills they give us confidence and direction on the mat when we go against a tough opponent we naturally gravitate towards our best moves and when things get tough we work in the hope that we can bring our best and biggest guns to bear. Now ask yourself three sets of questions. However happy you might be with your favorite skills first, DO YOU REALLY MAXIMIZE YOUR POTENTIAL SUCCESS WITH THAT MOVE? OR COULD YOU DO MORE WITH IT?Second, DO YOU USE THAT SKILLMOVE AS A LEAD IN TO OTHER MOVES AND SKILLS TO BROADEN YOUR REPERTOIRE? Third, WHAT DID YOUR EXPERIENCE LEARNING AND DEVELOPING THIS FAVORITE MOVE OF YOURS TEACH YOU ABOUT LEARNING IN JIU JITSU? COULD YOU USE THIS KNOWLEDGE TO HELP YOU LEARN OTHER MOVES AND FURTHER YOUR PROGRESS FAR BEYOND YOUR CURRENT STATE? It s natural and healthy to feel a sense of pride and contentment about your best moves. SAVE YOUR CONTENTMENT FOR YOUR DEATH BED. KEEP WORKING HARD TO MAKE FORWARD PROGRESS AND LEARN TO USE PAST LEARNING SUCCESS NOT AS A PLACE TO REST AND BE HAPPY, BUT AS A SPRINGBOARD TO FURTHER PROGRESS AND DEVELOPMENT THAT WILL ELEVATE YOU FAR ABOVE THE LEVEL THAT CURRENTLY MAKES YOU HAPPY.What is your worst skill? Every jiu jitsu player, you, me, everybody, has a worst skill some part of the game that lags far behind their other skills. We all carry it around as a burden and hope it does not show up in sparring or competition. A great project for all jiu jitsu students is to identify the worst element of your game. It can be a MOVE, say for example, kata gatame arm triangle; or a POSITION, say, left side bottom half guard. Whatever it is, identify it. Then study it. Ask your instructor about it, study great athletes who have a reputation for excellence in that area. Then set a very manageable goal. For three weeks, START EVERY SPARRING SESSION IN THAT POSITION OR MOVE AND SPEND AS MUCH TIME AS POSSIBLE WORKING IN THAT SPECIFIC AREA. Initially you will feel awful. Don t get dispirited. Understand this IN ALL LEARNING ACTIVITIES THE GREATEST JUMPS IN SKILL LEVEL OCCUR EARLY IN TRAINING AND THEN DECREASE OVER TIME. I promise you that after a rough start you will make astounding progress in that area in a relatively short time. Will you be a world beater? No, but you will be considerably better and put yourself in a position to improve over time. Most importantly, YOU WILL NO LONGER SEE THAT SPECIFIC AREA AS A WEAKNESS, BUT RATHER AS A GROWTH AREA WITH POTENTIAL FOR THE FUTURE. Once you see it in that light, then you can move forward with that moveposition as part of your overall progress, rather than make progress in some areas and just leave that one behind and hope it never gets exposed.The shared spiral All joint locks are divided into linear locks and twisting locks. Arm bar juji gatami and knee bar would be good examples of linear locks, where the joint is hyperextended in a straight line. Twisting locks rotate the joint in directions it cannot follow figure four toe holds and Kimura would be good examples. The HEEL HOOK is a classic example of a twisting lock. Many people experience failure with the heel hook due to THE PROBLEM OF THE SHARED SPIRAL. There are two aspects to this problem. The first is that many athletes make the mistake of applying the direction of force of both the ashi garami they use to control the leg they are attacking AND the heel hook IN THE SAME DIRECTION, thus they are only able to apply a turning force in one direction upon the joint, rather than applying them in OPPOSITE directions so that they can apply a true tearing force. The second aspect is that your opponent will want to turn in the same direction as your heel hook s rotational force to relieve pressure so that you spiral together. It is crucial that you create a spiral force on the leg, BUT THAT YOU PREVENT OR LIMIT YOUR OPPONENT S ABILITY TO DO THE SAME. This is done by the sophisticated use of ashi garami controls, switching from one ashi garami to another, or using some form of ashi garami that enables you to interfere with your opponent s ability to turn with you. Your goal is to slow and control your opponent s spiral and ultimately STOP it even momentarily so that a breaking force can be applied long enough to get the job done. Here, Katya Leontyeva gets to an ashi garami variation and then works to slow down her opponent s strong turning defense until she can finally stop it long enough to apply a powerful force in the opposite direction of her ashi garami to get an impressive win.Juniors cover all options on route to victory Outstanding junior squad members, Frank Rosenthal, Katya Leontyeva and Danny Hernandez had great wins in Global Grappling League super fights yesterday in Phoenix NY. All three won by submission an arm bar, a leg lock and and a strangle covering all three of the major possibilities of submission arm, leg and strangle. Always the idea is to threaten the whole body with submission it s much harder to defend a wide expanse of territory than a narrow one. It s great to see the juniors doing exactly that in competition. This is an important lesson for all of you of course it s desirable to have favorite moves with which you can smash through determined opposition even when they expect it coming, but it s equally desirable to be versatile enough with your attacks that an opponent never really knows where the next one is coming from and thus has to scatter his or her defenses and fall prey to feigned attacks on one area only to be caught in another. LEARNING TO PLAY BETWEEN FOCUSED CONCENTRATION OF FORCE AND WIDE RANGING VERSATILITY IS A KEY PART OF YOUR DEVELOPMENT AS A STUDENT OF SUBMISSIONS. Work hard on this crucial theme and soon you will see similar results as these outstanding students!The Renzo Gracie Academy lost one of its most beloved members today. Mr Anthony Bourdain was an enthusiastic student of the art and loved by all for his kind and quiet demeanor that made it a joy and privilege to share the mats with him. He was a gentle soul and traveler who traversed borders and generations bringing the gift of conversation and story telling gift wrapped in cuisine but whose real effect was to make listeners from every strata of society, from the greatest to the least, reflect upon themselves in ways that when the talk ended, you knew yourself a little better and felt a little wiser. In a harsh, competitive and divided world he was a spokesman for the power of simple joys to bring people together, initially at the table, but ultimately at the mind. Food was just the medium not the message the deeper lesson was always harmony based around the insight that the pleasures of the dinner table are the same for one and all, and thus that division can be broken down by the simple joys of life that can make us see what is the same in all of us instead of what is different.Mechanical tightness vs muscular tightness One of the most basic demands of good jiu jitsu technique particularly submission holds is the demand for TIGHTNESS. Your body must be tightly woven into your opponent s body to prevent slippage and escape. Unfortunately most beginners misunderstand this need for tightness as MUSCULAR tightness and quickly exhaust themselves locking in to their opponents and squeezing for all they are worth until inevitably they fade and fail. The key to tightness is not to squeeze your opponent, but to FIT THE SHAPE AND GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THAT OF YOUR OPPONENT and then exert your tension into YOUR OWN BODY in order to hold that geometric shape around your opponent, rather than try to squeeze him into the shape you want with your strength. The only way to make your body conform to the shape of your opponent is to RELAX until you have the desired positioning and THEN lock YOURSELF tight not him. Thus you must learn to put yourself through CYCLES OF RELAXATION AND TENSION until you get what you want. Try to break the natural, but harmful, beginners habit of maximum tension from start to finish that is both exhausting and unlikely to work. Begin your experiments with hear cycles of relaxation and tension in drilling moves and then try to extend them into live sparring where their application is more difficult. Learning to manage these cycles of tension and relaxation is a huge step in the jiu jitsu journeyAuxiliary systems Most of you know that I am a big proponent of a linked subsystems approach to jiu jitsu. Classical BJJ is a system based approach to combat. I build upon this through the use of subsystems systems built around specific areas of the game that create tremendous expertise in that domain that can enable an athlete often with less overall experience than his opponent to trap his or her opponent within that system where they have a significant knowledge, skill and experience advantage due to specialization and can win from there. As these subsystems grew in complexity I divided them up further in various ways that aided students in learning and applying them. One of the more interesting types of division was that between MAIN systems and AUXILIARY systems. In the case of our BACK SYSTEM, the main system is built around a set of arm traps that allow an attacker to pin his opponent s defensive arms to facilitate the use of the most high percentage back finish the rear naked strangle mata leohadakajime. There is no question this is our main method of attacking the back and the one that has garnered the most success in competition. However, in cases where we cannot get the breakthrough by this main route, there are four AUXILIARY systems that go in a totally different direction. Instead of facilitating the breakthrough of one submission in one area rear strangle around neck they employ a diverse array of submissions OVER THE WHOLE BODY. This play between the narrow focus of the main system and the diverse applications of the four auxiliary systems is a big part of what gives our overall back system its character. Here, Garry Tonon shows his skills with one of those four auxiliary systems the rear triangle ushiro sankaku as he locks in an impressive looking strangle in training.Two is always better than one A founding principle of my approach to leg locking is that of double trouble given that most of your opponent s resistance to a lock on one leg comes from the OTHER leg; if we can somehow restrain the second leg, this will make resistance far more difficult for him. There are many ways to restrain that second leg. Which method you choose is mostly determined by the version of ashi garami you find yourself in though there are other factors also. Here, Gordon Ryan works on a version from reverse ashi garami, binding up both his opponent s legs as he works between a knee bar and toe hold. Constantly looking to manifest this important principle will pay big dividends in the leg locking game. Having a clear understanding of the underlying PRINCIPLES behind the main movements of jiu jitsu will enable you to improvise during a match and innovate in the training room two things that will greatly increase your prowessThere s no heel hook without a heel A critical part of success in jiu jitsu is that of SEQUENCE. Most of the moves have essential preconditions without which the move simply will not work. As such, YOU MUST ALWAYS HAVE A CLEAR SENSE OF WHAT THOSE PREREQUISITES ARE AND HOW TO ATTAIN THEM. In the case of one of my favorite moves, the heel hook, HEEL EXPOSURE is one of the critical prerequisites. If I cannot expose my opponent s heel, any other leg locking skills I might have are worthless. As you deal with better opponents, they will also understand what the prerequisites to your favorite moves are; and they will fight hard to prevent you getting them. At this level, you will have to fight not only to perform the move you want, BUT EVERY PREREQUISITE STEP THAT MAKES THE MOVE POSSIBLE. Your journey to prepare yourself to win these battles will create depth in your jiu jitsu game. It will mark your rise from beginner to expert. No matter what your favorite moves are research the preconditions that underlie them and make a serious study of those as well as the move itself. You will be rewarded with a move that you can impose upon even expert defense. Here, Garry Tonon opts to hook his opponent s exposed heel even before he fully controls his opponent s leg in an ashi garami usually I prefer a tight controlling ashi garami first and work to expose the heel second, but reversing the order of operations can also be very effective in some cases, but in either case, KNOW WHAT YOU NEED IN ORDER TO GET WHAT YOU WANT.Pace A critical factor in competition success that gets surprisingly little attention is PACE. There are two main types of pace that are of importance. The first is the pace that i impose upon MYSELF. This concerns my efficiency with regards my energy expenditure. Often i see athletes working themselves very hard when there is no need. Consequently they fatigue rapidly and after a strong start, fade in effectiveness. The second concerns the pace i impose upon my OPPONENT. For any given match there will be a pace set by the two athletes that is usually a compromise between the desired pace of each of them. Every athlete has a pace they feel comfortable with as they perform their techniques. If I can force them to work at a slower or higher pace than their comfort zone, this will often lower their performance and fatigue them. Learning to use pace as a weapon is often neglected in the gym where the sparring is usually and understandably a level below competition. Thus the great value of competition experience as the primary means of learning this skill though it certainly can be learned in the gym also. Here, Nicky Ryan works to impose his desired pace in a tough match against the talented Geo Martinez. His victory was largely a result of an advanced use of pace control VARIATIONS IN PACE THAT CONFUSE AN OPPONENT AND ALLOW A SUDDEN INCREASE IN PACE AFTER A LULL TO HELP GET A BREAKTHROUGH. Learning to set your techniques in the context of pace signifies a well developed game work on it like all your other skills it will soon reward you.Coaching memories Georges StPierre vs Josh Koscheck 2 One good move begets another A theme that I often push upon my students is that of DEVELOPING AT LEAST ONE STRONG MOVE THAT PEOPLE KNOW AND FEAR YOU FOR. In truth IT DOES NOT EVEN MATTER IF YOU ACTUALLY SCORE WITH THAT PARTICULAR MOVE YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE OVER REACTIONS TO THE MERE THREAT OF IT WILL OPEN MANY OTHER ATTACKING OPPORTUNITIES THAT YOU CAN EASILY EXPLOIT. A very fine example of This occurred when Georges StPierre took on the very tough wrestler Josh Kosheck for the second time. The first match was hard fought, but Mr StPierre dominated with his takedowns shocking given that Mr Koscheck was a two time NCAA champion and three time finalist. When we did the Ultimate Fighter show, Mr Koscheck made it clear that he would not be taken down this next time. When the second time came, Mr StPierre took him down in the opening seconds with one of the fastest double leg entries I ever saw. Mr Koscheck did a good job of recovering back up to his feet but the damage was done he now had to focus all his defensive skills into stopping that dangerous double. Mr StPierre immediately took notice of this and went to phase two. He was always a lead hand dominant striker strong jab and left hook much less so a rear hand striker, that was never his strength. He began to mirror his level change to a fast and powerful rising jab to that of his double leg. From Mr Koscheck s perspective it was nearly impossible to tell whether any given level change signaled either a double leg or a rising jab. Immediately the jab starting scoring. One was so powerful it broke Mr Koscheck s orbital bone and caused a gruesome eye injury that essentially sealed the outcome in the first round. To his credit, Mr Koscheck showed the heart of a lion and stayed the course, getting back up every time he was taken down, but the lesson is clear THE THREAT OF ONE BIG WEAPON WILL ALWAYS FACILITATE THE USE OF ANOTHER. Take this lesson from this great man and make it yours PUT TIME AND ENERGY INTO DEVELOPING A POWERFUL ATTACK THAT INVOKES STRONG DEFENSIVE REACTIONS IN YOUR OPPONENTS AND BUILD AN ARSENAL AROUND ITTaking notes I am a big believer in the notion that to a large degree, jiu jitsu is a knowledge game. Of course knowledge is not the whole story. Until KNOWLEDGE is translated into SKILL it is of little practical value to the athlete though it can still be of great value to the coach. Like any knowledge based enterprise, there is a lot of memorizing and, unfortunately, a lot of forgetting! As such I believe it is of great value to many people not all people some learn in very different ways to keep notes on their progress. At the end of every day I make sure I write down in some form the main things I learned that day. I don t suggest writing vast amounts you wouldn t guess that given my lengthy instagram posts would you!? just the NEW elements that you believe have potential for the future. I believe that JUST THE SHEER ACT OF WRITING AIDS RETENTION. In addition to helping retention, IT HELPS ORDER YOUR THOUGHTS INTO MORE COHERENT STRUCTURES THAT WILL HELP YOU WORK THEM INTO YOUR DEVELOPMENT. Thus even if you never peruse those notes again they will have helped you. I remember once coming across an old journal of mine from 2002 and seeing an entry on an interesting concept that may be of considerable value for further research and wider applications it was the notion of double trouble applied to ashi garami based leg locks how ironic that this would go on years later to be of such value to my students. Let the time, orderliness and discipline of note taking work for you just as you did in school it can help you take the lessons of today into your improvements of tomorrow.Isolating limbs In an MMA or fighting context, what makes the dominant pins of jiu jitsu such as the mounted position dangerous IS YOUR ABILITY TO DO DAMAGE WITH STRIKES. All this changes in a grappling match however, where strikes are not allowed. The single most important ability you can develop to make yourself dangerous from a dominant position in a grappling context, is THE ABILITY TO ISOLATE AND CONTROL A LIMB. An isolated limb can be controlled and broken or in the case of the neck strangled the neck is the fifth limb in grappling. I always encourage my athletes to go the extra distance when they get to a dominant position DON T BE SATISFIED WITH THE PIN ITSELF GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND FIGHT TO ISOLATE A LIMB. The day you start doing that you will begin SUBMITTING people from dominant positions rather than merely HOLDING them. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of pinning down Ralek Gracie s right arm from a variation of the mounted position, thus isolating one arm from the other allowing complete isolation and control of the head and left arm in ways that lead directly to a variety of submission holds. Respectful Memorial Day to all Georges StPierre on Joe Rogan experience For those of you who have not heard, my student Georges StPierre georgesstpierre appeared on the world s biggest podcast The Joe Rogan experience joerogan yesterday. Mr StPierre is usually very guarded during interviews, but Mr Rogan did an amazing job through his informal chat based method of getting this amazing athlete and human being to open up and tell his story in his own words to a greater degree than anyone has ever done in the past. All these years I have known what an incredible person, martial arts athlete and innovator Mr StPierre was now you will see it too in this remarkable interview! Hats off to Mr Rogan for accomplishing what no one else could in showing the humor, interests and methods of this truly great MMA athlete. In less than six hours it already passed a million views. If you have time this weekend check it out it s both a fascinating and funny expose of a great man; but also A STUDY OF THE MIND AMD MINDSET THAT MADE HIM GREAT, and thus of great value to all of you as you work towards your own goals and dreams check it out!Just got a sample clip of the new and improved LEG LOCKS ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video. This time they got it right with perfect sound quality and camera work and initial reviews have been significantly higher than any other in company history. In addition I added quite a lot of new material and presented at a faster pace to give the video a leaner and faster look with same overall length. Complete editing is estimated to be around two weeks. Anyone who bought will get it for free and keep access to the original Darth VaderBane voice version as well and anyone buying now or in the future will also get both though I suspect most will focus on the way more audio friendly second version . I m happy and proud to offer a video that has the best content now matched with excellent production value link to buy is in the bio of my instagram if you are interested. Now I will do the same with Back Attack system hopefully this weekend though I did have some relapse with my perennial body issues this week hoping I m good enough to go this weekend. Hope you all enjoy good sound quality and overall productionpresentation improvements!Closed wedges The essential feature all of jiu jitsu is control that leads to submission this is the foundation of my approach to the game. Any deviations from that mindset are abhorrent to me and my students. The most fundamental form of control is that over movement AND THE MECHANICAL BASIS OF IMPEDING MOVEMENT IN JIU JITSU IS THE WEDGE. The human body can be positioned as a SET OF WEDGES around another body to restrict movement and make possible the control required for submissions. Our favorite form of wedges are double sided reinforced wedges. That is, wedges positioned on both sides of the limb or torso we are trying to control and where something locks the wedges in position. Usually BODYWEIGHT is the thing that locks wedges in place That s is how most conventional pins work but ashi garami does not involve bodyweight since you are usually sitting on the floor when you apply it so we need another method. That method is CLOSED WEDGES where ONE OF OUR LIMBS LOCKS OUR OTHER LIMB IN PLACE SO THAT THE WEDGES ARE REINFORCED BY YOUR OTHER ARM OR LEG AND NOT EASY FOR A RESISTING OPPONENT TO DISLODGE AND GET AROUND OR OVER. In the case of leg locking in particular we greatly favor locking our legs around an opponent s leg either with crossed feet or triangled legs. Most of our favorite finishing positions have this feature. The highest ranked in our leg locking hierarchy are those variations within the cross ashi garami featuring triangled legs we call these variations inside sankaku inside triangle. Here, talented junior, Drew Hooper, takes a brilliant win last weekend at Rise Invitational 4 in Manhattan. Notice the extremely solid connection he has achieved with the use of this inside sankaku variation and how it immobilized even a tough, competitive opponent in a way that gives him very few defensive options. This is exactly the kind of leg and hip control you should be looking for as you make your progress in the leg game.Victory for the Bronx Bombers Those of you who have been following me for a while will know that every Monday night I travel up to the Bronx to teach at the academy of one of my first and best black belts, Doug Pelinkovic, who runs his own excellent academy bxmartialarts Originally I started going there when Mr Pelinkovic was badly injured and saw the dedication of the students and stayed on after! Now fully recovered, Mr Pelinkovic does a very fine job of teaching his students our approach to the game. This last Friday night his extremely talented student, Stanley Rosa stanleyrosa put on a superb display of submission directed jiu jitsu. Mr Rosa has built a tremendous game in a shockingly short time that is testimony to his hard work and learning capacity; and the teaching skill of Mr Pelinkovic. He has a distinctive movement style like a leopard that when combined with the mechanical tightness of our approach catches everyone s eye. Enjoy this excellent display from over the weekend. Tonight I head up to see the Bronx team and hear the full story.It s a wrap folks!! Just finished a crazy weekend of filming the reshoot of LEG LOCKS ENTER THE SYSTEM in Boston. Two hectic days eleven hours on Saturday and nine hours today to produce around 10 hours of video content. Filming went well I added a lot of new content. We stay on many of the same techniques and topics as the first video, but with many additions. The general sense of the new video is a leaner, faster paced, more action oriented production. Of course you will also have full access to the original as well so you get both styles. Now I m on the train back to NYC back before midnight and then it s a long day tomorrow 6am alarm and get home from work around 11pm it s a good thing I like what I do! It s beautiful to take a train ride through New England at dusk in spring always a reminder that there s more to life than gyms and jiu jitsu. Next weekend I return to Boston and do it all again as I reshoot the entire Back Attack series it had similar audio problems to the leg lock series. It s tough, but not as tough as going to sleep knowing you didn t give your best to get an important job done so come next weekend back on the train bound for Boston to get it right! Wishing you all the best from the tracks in New England Angle The human body is set up to deal well with threats that are directly in front of it. It is very poorly adapted to deal with threats from BEHIND it. Thus in all forms of combat there is a constant battle to get to an advantageous position behind an opponent. We can t always get fully behind a good opponent they will always resist our attempts by constantly squaring up to us. That fine you don t have to get all the way behind to gain advantage usually even GAINING AN ANGLE on an opponent a PARTIAL movement towards the back is enough to secure sufficient advantage to score in some fashion. ANGLE IS ONE OF THE BEST AND MOST READILY AVAILABLE FORMS OF ADVANTAGE IN ALL COMBAT SPORTS YOU MUST DILIGENTLY TRAIN YOUR MIND AND BODY TO SEEK IT AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY AND TO SCORE FROM IT. One of the more obvious examples of angle advantage in jiu jitsu is standing guard passes, where an initial angle makes completing the task of passing the opponent s guard much easier. Here, Nicky Ryan does a fine job of getting a good angle to set up a standing guard pass that puts his rival, Geo Martinez under strong pressure.Experimenting The single greatest means of creating innovation and positive change in your game is a sense of experimentation. THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF THE INNOVATIONS THAT I BOUGHT INTO THE GAME CAME FROM IMMERSING MYSELF IN A GIVEN POSITIONSCENARIO AND USING TRIAL AND ERROR TO FIGURE OUT OVER TIME ANSWERS TO THE VARIOUS PROBLEMS I HAD IN THAT POSITION. All that is required is a partner, time and thinking. The hard part will come afterwards when you test your findings in live sparring. If an innovation shows potential it will be subjected to further experimentation and testing until it either passes and is accepted or fails and is discarded. Most people use only two modes of training drilling and sparring. Add a third experimental problem solving a hands on approach to solving the myriad puzzles of the sport that will make you a much more involved student of the sport and convert you from a passive learner to an active learner.Big news for my leg lock instructional video Last week my leg lock instructional video was released and within hours became the biggest seller in BJJ Fanatics catalogue by a landslide. Unfortunately it has become apparent that certain aspects of the production quality in particular the audio but some other aspects too were not up to acceptable standards. The general consensus is that the content is great but the sound production is at best adequate and at worst lame. Wh...Looking out over a crowded training hall I am always struck by the thought that potential champions are everywhere it s just a matter of good coaching married to ambition and discipline that creates the actual champions. Most people have complex lives that take them in many different directions. Thus their ambitions in jiu jitsu are usually more modest, since they have other priorities and approach the sport as a recreation. That does not blind me to their potential however I have recreational students who can give even champions a very hard time indeed on the mat. Never lose sight of the fact that we all have roughly the same potential to excel in the sport the actual differences are mostly due to lifestyles choices and time committed to training. Have faith that even a recreational approach can produce a shockingly good student in time. Never think that because you are not a full time professional athlete that you cannot excel to a level that even the best will be impressed by.Always trainingalways learning So often I am asked how to increase progress in learning jiu jitsu. The real question they are asking is how can i get good quickly? While I definitely believe there are ways to learn more quickly than most, there is simply no getting around the fact that you will need to invest large amounts of time and effort if you wish to gain competence in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. The better question then, is not, how do I get good quickly, but rather, how do I sustain progress over time. The danger is that as time passes, progress can be destroyed in two main ways. First, by extended periods away from the mat. Second, by showing up and training without a clear sense of purpose for each session, just complacently showing up and thinking that s enough. The first will cause you to lose skills you once had; the second will simply maintain whatever skills you do have and no more guaranteeing a plateau in performance that can go on for months or even years. If you seek excellence as time passes make a concerted commitment to the idea of MINIMIZING TIME OFF THE MAT AND MAXIMIZING THE VALUE OF YOUR TIME ON THE MAT. Do this by having at least one clear goal every time you go to train and a plan to work towards that goal showing up is not enough to avoid stagnation. The single best example of this mindset in operation over long periods of time I ever saw was Georges StPierre. Despite winning the success that could have easily made anyone else kick back and relax, he trains constantly and learns constantly. This week he caught up with the squad and went though all the latest leg lock work. Now he is flying home to work with some European tournament Karate champions to work on distance and movement skills. This constant push for volume and progress in training is deeply impressive and an inspiration to us all.Teaching seminars is one of my favorite ways of getting our message out to students outside our gym. I love the personal interaction and the novelty of it all for new students. Note that all my students, particularly Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and the Ryan brothers, Gordon and Nicky, can do just as good a job in many ways better as they do not have my physical limitations. We all love to teach when we travel. If this is something you are interested in at your school, contact us at our individual social media and make arrangements. We love to form a bond with the schools in which we teach not just come in teach some moves and go home, but come back again often to check progress and see developments. For example, I often teach at Dynamixmma in Santa Monica, LA and work with Josh Fiore and Antoni Hardonk to keep them progressing forward in our approach to grappling and watch the progress of their students. If this kind of long term teaching relationship of our style is of interest to you and your school contact us. We would love to share our knowledge and have you learn what we do and share it to your students. Our goal is create coaching bonds with schools that mean a student who wants to learn our approach to the game can join that school and be confident that he or she is learning the same technique and tactics that we employ in our own gym. Here, I run an enthusiastic group of students at dynamixmma LA through squad leg locking work they did a great job of learning and improving their skills!Teaching seminars is one of my favorite ways of getting our message out to students outside our gym. I love the personal interaction and the novelty of it all for new students. Note that all my students, particularly Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and the Ryan brothers, Gordon and Nicky, can do just as good a job in many ways better as they do not have my physical limitations. We all love to teach when we travel. If this is something you are interested in at your school, contact us at our individual social media and make arrangements. We love to form a bond with the schools in which we teach not just come in teach some moves and go home, but come back again often to check progress and see developments. For example, I often teach at Dynamixmma in Santa Monica, LA and work with Josh Fiore and Antoni Hardonk to keep them progressing forward in our approach to grappling and watch the progress of their students. If this kind of long term teaching relationship of our style is of interest to you and your school contact us. We would love to share our knowledge and have you learn what we do and share it to your students. Our goal is create coaching bonds with schools that mean a student who wants to learn our approach to the game can join that school and be confident that he or she is learning the same technique and tactics that we employ in our own gym. Here, I run an enthusiastic group of students at dynamixmma LA through squad leg locking work they did a great job of learning and improving their skills!My teaching method The dynamic problemSystematic Solutions model My proudest achievement as a coach is not the many prizes and accolades my students have won, but rather the fact that all of them are excellent teachers and innovators who can chart their own development once they reach a certain level. A large part of why they can do this is the general method of teaching i use and in which they all excel the dynamic problemsystematic solutions method. Most of you know that I see the primary attribute that determines long term success or failure in jiu jitsu and in almost everything else in life thus making jiu jitsu a mirror to all our other activities and giving it a deeper meaning is PROBLEM SOLVING. Jiu jitsu is more than anything, the act of solving problems under stress faster and more competently in a competitive race towards submission victory than your opponent. My teaching reflects this belief. I break jiu jitsu into skill areasscenarios and look to see what is the central problems in that area. Note immediately that all the problems of jiu jitsu are DYNAMIC problems. If I ask you what is 316 divided by 23 this is a static problem once the problem is stated, it does not change as you figure out the answer. In jiu jitsu, like any competitive game with a sentient resisting opponent, every attempt at a solution to the problems they present will be countered even as we are fighting for a solution. Thus the usual pattern is one of central problems rapidly being followed by subsequent problems as we offer solutions. This immediately gets us into a creative drive to research and find new solutions in an interlocking web that rapidly grows in complexity and size proportional to the skill level of our training environment and our imagination. THIS TEACHING METHOD IS WHAT GIVES RISE TO SYSTEM BUILDING AND PROGRESS. It is the basis of teaching methodology and it creates innovative self starting students who can think for themselves and ultimately go further than their teacher the very purpose of teaching. Begin by seeing every situation in jiu jitsu AS A PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED in time you will astounded by the structures you build in response.Leg lock Instructional video ON SALE NOW Due to heavy demand, BJJ Fanatics will release my leg lock instructional series immediately it was originally scheduled for release tomorrow at 12pm It is available as of now in both digital and DVD format. It will feature a very comprehensive ten hour viewing deep into the system taught along the same theoreticalconceptualpractical lines I use with my students the dynamic problemsystematic solutions model very different from standard instructional format. It is designed to give you a training resource you can constantly refer back to for years of development and build an ability to ask questions, solve problems and become a creative problem solver, rather than simply copy some moves. For those that prefer a shorter and simpler format, I can definitely do that in the future also Hope you all enjoy it! I will post a link in my bio if you are interested in buying please buy from link if possible. Thanks so much to all my teachers, mentors, students and followers who built this interest in new approaches to jiu jitsu! Back system series will be next! Ordering link httpsbjjfanatics.comp enterthesystembyjohndanaher Carrying weight One of the single most important directives whenever working from bottom position underneath an opponent is this SEEK ALWAYS TO MINIMIZE THE TIME AND EFFORT SPENT CARRYING YOUR OPPONENT S WEIGHT. You must make a serious study of the methods and means of reducing your opponent s ability to impose his weight upon you. This will mostly come down to postural, positional, gripping and tactical factors far to numerous and subtle to list but when they are absent you will immediately be aware as your workload under an opponent will double. Here, Nicky Ryan and Australian grappling superstar, Craig Jones experiment with weight bearing drills after class note the different demands both athletes have due to their respective roles as top and bottom athlete and how this drastically influences their choices in posture, positioning and gripCarrying weight One of the single most important directives whenever working from bottom position underneath an opponent is this SEEK ALWAYS TO MINIMIZE THE TIME AND EFFORT SPENT CARRYING YOUR OPPONENT S WEIGHT. You must make a serious study of the methods and means of reducing your opponent s ability to impose his weight upon you. This will mostly come down to postural, positional, gripping and tactical factors far to numerous and subtle to list but when they are absent you will immediately be aware as your workload under an opponent will double. Here, Nicky Ryan and Australian grappling superstar, Craig Jones experiment with weight bearing drills after class note the different demands both athletes have due to their respective roles as top and bottom athlete and how this drastically influences their choices in posture, positioning and gripCarrying weight One of the single most important directives whenever working from bottom position underneath an opponent is this SEEK ALWAYS TO MINIMIZE THE TIME AND EFFORT SPENT CARRYING YOUR OPPONENT S WEIGHT. You must make a serious study of the methods and means of reducing your opponent s ability to impose his weight upon you. This will mostly come down to postural, positional, gripping and tactical factors far to numerous and subtle to list but when they are absent you will immediately be aware as your workload under an opponent will double. Here, Nicky Ryan and Australian grappling superstar, Craig Jones experiment with weight bearing drills after class note the different demands both athletes have due to their respective roles as top and bottom athlete and how this drastically influences their choices in posture, positioning and gripLearning lessons Gordon Ryan fought a tough match in his ACB debut against the very talented Vinny Magalhaes and lost a close points decision. Mr Magalhaes got a strong start with a nice guard pass early in the first round. Mr Ryan seemed to prevail in the closely contested action in the next two rounds with several strong lock lock attempts and off balances but could not translate it into points and so lost the decision based on the first round. All credit to Mr Magalhaes for a very good performance. For us we will have to improve our adjustment to the new rule set and come back stronger next time. The good news is that It s always an easier thing to fix tactics than technique so we shall head back to the blue basement and work on that. Wishing you all the best from LA hope you enjoyed the show! We are in the stands now watching Leandro Lo take on Gabriel Arges so much talent on this card! Always great to see the super stars of the sport in one room and putting on a show!Getting ready for the big show Gordon Ryan and the great Vinny Margalhaes square off at the official ceremony for tomorrow s ACB event. It will feature a three round match five minutes per round scored along IBJJF lines with heel hooks permitted and fitted into 109 scoring per round. Mr Magalhaes is a former ADCC champion and one of the most gifted heavyweights in the sport this will be a tremendous challenge. The card is probably the best I ever saw I have not seen this much ultra elite jiu jitsu talent in one room since the last ADCC. On this incredible card are jiu jitsu icons, Cyborg Abreau, Marcus Almeida, Leandro Lo, Gabriel Arges, Augusto Mendes, Keenan Cornelius, Yuri Simoes, Romulo Barra, Michael Langhi, Bruno Frazatto, Ari Farias, Edwin Najmi, Luis Panza, Erberth Santos its like a team of jiu jitsu superheroes! Can t wait to see what this collection of talent can produce tomorrow!Incorporating systems into your game I always enjoy coaching experienced athletes with a well established skill set that they have used for years and working with them to take on new skills and add them to their already existing skills as a means of increasing their effectiveness, or even just giving them the joy of new perspectives and skills on top of what they already know. My good friend, Tom DeBlass is a fine example. He has a highly successful game that he developed over many years of Training that saw him win US ADCC trials on many occasions and compete at the world championships on multiple occasions. As he saw the success of the squad to whom he is very closely linked he gave Garry Tonon his black belt and is a great mentor to Gordon and Nicky Ryan he became interested in studying the various systems we employ. Being a skilled athlete with vast experience in jiu jitsu made it very easy for him to pick up the essential concepts and movements and very soon he started having success in the gym. This weekend at Fight2Win Pro Grappling in Philadelphia he went out with the intention of using that knowledge in classic squad style sit and battle for inside position, then a fight to off balance the opponent kuzushi to get an opponent into vulnerable extended positions from where a solid connection via ashi garami can be attained from there it s a task of negating resistance, exposing the heel and then proper breaking mechanics. Mr DeBlass did exactly that and in quick time just thirty seconds in and victory via outside heel hook was his. It was a fine example off an athlete who had a certain skill set and added to it. If you have been studying jiu jitsu for some time, I am confident and infusion of our systems based approach can do similar things for you. Sometimes people think that my students became proficient because I began teaching them early in fact I have had many athletes who started very late in their careers with me and had similar success at learning the various systems. Hats off to Mr DeBlass for taking on a new skill set that he did not need, but did so for the sake of knowledge and learning and did a fine job of demonstrating it.Weekend of victory Squad juniors, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau had a great weekend at Pilgrim Grappling Championships in Philadelphia over the weekend. They were the main event matches. Mr Rosenthal took on EBI Combat Jiu Jujitsu Champion Chad Georges and had a great victory in overtime using elements of our back system to lock in a winning strangle and continue his impressive win streak. Jason Rau won in regulation time via Kata Gatame strangle in regulation time over Quentin Rosenweig, a very tough EBI competitor. It s great to see both athletes showing they are at that EBI level and rising fast. Outstanding female blue belt, Katya Leontyeva had a tremendous day, winning advanced category gold in both her weight and absolute divisions every match by heel hook! Today Mr Rosenthal and Ms Leontyeva showed their impressive work ethic by coming back to the gym next day to help Gordon Ryan train in anticipation of his big match next weekend with the great Vinny Margalhaes in Los Angeles. Wonderful to see such progress and the work ethic that makes it possible.The essential skills of the leg lock system You might be puzzled by the first two listed essential skills of the leg lock system grip and inside position is the first, distance and connection is the second. In both cases TWO skills are listed. True however, in practice those skills are so closely entwined that I usually teach them together and certainly in practice they are usually performed together so for the sake of brevity I listed them as one skill yes, brevity sounds weird coming from me I know Here, Nicky Ryan goes through his grip and inside position drills with Garry Tonon just prior to his winning performance at Kasai Grappling 2. Note how inside position with the feet and a preliminary grip have been attained at the same time to lessen reaction time for his opponent and set up his ability to go to the next step. Seen in this light, you will see heel hooking as we do as a PROCESS rather than a MOVE. There is a chain of skills where the preceding skill must be completed before the next can be attempted. All my students are highly adept at at working methodically through this process even against tremendous pressure. In this way even skilled resistance can be overcome and victory attainedOpen wedgesclosed wedges an important principle of my leg lock system is the closed wedge principle. Ashi garami is essentially a set of wedges around your opponent s leg and hips. Like most examples of wedging in jiu jitsu, it is designed to INHIBIT MOVEMENT so that you can more easily break your opponent. As a general rule I have a preference for CLOSED wedges over open wedges when it is time to break someone. In practical terms, this means that ONE OF MY LIMBS MUST REINFORCE THE POSITION OF THE OTHER, LOCKING IT IN PLACE SO THAT AN OPPONENT CANNOT EASILY SEPARATE THE WEDGES AND ESCAPE. There are a vast number of ashi garami variations out there, but if you observe my students in operation you will see immediately that whenever they are in a tough match with a skilled opponent, they will go back to the strength and security of closed wedge variations of ashi garami where their legs lock around their opponent with crossed feet or triangled legs. This adds greatly to the tightness of the control. Our two favorite and strongest finishing positions at the top of the breaking hierarchy both feature closedreinforced wedges in the case of straight ashi garami variations we favor outside ashi garami. In the case of cross ashi garami variations we favor versions of inside sankaku. Both lock the attacker very securely to the opponent and thus can generate truly intimidating power. Are closed wedges always necessary? No you can get a lot of success without them up to a certain level. If your opponent is perhaps inexperienced in avoiding heel hooks, then open versions of ashi garami can work just fine but when you are in a serious struggle against a skilled opponent work with the security, safety, strength and power of closed wedges when possible.The leg lock system instructional There are many different ways to present my approach to leg locking to students. Initially I thought it best to do so in a simple and brief introduction video show some important moves and counter moves, in the standard format for jiu jitsu instructionals. The more I thought about, the less happy I was with that idea. That was not how I taught my own students. I got so many requests over the last few years to go and teach in many locations, also many visitors here in NYC asked for instruction but I am one person with some rather serious physical issues and can t reach many more people so I thought about teaching a video that would be quite different from the norm a video where I went in much greater depth using my preferred style of teaching, the scenarioproblemsolutions model that I use with my own students. This is a difficult thing to present on video and puts much greater demands on the viewer than regular videos, where the viewer just passively watches some moves and seeks to copy them. Here, I am looking to present a complete working method for leg locking and give the viewer UNDERSTANDING rather than mimicry. My proudest achievement as a coach is to have produced students who were independent, innovative problems solvers who can teach as well as they compete I don t want to produce robots. My goal is to do the same with you. The simplest way to state the structure of my system is as follows. It consists of six essential and sequential skills, manifested in three distinct yet linked sub systems, each of which presents at least one central problem along with subsequent problems as the system unfolds; and is given its character by around ten core principlesaxioms. This is the way I taught my students and they rapidly became the best leg lockers in the world. It did not create just one good leg specialist, but a ROOMFUL of them, across all weight divisions and body types. If you can invest time, patience and study into it, I believe it can work for you to. LEG LOCKS ENTER THE SYSTEM will be released soon by BJJ FanaticsMoves and movement Jiu Jitsu is usually taught as MOVES. However, every MOVE presupposes that you are capable of the physical MOVEMENTS that underlie that move. The better your capacity to control and direct the movements of your OWN body, the better will be your ability to perform the moves that will enable you to control and direct the movements of ANOTHER PERSONS body. Therefore, take as much pride and interest in your ability to move yourself around the mat as you do in moving an opponent your performance of the latter will improve in relation to the former. Whatever your age, physical limitations etc, there is always some way that you can increase or improve your own capacity for movement. Whatever gains you make in this area, no matter how small, will aid you in your quest to perform well the many moves of jiu jitsu and thus move and control another person the ultimate goal of the sport.Ideal positioning and less than ideal When we first begin to learn a move it is wise to begin study under ideal conditions your body well aligned in the preferred position for that particular move. In competition and sparring however, IN THE MAJORITY OF CASES YOU WILL HAVE TO PERFORM YOUR MOVES IN LESS THAN IDEAL POSITIONS AND ORIENTATIONS THAT NATURALLY OCCUR WITH MAXIMUM RESISTANCE. As such, we often practice finishes in a range of different orientations belly up, belly down, inverted, rolling through etc etc. In this way there are no surprises on match day you will be prepared for any contingency as you go in to finish your move. Here, Frank Rosenthal easily adapts to a belly down rolling situation when he needed to finishing a fine inside heel hook at Kasai Grappling Championship in fine style strong preparation in non ideal scenarios made for a flawless finish against strong resistance.Back attacks As most of you know, I put a VERY heavy emphasis on back attacks in my coaching of jiu jitsu. In my opinion, the back represents the safest place to be both in grappling and fighting and offers the most high percentage and effective submission attacks, thus do I favor it above even the mounted position and all other dominant pin positions. When I look at modern jiu jitsu I see many talented athletes who are extremely good at GETTING TO and MAINTAINING the back position. But many people struggle to FINISH from the back, particularly without the gi. Part of the reason is the lack of incentive to train finishes. In truth, there is little incentive to train hard on back finishes for a simple reason. If you have taken your opponent s back then you have scored four points the maximum in the sport. In most cases you have probably also scored takedown, passing and other pin points as well so in most cases you will be far ahead on points by the time you get to the back position and thus very likely to win anyway, so there is no need to finish. That all changed with the rise of submission grappling events, where getting someone s back meant nothing NOW YOU HAD TO FINISH FROM THE BACK. Many elite athletes really struggled with this, as the evidence of EBI overtime s will attest. My approach to the back puts equal emphasis upon GETTING TO, MAINTAINING and FINISHING from back position, rather than focusing mostly upon the first two and assuming the third is just a bonus because the match will be won on points anyway. When it comes to finishing skills, I strongly emphasize two crucial themes. The first is an indepth hand fighting system arranged in a hierarchy designed to pin an opponent s defensive arms. The second is auxiliary subsystems designed to allow you to ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY rather than restrict yourself to mostly the neck. These two themes are often exhibited by my students in competition and have led to many of their greatest successes. Here, Gordon Ryan, a young master of back attacks, shows his hand fighting skills as he prepares the way for a strangulation in training.The separation principle My leg lock system has around ten core principles that give it its character. One of those principles is the separation principle. This is the idea that if we are to excel in leg locking we must separate the mechanism of CONTROL Ashi Garami from the mechanism of BREAKING the heel hook, toe hold, Achilles lock etc. As a general rule we favor implementing the control mechanism first and the breaking mechanism second though there are some exceptions to that rule. Once you start to implement the separation principle, interesting things start happening. You can start holding and pinning opponents with the Ashi Garami for long periods of time, switching from one form of Ashi Garami to another in other words USING ASHI GARAMI AS A TYPE OF PIN EXACTLY AS YOU WOULD USE DIFFERENT UPPER BODY PINS IN CONVENTIONAL JIU JITSU. You will see that there is a hierarchy among the various ashi garami variations, just as there is among upper body pins; and that you can hold them at will and establish your controlposition prior to attempting the submission just as you would for upper body pins. Thus the separation principle opens the door for a controlpositional approach to leg locking that in some important ways mirror the basic philosophy and methodology of classic BJJ. Here, Nicky Ryan drills ashi garami variations with senpai Garry Tonon shortly before his victory over Geo Martinez. Note how he has established complete control over both legs double trouble principle in ways that enable him to dominate movement while not even concerned with breaking that comes later at a time and intensity of his choosing, since he is in complete control of his partners movement.A word of thanks to show promotions I think of all the jobs in grappling, the toughest and most difficult may be one that no one talks about producing a big show. To put on a jiu jitsu event requires enormous amounts of planning, time and expense. There are so many things that can go unexpectedly wrong and good plans become a disaster. I see enough of the backstage drama and difficulties to be thankful that my coaching job is so simple in comparison! WITHOUT SHOW PROMOTERS ALL THE DREAMS AND GOALS OF THE ATHLETES AND THE DEDICATION OF THE SUPPORTING FANS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE. I always appreciate the efforts of the promoters they give a stage upon which dreams can be built. I always laugh when I hear people talk about a squad rivalry with 10th Planet and Eddie Bravo. Nothing could be further from the truth. Without Eddie Bravo s groundbreaking decision to take the risk of a high production show with large viewership and its own rule set, we would all still be a bunch of no name dorks squeezing each other s legs in my sensei s basement. I never forget that and am always grateful for his efforts. No promotion will ever be perfect or satisfy all the viewers tastes that s why it s good to have choices. But all the main shows, ADCC, EBI, IBJJF, ACB, Fight2Win, Polaris, Rizin, Global Grappling League, Sapeteiro and yes, even metamoris did so much to boost the brands of the athletes and take the sport forward. I am so happy to see a new contender among the big shows, kasaigrappling In only their second show they have greatly impressed me with their production value and athlete recruitment. Led by Rolles Gracie and Rich Byrnes, one a former athlete himself, the other a formidable businessman and both deeply passionate about advancing the sport, they have created a top level show in our hometown NYC that is letting both international and local athletes work towards their dreams. From the squad thanks so much to all the promoters who gave our athletes a chance to show our approach to the game and create change in jiu jitsu and congratulations to new kid on the block, Kasai Grappling for their outstanding work so far. Thank you all.Develop one strong threat first and build upon that A key theme of my teaching is that once an athlete becomes proficient in the fundamentals of jiu jitsu there is no getting around this the fundamentals are the heart and soul of the sport and any deficiencies in this regard will quickly be revealed in competition IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT YOU DEVELOP ONE STRONG MEANS OF ATTACK THAT WILL PUT FEAR AND RESPECT IN YOUR OPPONENTS MIND. If you present no threat to an opponent, he will open up his full game upon you, but if he fears certain things, he will close down areas of his game and restrict himself to stay away from that threat of yours. You will find in time that you have a propensity for certain kinds of attack what it is is not important some of you will develop an unstoppable sweep, others a powerful takedown, a devastating arm lock anything that can win a match and which you perform very well will do. For me, it is leg attacks and back attacks. All my students are very strong in this regard. I like them because they are almost always available and create very strong defensive reactions that lead into many other forms of attack. The results of successful leg and back attacks are usually devastating and have a strong intimidation factor that can be exploited as opponents react defensively. Once you develop that first strong threat, you can build organically from there as there will be natural follow ups but start with one. Here, Nicky Ryan explodes from bottom into an arm drag that exposes the back of Geo Martinez forcing a strong defensive reaction and adjustments in posture and positioning that he could exploit later in the match with another of his favorite attack methods the triangle sankaku a fine example of a strong initial threat creating opportunities for another further down the road.Getting it right Talented and industrious squad junior, Frank Rosenthal had a superb performance Saturday night at kasaigrappling championships winning via inside heel hook. You can see him perform flawlessly many of the central themes of our approach to the leg locking game a fine ankle lace ashi garami ties his opponent up and immobilizes him to allow transitions to a tight closed wedge in this case, inside sankaku around the hip and then perfect head position to generate heel exposure on a now stationary target result? A completely controlled submission on a tough and skillful opponent from 10th Planet who simply runs out of defensive options as the system unfolds on stage. Great result for Mr Rosenthal in his best performance so far and a great example to the other juniors and classmates and indeed, all of you, in the calm and disciplined execution of well rehearsed skills in a pressure situation.Nicky Ryan and the power of sankaku triangle Many of you will remember that a BIG part of my teaching is concerned with the use of WEDGES as one of the key elements in my approach to jiu jitsu. Wedges are useful for many things, but primarily to RESTRICT MOVEMENT. As much as I like wedges, I have a strong preference for a certain type of wedge. Most wedges used in jiu jitsu are OPEN WEDGES but whenever possible, I prefer CLOSED reinforced WEDGES. This is when your limbs are locked together around an opponent so THAT ONE LIMB REINFORCES THE POSITION OF THE OTHER FOR ADDED TIGHTNESS AND CONTROL. You will notice that most of my favorite finishing positions involve the use of closed reinforced wedges. So in my leg lock system the preferred breaking positions involve locking our legs together around an opponent s leg inside sankaku and outside ashi garami are two well known examples that you will often see my students using. In the case of upper body submissions, I greatly favor the use of triangle locks as they are fine examples of closed wedges around the head and one arm that present a dual threat of strangle and arm lock. Moreover, it features the strength of both my legs against an opponent s neck and one arm an obvious imbalance. In this way you can see it is a particularly good way for smaller and weaker athletes to handle stronger athletes. The primary problem presented by the Geo Martinez match for Nicky Ryan was the obvious strength disparity between a mature athlete with great gymnastics background versus a sixteen year old boy. As such, sankaku training was a huge part of his training. Tactically, strong threats to the legs that created reactions that would lead to sankaku and vice versa were the theme of the camp. All my students excel at sankaku, but the Ryan brothers are particularly adept. Indeed, they have their own sequence from the position we call the Ryan roll. What an experience it was to watch this wunderkind hit exactly the tactics and techniques he worked so hard on in camp and show everyone again the remarkable property of sankaku as a means of victory over a stronger opponent a lesson to us all!Victory in NYC! Nicky Ryan won his grappling superfight versus the very tough and distinguished Geo Martinez tonight in NYC. He won a unanimous decision and in the final seconds had a fully locked triangle from the back an advanced element of the back attack system and appeared moments from a decisive submission victory. In addition he appeared to have the stronger submission attempts throughout the match, along with more positional reversals. It was a truly remarkable performance from this young man. He went through a tough training camp and tonight on the big stage he did everything he trained for perfectly. He has a maturity and elan that is truly remarkable for a man his age. Eddie Cummings won a hard fought decision over the very talented Renato Canuto as he had the better submission attempts and overall aggression. Frank Rosenthal has his best performance ever with a beautiful heel hook victory over 10th Planet stand out Zach Malany in one of the nights highlight moments. I am so proud of these remarkable athletes here in front of their home crowd. Bless you all from NYC! Hope you all enjoyed the show!The purpose of the instructional video My intention in releasing an instructional video series is to 1 To provide a very comprehensive guide to the core insights and techniques that was shown to the squad and which they had so much success with in competition. I believe teaching a wider audience can create beneficial change in the sport. The idea was to take someone who perhaps lacked access to instruction in leg locking and start them on the right track all the way from initiating contact with an opponent to getting a submission against strong resistance. 2 To enable anyone who was already experienced in jiu jitsu to quickly add on skills from a niche area leg locks for example and add them easily to the game they already have spent years practicing. I was very happy to have Bernardo Faria as part of the project because he already has a tremendous world championship winning game you will see how he can easily add on leg locking skills to an already well developed game. 3 to change the game of video instructionals. Usually an athlete shows some favorite moves and you try to learn the ones that suit you. My intention is to show a much more CONCEPTUAL approach whose aim is to make you understand the central PROBLEMS of leg locking and a METHODOLOGY OF FINDING SOLUTIONS. The idea is to make you into an independent problem solver who can understand the problems and has a method to figure out solutions. I will show many of my solutions but do so in a way that will hopefully allow you to gain the ability to figure out your own as well. I want to make students into PROBLEM SOLVERS rather than COPIERS. This does mean the series is much longer than most and requires more viewer patienceinteraction. I wanted to teach at the same level of conceptual detail that I taught the squad that requires more from the viewer but will allow those with the desire and patience to get to a MUCH higher level than merely copying some moves. For those of you who prefer a simpler, shorter and condensed summary of my leg locking game and many people do better with that kind of instruction I would be happy to provide a condensed version in the future.Teaching a wider audience launching an instructional video series For twenty years I have taught in the dojo of my sensei, Renzo Gracie. In that time I have had the honor of teaching packed classes and great athletes, but always I was limited to teaching whoever was in front of me. As a result I had a big influence on a small number of people. The most I could do was occasional touring seminars where I could reach a new audience for a few hours. People have often asked me to come and teach but I am only one person and usually preoccupied with my students next bout. Things got worse when my body started failing and my ability to travel and teach was further diminished. My crippled leg has deteriorated to a point where I have to get a knee replacement on the same side as my hip replacement and there are serious doubts about my ability to demonstrate moves if I do this. I feel that my students have done an incredible job of showing my ideas to the world in the heat of top level competition. Many of you have requested teaching but my limitations as an individual with body issues have made that impossible. My good friend, Bernardo Faria, World jiu jitsu Champion, encouraged me to reach a wider audience than the blue basement in NYC through video. I am happy to announce a soon to be released video production with Mr Faria and Micheal Zenga with BJJ Fanatics featuring my leg lock and back attack systems. If people find the material interesting, we can definitely go on to look at many other aspects of our approach to jiu jitsu, but Most Enquiries I received for instruction were leg locking and back attacks so I started there. Last weekend we went through a marathon filming session showing the complete ashi garami leg lock system be warned this thing is so long and complete it makes my instagram posts look short!! I wanted to show the core concepts, tactics, philosophy and techniques that you have all seen my students apply so brilliantly over the years. I wanted to thank Mr Faria and Mr Zenga for their encouragement and guidance on the project. I hope you will enjoy a look at the squad training methodology more details soon!Insight, BJ Penn and my back attack system As many of you know, I am a huge believer in the idea that someone can have a massive influence upon you even when you met them very briefly, or even without ever meeting them. This is done through the power of INSIGHT. Someone can give you a critical insight, some idea that changes your point of view in some significant way that inspires you to change direction and change how you do things. For example, I met Dean Lister once and he gave me a new perspective with a single sentence that changed my jiu jitsu forever. Another huge influence on my jiu jitsu comes from the oddest source BJ Penn. Mr Penn was in opinion, one of the absolute most skilled and talented MMA fighters of his generation. On two occasions he fought my student, Georges StPierre. Both were epic matches in very different ways. In preparation for those matches I studied Mr Penn s game to help construct a plan of operations. I was extremely impressed by Mr Penn s use of his legs to trap the arms of his opponents to facilitate strangling them. Now Mr Penn was a man of extraordinary flexibility. Experimentation quickly showed that his arm trap position was very effective, but that few people had the necessary flexibility to employ it as he did. As it turned out, he was never able to get those positions when he fought Mr StPierre, but I did not forget how effective that technique was. I immediately began working on means of controlling and trapping arms from rear mount in ways that did not require flexibility. A sophisticated and intricate system of hand trapping patterns and grip nuances quickly got great results. In time I added four auxiliary back subsystems to the main hand fighting system so that the WHOLE BODY could be attacked, rather than just the neck. When the squad rose to prominence, they all proved highly adept at back attacks and the senior students, in particular Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Eddie Cummings, all added key features and insights. The irony is that the entire project started from observing a rival to one of my students, a man I never actually met, but whose insight and example inspired greatly me.Balance One of the key attributes and skills you must develop as you train is a sense of balance. Your ability to transition smoothly from one move to another is vital to your ability to succeed, as no one move will enable you to defeat skilled opponents, rather, moves applied in smooth SEQUENCES will be the means to victory. YOUR ABILITY TO GO EFFICIENTLY FROM ONE MOVE TO ANOTHER IN STANDING AND TOP POSITION, IS ENTIRELY DEPENDENT UPON YOU BEING IN GOOD BALANCE. Any failure in your balance will require you to first correct your balance before you can move on to the next technique. This will give your game a stuttering and clumsy appearance and make it easy for an opponent to seize the initiative during those times when you are trying to recover balance. Developing the skill of KEEPING YOUR CENTER OF GRAVITY INSIDE YOUR BASE OF SUPPORT AT ALL TIMES is thus crucial to your development. Begin this development while drilling your top game. Pay particular attention to the position of your head position and posture and understand that static balance is not the goal rather, DYNAMIC BALANCE the ability to hold balance throughout movement, is the skill you are developing. Here, Oliver Taza displays excellent balance whilst working inside an opponent s guard this will enable him to calmly identify his next step in the midst of the action and go immediately to it without delayThe underlying essentials never change Obviously the sport of mixed martial arts is radically different from grappling. Yet there is a definite sense in which the basic demands of all combat sports are the same only the means of expressing them are different. I find it helps athletes who are making the crossover to teach them in terms of those shared foundational principles so that the many SHARED elements of the different sports are emphasized rather than the many DIFFERENCES. It does not matter whether we are punching, kicking, clinching, performing takedowns or grappling on the floor gaining angle on my opponent towards his back will constitute advantage. By constantly emphasizing that concept in grappling training, it becomes easy to teach applications of the same principle to that athlete in the new context of striking. Here, just days before his MMA debut in Thailand, Garry Tonon works to find and exploit advantageous angle to punch, just as he did for years to enter into submissions different context same principleControlling movement A central feature of all good jiu jitsu is that of learning to control an opponent s ability to move. The best athletes can reduce an opponent s ability to move to that of a puppet, whose every move is determined by the strings to which he is bound and whose every motion is wholly determined by the puppet master. Note that it is not always possible or even desirable to completely STOP an opponent s movement often it is enough, or even better to DIRECT an opponent s movement controlling the speed and direction in which he goes. This theme of beginning with stopping, restraining, slowing or directing movement is a central feature of my approach to leg locking. Until you have the ability to restrict or control MOVEMENT, the application of the locks is very difficult against skilled opposition. That is why we strongly separate the mechanism of CONTROL the ashi garami variations, from the method of BREAKING usually heel hooks, but there are others. The ashi garami holds an opponent in place long enough for a breaking force to be applied to the leg. What was different about our approach is that multiple ashi garamis were used in a sequence to perform a single lock. At least one of those ashi garami had RESTRAINT OF MOVEMENT as its main task. Probably the most recognized is the ankle lace ashi garami that ties an opponent s legs together in a way that makes effective movement extremely difficult and sets up some particularly punishing leg attacks. Here, Georges StPierre works on binding the ankles together as a prelude to a heel hook variation.Leg lock mastery and the percentage principle When I was a beginner in jiu jitsu leg locks had a subversive and mysterious aura to them. There were some people who were considered experts in the field. The criteria by which people were judged as expert was typically THE NUMBER OF LEG LOCKS THEY KNEW. If one person knew ten leg locks and another knew one hundred, the second man was the expert. Consider the work of my students NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF THE VICTORIES MY STUDENTS HAVE HAD IN COMPETITION AND IN THE GYM AND NO ONE HAS HAD MORE LEG LOCK VICTORIES OR AT SUCH A HIGH LEVEL HAVE COME FROM TWO LEG LOCKS the outside heel hook and the inside heel hook. Probably one of the biggest effects upon leg locking that I have had is to change people s perceptions about what constitutes leg lock mastery. Rather than see it in terms of the number and variety of leg locks known and performed, I SEE IT IN TERMS OF MASTERING ONLY THE MOST HIGH PERCENTAGE MOVES AND FOCUSING UPON THEM EMBEDDING THEM IN SOPHISTICATED SYSTEMS OF OPERATIONS THAT TAKE AN ATHLETE FROM THE BEGINNING OF A MATCH TO THE END. Thus mastery is about the DEPTH OF THE SUPPORT SYSTEMS AROUND A FEW HIGH PERCENTAGE LEG LOCKS, RATHER THAN NUMBER AND EXTENT OF THE LEG LOCKS THEMSELVES. I really only teach five ashi garami based leg locks in a serious fashion, along with a few non ashi garami leg locks, and of those five, the overwhelming majority of my time is spent on just two and from those two came a success rate that changed the direction of jiu jitsu over the last five years. I could teach you a hundred interesting and exotic leg locks and it would do little or nothing to improve your performance on the mat or I could teach you two biomechanically sound leg locks embedded in systems that could get you to those locks and keep you there against strong resistance the second option will make you a real master of leg locking the first will not.Globetrotting grappler One of my favorite people in professional grappling is Aussie superstar, Craig Jones. This remarkable young man travels the world for competition, seminars and training. He is a great example of the martial arts ideal of a killer on the mat, but an absolute gentleman off the mat. I had a great time teaching in Australia last time visiting family and had a great experience at Mr Jones gym, absolutemmamelb in Melbourne, so whenever Mr Jones is in town I always like to return the favor. Today he had some great training sessions with young Nicky Ryan. Both Athletes are getting ready for the upcoming kasaigrappling show in NYC in two weeks prior to that Mr Jones will fly to Japan to compete and then back to NYC! I don t know anyone who travels so far so often as this man! Here, Messrs Jones and Ryan relax after working their half guard leg lock entries and sparring rounds.Eddie Cummings back to center stage The Wolverine, Eddie Cummings, one of the most skilled submission hunters I ever had the pleasure of working with, will return to the big show headlining the kasaigrappling Kasai Pro 2 event in NYC on April 14. He will take on the extremely impressive Renato Canuto at 160 pounds in a fifteen minute super fight with no points for first ten minutes and then a shift to points in last five minutes. Mr Canuto greatly impressed everyone at the previous Kasai Show, beating out a stacked field with exceptionally dynamic movement both standing and on the ground and showing equal ability in both positional play and submissions. This will be a great clash of very different styles. Mr Canuto is a master of generating movement, but Mr Cummings is, like all my students, trained primarily in disrupting and inhibiting movement, This should lead to a fascinating match. Mr Cummings has been working hard developing his own brand over the last year independently of the squad, but still very much a flag bearer of the submission grapplingattack the whole body and one of the greatest products of the blue basement. In addition, several of the juniors kohai will compete in the card I will talk about that soon. Looking forward to another great night of grappling in NYC in this very impressive emerging show!Getting hands taped for the first time A first MMA fight is never an easy thing. When camp begins, most of the problems are physical the sheer volume of work is staggering. Much of that work is new, so it has a clumsy, unfamiliar feeling about it. There are myriad small injuries from the punishing training and you don t have time to let them heal so they accumulate over the camp. As The first fight get closer, hard physical training is reduced and usually avoided altogether in the last week. That s when the mental problems start. Self doubt, confidence issues, concerns about the opponent s strength relative to your weaknesses they all come out. Often they reach a peak in the warm up room. Here, Garry Tonon gets his hands wrapped and certified for the first time just prior to his debut fight last week in Thailand. I remember once at a UFC event, a young fighter in his first event was getting his hands professionally wrapped for the first time and was greatly impressed by the result off having a real professional tape up his fists. When it was done he jumped up and yelled, my hands feel like they have been dipped into steel!!! When I hit that fker he s going to wake up with a busted face and broken jaw! The professional hand wrapper looked casually at him and quietly remarked, I wrapped the other guys hands the same way ten minutes ago... i usually find that the nervousness peaks at the hand wrapping why? Because, once the hand wrap is complete THE ACTIVITY OF WARM UP BEGINS, and PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY is the single best antidote to fear and nervousness that I know of. Shortly after this picture was taken, Mr Tonon went through a solid warm up that brought together all the main themes of the camp helped reduce the natural feelings of nervousness you would expect in a debut MMA performance. Always remember WHEN YOU FEEL NERVOUS PRIOR TO AN EVENT OF ANY KIND PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY RELATED TO THE TASK BEFORE YOU WILL HELP YOU MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE.Why don t you just call it a honey hole or 411, or saddle or whatever like everyone else? Often people ask me why I insist upon a large array of names for moves that most people describe with a single well known name. My reasoning is easy to understand. FOR ANY GIVEN MOVE, THERE WILL BE MANY VARIATIONS WITHIN THAT MOVE each will have different strengths and weaknesses and areas of application. FAILURE TO UNDERSTAND THOSE DIFFERENCES WILL LEAD TO INAPPROPRIATE APPLICATIONS THAT WILL LOWER MY PERFORMANCE. Let s look at a simple example. A friend calls me and says he needs me to come over with a screw driver and remove some screws. Being completely naive with regards screwdrivers and handyman work in general, I naively reach into a tool box and grab a screwdriver and head over. Given that there are several different types of screwdriversscrews used out there I HAVE PROBABLY CONDEMNED MYSELF TO FAILURE BEFORE I EVEN BEGIN THE TASK. As any task becomes more complex THIS MUST BE REFLECTED IN THE LANGUAGE USED TO DESCRIBE YOUR ACTIONS AND THOUGHTS AS YOU PERFORM THAT TASK. If I have only a single term to cover a wide array of variations of a move, MY THOUGHTS AND ACTIONS WILL REFLECT MY LINGUISTIC NAIVETY WITH A NAIVE PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE OF THE TASK. If I have only one word to describe a given color, red how good do you think my ability to paint a picture of a scene accurately compared with another person who distinguishes crimson, scarlet, magenta, maroon, garnet, cherry red etc etc will be? The language you use to describe your actions to yourself and others will set the limit on your ability to think about, reason, describe and distinguish the variations within a move that HAVE A GENUINE EFFECT UPON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE MOVE. Here, Georges StPierre works one variation of an inside heel hook with an inside sankakuoutside foot leg position that offers some mechanical advantages along with some disadvantages being able to distinguish this from the many other variations lets me exploit those advantages when i can a more sophisticated terminology helps us make and describe those distinctions to ourselves and others greatly speeding learningA word of thanks being a small part of Garry Tonon s preparation for his winning MMA debut was a great coaching experience and to see him successfully execute many of the central themes and concepts of an entirely new sport in such a short preparation time was truly impressive. I wanted to thank the many people who played key roles in this young mans incredible development. First, to Mr Tonon himself. He trained three times a day seven days a week, through injuries, physical pain and early frustration and never missed a workout. Due to the fact that I have to teach a high volume of private classes to make a living, the only daily time slot for MMA sparring was immediately after his second grappling class. I did not want him to neglect his main strength, so he had to spar MMA immediately after two hours of grappling he did it every day without complaint. His work ethic amazes me. Thanks also to Squad seniors Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan, along with all the kohai juniors who created the framework of the squad that helped build his brand and a training room that could promote development. Thanks so much to the unsung heroes of the squad the regulars of RGA in NYC headquarters who come in every day while holding full time jobs and made a room that builds champions you fellows are the rock upon which this whole enterprise is built. Thanks to Doug Pelinkovic, Mike Jaramillo, Gene Dunne, Brian Glick and Claude Levy, senior students whom I often discuss ideas and concepts of MMA and who provide such a fine sounding board for my developmental ideas. Thanks to Tom DeBlass for being such an outstanding mentor to Mr Tonon all these years. Thanks so much to Ryan Rizco, Jake Shields, Matthew Tesla, Neiman Gracie, Garry StLeger and Mehrdad for being the sparring partners who took Garry from total novice to confident debutant in just four months. Thanks to Jamie Crowder and Joe Sampieri of RGA Muay Thai for all your insight and help. Thanks so much to Georges StPierre and Joe Rogan for extremely valuable input on the subtleties of distance, movement and timing that played a pivotal role in the outcome. Thanks to Mr Tonon s family who did such an amazing job raising this young man and fully support him through thick and thin. Thanks to my sensei, Renzo Gracie, who gives us a space to train and freedom to develop so the athletes can progress towards their dreams. Thank you to One FC for believing in Mr Tonon s potential and giving him a chance to showcase his hard work on the international stage. And thanks so much to you, my dear readers, who follow our exploits, tolerate our foibles and share our vision of grappling and martial arts in ways that motivate us and makes us try even harder. Bless you all from Bangkok.Victory in Thailand Garry Tonon won his first ever MMA fight here in Bangkok via TKO in the second round. Prior to the bout, Mr Tonon expressed a desire to use his fledgling striking skills rather than simply rely on grappling. Despite only around four months of MMA training he made remarkable progress and wanted to test his new skills as part of his development. After an understandably nervous start where he took some hits, he settled into his rhythm and started landed his own heavy blows leading to a first round knock down and very nearly finished in the first round. In the second, Mr Tonon took control both in the open and on the fence and ultimately to the floor where he landed many heavy punches and elbows to get a stoppage. It was impressive to see a grappling athlete with no real striking background other than some sporadic pad work until four months ago come out and win via TKO on a specialized striker. Obviously there is still a huge amount to work on, but it was an amazing performance by the rookie. It was also a brave choice to stay with striking when he could have easily gone into submission mode. Previous to tonight, Mr Tonon had never thrown a punch with bad intentions before, but here in his debut he landed well once he got settled in. Any debut into MMA is tough, but doing it in a foreign country, on the main card of one of the biggest organizations in the world, with only four months of experience behind you and big expectations from fans, and still have the presence of mind to work on new developing skills to help long term growth shows remarkable presence of mind. I hope you all enjoyed the bout. Thank you all so much for your interest and support. I know it means a lot to Mr Tonon and it certainly does to me. It was an honor come to Thailand, home of the mighty Thai fighters, a land steeped in martial arts tradition and influence, and make a memorable debut. Now it s back to NYC to get the squad ready for upcoming grappling bouts!Two versus one Putting Nicky Ryan through a tough session tonight in Bangkok. Two opponents versus Mr Ryan over thirty minutes alternating as he stays in the center for the full thirty minutes. Working against two people is never easy they get a chance to rest while you don t. Learning to deal with the physical pressure mounting over time as you are fatiguing is a good test of inner resolve and maintaining calm and discipline under tough conditions. Here we reflect on the main lessons learned, the most successful techniques and tactics and the least successful so that tomorrow we can incorporate more of what was working and change or omit what was less successful. Immediately after this, Garry Tonon went into his MMA training it s a fascinating experience as a coach to run two two sports back to back and see first hand the commonalities and differences between the two.First day in Bangkok The squad went straight into action after marathon flight from the blue basement in NYC to Bangkok Thailand. We stopped by local MMA and jiu jitsu gym generously hosted by morganbangkok At MMAFight Lab its always a joy to go back to Asia there is such a strong tradition of martial arts here, especially in Thailand, and the local scene reflects that. Nicky Ryan sparred with locals in preparation for his upcoming bout with Geo Martinez and Garry Tonon went through his MMA drills in preparation for his debut this Saturday. It was good to feel the heat and humidity out here I always prefer a hot training environment over a cold one. A good workout in Thailand is the best jet lag cure ever invented Now it s time for dinner and rest I am quite certain there will be some heavy sleeping tonight! Wishing you all the best from Thailand. What an honor to train in the homeland of the mighty Thai fighters who have provided so much inspiration and technical nuance to the modern game of MMA.Another squad adventure begins Killing time at JFK as we wait for the plane to Bangkok, Thailand for Garry Tonon s MMA debut next weekend in ONE FC. I was actually early for a flight for the first time in my life due to the good influence of my students! Nicky Ryan will come to maintain his training for his upcoming match in Kasai Grappling on April 14. Here he is joined by his Dad. Mr Tonon had his last sparring session today and is excited to start a completely new phase of his competition career. We are all sitting around telling horrible stories about each other. My favorite so far? One time Nicky Ryan was weight cutting for a jiu jitsu tournament and Garry Tonon made him carry a box of freshly baked donuts and hold them for everyone else to eat while Nicky watched and salivated! evilsensei thecrueltutelageofgarrytonon. I though I was a heartless and cruel teacher until I heard that one! I have to catch up to that level! Twenty four hours from now we will be getting set up in Bangkok and getting ready for training. Wishing you all the best and thank you all for your loyal support.Nicky Ryan back in action Nicky Ryan will take on the very formidable Geo Martinez at Kasai Grappling Championships in NYC on April 14 in a super fight put together by the Ryan brothers and and the kasaigrappling team in what should be a fascinating match. Mr Martinez is a multi time EBI champion and ADCC medalist. He has even defeated a senior member of the squad and gone the distance in a tight loss to another, so clearly his submission defense is of the very highest caliber. This will definitely be the toughest challenge of the sixteen year old Mr Ryan s career. Ordinarily I am not in favor of teenagers taking on Adult champions, but Mr Ryan showed he could qualify and compete at world championship level, so I will make an exception in cases like this. Obviously there is going to be a significant strength and physical maturity gap here, Eddie Cummings and Jonathan Calestine both told me that Mr Martinez was among the strongest lightweights they ever encountered and could maintain that strength for long periods. Mr Ryan will have to use all his rapidly developing skills to take on such a skilled and tough opponent. This entire Kasai event is fascinating, with several great super fights and a main tournament that should create some fantastic match ups more on this soon! Hats off to Kasai for creating a great show in the Empire State and giving these two fine athletes a venue to showcase their skills.There is no learning how to defend a given move until you learn the nuances of attacking with it Every day I get people asking me how to defend leg locks. I don t want to DO leg locks I just want to be able to DEFEND them. This is simply setting yourself up for failure. With this approach, Not only will you be unable to perform a leg lock or any other move you care to name, you will not be able to defend one either. ONLY BY GAINING UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT MAKES A MOVE WORK, WILL YOU BE ABLE TO PREVENT SOMEONE ELSE FROM MAKING IT WORK. You have to KNOW WHAT YOU ARE FIGHTING AGAINST if you are to have any hope of STOPPING a given move and that means LEARNING THE POSITIVE APPLICATION OF THE MOVE FIRST, AND THE DEFENSE SECOND. You cannot learn jiu jitsu in fragments. The deeper your knowledge of a move, the easier will be the task of frustrating someone else attempting to apply it, FOR BY KNOWING THE CONDITIONS NECESSARY FOR SUCCESS, YOU KNOW WHAT YOU NEED TO DO TO CREATE FAILURE IN AN OPPONENT. Here, Garry Tonon uses his great experience and knowledge of ashi garami scenarios to calmly work his way out of what could be a bad situation minutes later he would go on to win with a strangle. That calm demeanor in defense comes from endless hours of learning to attack in the same position.The basis of functional strength is posture People talk all the time about strength development for sports. There are many proven programs and methods of increasing somebody s strength over time. When it is time to APPLY that strength in competition however, remember this EVEN THE GREATEST STRENGTH WILL BE UNDERMINED BY FAILURES IN POSTURE WHEN APPLIED TO A GIVEN TASK. For any given task there is at least one posture that optimizes strength application deviation from that ideal postures will manifest itself as weakness. Breakdown the most commonly occurring situations and scenarios in your sport and research which postures come close to ideal as far as applying your strength towards your goals. Doing so will maximize the effect of whatever strength you have. Naive strength is one thing, BUT STRENGTH DIRECTED BY POSTURE FEELS LIKE IRON. A weak man with good and efficient posture will outperform a strong man operating from poor posture. Make posture in all the main areas of your sport a serious part of your study. Here, Georges StPierre shows perfect posture whilst wrestling on the fence in single leg position a key part of his sportGetting ready Garry Tonon is getting ready for his MMA debut at One FC Iron Will onechampionship in Bangkok, Thailand on March 24 against his opponent, striking specialist Richard Corminal from the Philippines. Mr Tonon s introduction to MMA training and techniques began just twelve weeks ago. He was fully committed to his grappling career prior to that and the transition had to be made in very little time. As always he has applied himself with everything he has but MMA is a deep ocean of moves, tactics and principles and there is still a long, long way to go. The fusion of his submission grappling background with MMA makes for fascinating training sessions and I believe it will be very interesting for spectators as well. Here he works with Welterweight great, Jake Shields on the very new world of standing striking. It is never easy for an athlete who knows what elite performance feels like in one sport, to take on another. They feel very acutely their beginner level mistakes in strong contrast to their usual smooth and efficient motion. Mr Tonon has however, taken on the project with admirable enthusiasm, humor and diligence that points to good progress over time.Kani Basami The scissor throw kani basami is one of the more controversial moves in jiu jitsu. It is among my favorite moves all of my students are very good at it and often use it in competition AND YET I DO NOT PERMIT THEM TO USE IT IN CLASS AND I EVEN WOULD GO SO FAR AS TO SUPPORT A BAN OF THE MOVE IN COMPETITION. Why do I have such an odd point of view towards this move? Kani basami is one of the few moves with a truly unacceptably high accident rate even when the move is performed well by well trained athletes. A tiny misjudgment of distance and height on a moving opponent can result in a badly broken leg. There are many safer ways to get into your opponent s legs that work just as well. When I began teaching I saw many incidents involving flying Kani basami injuries and ultimately came to ban in it my classes. Yet this moment proved to be one of the most important of my coaching career. It made me ask a very interesting question. WAS THERE A WAY TO EMPLOY THE EFFICIENT MECHANICAL SCISSORING ACTION OF KANI BASAMI ON THE GROUND? It would be safe on the ground as you are not jumping your full bodyweight onto a weight bearing leg. Initially I worked with the idea of back stepping from top position and this gave great results that students could use safely in everyday training to enter into inside heel hooks. Things got really interesting however, when kani basami was used from bottom position. The idea was interesting INSTEAD OF FLYING TO YOUR OPPONENTS LEG IN STANDING POSITION MAKE HIM FLY ABOVE YOU BY ELEVATING HIM FROM BOTTOM GUARD POSITION AND USE THE POWERFUL SCISSOR ACTION TO ENTER INSIDE HEEL HOOKS FROM UNDERNEATH. This was one hundred percent safe and proved to be extremely effective. How odd that an ancient move, which i do not allow my students to use in training with each other, should become one of the cornerstones of the modern leg lock game used by my students in a new fashion. My decision to ban its use in class more than fifteen years ago created an impetus that created a whole new direction for the move. I have not performed flying Kani basami since my hip replacement no wonder my poor partner looks nervous! Legend provides inspiration One of my all time favorite MMA fighters is the great Jose Pele Landi. He was a legend of early MMA back when it was called Vale Tudo or NHB. He was a gifted kickboxer with good upper body takedowns who could also mix it up on the ground. He was universally feared and respected for his devastating knee strikes which he could use at any moment in any situation to KO opponents. Imagine my surprise when he began coming in to train with the squad in grappling! Even now at forty four he comes in to train and gives his all. It is amazing to see such a legend trying new moves and working with the youngsters. I am always so impressed when I see people who have the accomplishments to sit back and rest, but who refuse and always seek further growth and new adventures. Sometimes I show the younger athletes film clips of Mr Landi in action and they are always amazed and proud to work out next to such a legend. There is always something special about working out next to a great athlete that lifts the room. What an honor to have one of my early idols work with my students and inspire them the same way he always inspired me.Concepts versus details Whenever I teach I try hard to begin with the general concepts that govern the area I am discussing and then flesh it out with details that give students the practical ability to get those general concepts to work. Concepts and details work together in a manner similar to a child s coloring book. The concepts are like the outlines, the details are like the colors you fill in to make it into a beautiful picture. Jiu Jitsu without concepts to give a general sense of direction will be like a collection of colors scrawled randomly over a page that portrays nothing. Jiu Jitsu without details will be like a rough sketch, colorless and dull. When jiu jitsu has both concepts and details in unison then you will see a complete and beautiful picture. See your jiu Jitsu along the lines of this metaphor. Start at the conceptual level to give yourself direction. Then over time, add details to add life and color to those outlines. Just as sketch and color together produce art, so too will concepts and details together produce a martial art.Here is Mr Stuart Cooper s video on the squad. Thank you so much Mr Cooper for making the time and effort to create such a well produced video illustrating some of our core concepts to our audience. Thank you also to my amazingly passionate and hard working students, especially the pioneers, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. All of you gave an incredible voice to my ideas that I could never have done alone. Thank you all for your efforts it has been my privilege to be a small part of that. Thank you also to my everyday students far too many to mention who provide the testing grounds, the passionate atmosphere and toughness that produced so many champions. Thank you to my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie, who gave me my start in the sport and the best playground to grow I could hope for. Thank you also my dear readers on social media for showing interest in what we do and putting up with my rather clumsy expression of my ideas. I hope you enjoy Mr Coopers video.Heres my new short film on Leg Lock pioneer John Danaher. In this video John breaks down the systems based approach of Jiujitsu and how he found a way to introduce Leg Locks to the system.Heres my new short film on Leg Lock pioneer John Danaher. In this video John breaks down the systems based approach of Jiujitsu and how he found a way to introduce Leg Locks to the system.The most important part of your workout Imagine if you had some strange brain disorder that resulted in total amnesia after every jiu jitsu workout so that everything you learned in that lesson was forgotten. Progress would be impossible! Every class you did would be your first class! The basis of all improvement over time is MEMORY memory allows us to retain information and apply it the next time we work on the same problem so that we do not have to relearn the same things every time, but can move on to new lessons and accumulate knowledge. IF MEMORY IS THE BASIS OF PROGRESS SHOULD WE NOT BE DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO ENHANCE OUR ABILITY TO USE MEMORY TO TAKE THE INFORMATION FROM A PREVIOUS LESSON AND APPLY IT TO THE NEXT? One of the most beneficial things you can do as a student is at the end of each lesson to think of the single most important thing you learned in today s class and ask yourself how you will try to apply that lesson tomorrow. If you can carry just one piece of valuable information from one class to the next, I assure you that you will make fast progress over time and surpass most of your peers. It always amazes me that people who are happy to perform three hours of hard physical training every day will balk at the idea of thirty seconds of easy thinking after that workout that could greatly benefit the next workout and ensure that a year from now they will be far better than they currently are. YOUR WORKOUT DOES NOT FINISH WHEN YOU STEP OF THE MAT IT FINISHES WHEN YOU USE THE EXPERIENCE GAINED TODAY TO CREATE A PLAN FOR WHAT YOU WILL ATTEMPT TOMORROW.Spreading a message I always try to convey our approach to the sport out to the jiu jitsu world in the hope that some people might find it interesting or helpful. The vast majority of the work in getting people interested in our methods has been done by my students, whose outstanding achievements in competition have made many people take notice of our approach. Wherever I can I try to help out through writing or speaking. A small milestone was reached recently when the Joe Rogan podcast went past one million views on YouTube Mr Rogan generously have great exposure to some of the core concepts of our way of thinking about the game and experimentalSocratic method of learning and teaching that we employ to instill it in the athletes. Thank you all so much for your interest and to all those who helped us get the message out joerogan ebiofficial eddiebravo10p polarisprofessional flograppling adccsubmission ufcfightpass ufc globalgrapplingleague f2wpro Without you all we would just be some weirdos playing twinkle toe footsies in my sensei s basement! Thank you all and thank you to all my cherished students who gave so much and did so well.Pushing and pulling Most of what I teach from bottom position in jiu jitsu follows a simple three step pattern. FIRST, GET AN EFFECTIVE WORKING GRIP. SECOND, GENERATE KUZUSHI off balancing. THIRD, ATTACK preferably in complimentary combinations. When it comes time to begin the study of kuzushi, the best place for most people to start is the seemingly simple, yet in practice, very subtle, dynamic of PUSH and PULL. As the Japanese noted so long ago, when someone is pushed, they will push back, when pulled, they will pull back. Learning to read your opponent s posture and where their body s exertion is being directed at any given moment is critical to your ability to off balance them through pushing and pulling. If ever I want to PULL someone, I first PUSH them back knowing ahead of time that they will instinctively push back against my push and thus greatly amplify the effect of what I really wanted all along a powerful pull. This seems like such a simple concept, but it takes discipline and training to apply it consistently throughout a match and make it the basis of your initial contact with an opponent that ties into all your favorite attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan pulls with the right hand to create a defensive pull back reaction from the great Xande Ribeiro that will create an entry for a strong rearward pushing trip a good example of the push pull dynamic in operation.A fundamental distinction in joint locks linear and twisting locks Joint locks can be divided into two broad families. The first are linear or straight locks. Common examples are juji gatame armbar, ude gatame straight arm lock and hiza gatame knee bar. These locks are probably the clearest and simplest examples of lever and fulcrum in the entire skill set of jiu jitsu. The second family are the twisting or rotational locks. Common examples are Kimura, Americana and heel hook. In general these locks tend to be more complex in nature. Often the relationship between lever and fulcrum is not so obvious and the forces involved are rotational. Athletes can have favorite moves, but I have always believed ALL athletes most excel in several linear and several rotational locks you can t only excel in linear or only in rotational. This is because very often the main escapes from a linear lock lead very naturally into a twisting lock and vice versa. Being able to switch mindset from linear to twisting and vice versa in the blink of an eye is thus very important. In addition, linear locks tend to work best on straightened limbs, whilst twisting locks generally work best on bent limbs when you excel in both, you will be able to attack regardless of the extension, or lack of, in your opponent s limb. Once students are made aware of the different nature and demands of these two families of joint locks, I find they usually have no difficulty working with both but they should always be aware of the important mechanical differences between them in order to maximize their use of them. Here, I teach one of my favorite twisting locks Kimura to the students of Columbia University and run them through the various factors that enhance performance with this incredibly versatile hold.A remarkable role model A sad week at RGA headquarters in New York City one of the most prominent and successful athletes and teachers Rafael Sapo Natal, will return to Brazil for a time to take care of family. Mr Natal s story is one that should inspire anyone looking to work towards a dream. He learned jiu jitsu from his primary sensei, Draculino and came to NYC when he wanted to transition to MMA so he could work with Renzo Gracie. Working hard in a new country with new language and new culture is never easy, but Mr Natal attacked his goal with everything he had. In a short time he won a dedicated group of students and got into the worlds premier MMA organization, the UFC, where he had a very distinguished career. Mr Natal was beloved by students and workmates alike for his enthusiasm and drive and success. He always radiated an easy going charm while pushing people hard to do their best his own example was a fantastic demonstration to the students. Last night he gave one of the most emotional and heartfelt goodbyes the academy has ever seen. What an honor to have worked alongside this outstanding young man for so long. He worked so hard and gave so much. He went through a long, complex and painful eye surgery after an injury. I never heard him complain, never saw him waiver from his goals I only saw him work harder and inspire others to do the same. I am sure fate will bring him back soon to NYC, but I truly admire his decision to put family before self and get that done before he returns. Wherever fate takes him, the entire RGA staff and student body will always remember him as a real mensch a true jiu jitsu man who represented himself and his team with distinction and honor. Wishing you the best rafaelsaponatal from NYCAlma mater I had the pleasure of going back to my alma mater Columbia University to teach a jiu jitsu seminar yesterday. It was wonderful to see the amazing progress the students have made under the direction of club leaders Andrius Schmid and Jason Yang. Back in the 1990 s the club was started by Christian Barry, Matt Serra and myself. The sport was so different then! Mr Barry advertised the first class as Brazilian fighting jiu jitsu and Vale Tudo with a picture of a vicious fight from mounted position. Almost one hundred people showed up for the first class every angry nut job and lunatic came out of the woodwork of Columbia and showed up in the wrestling room. The entire class immediately descended into a chaotic mass sparring session as dozens of repressed academic types with some kind of obscure martial arts backgroundfantasy went berserk on each other in a mass rage warfare scene that was pure comedy gold! Next class five bruised and scratched people showed up and the Columbia jiu jitsu club was born! Time has worked its magic and now it is a very big and well run club I had a great time showing the gifted students there elements of the squad s Kimura system and its links to other subsystems we routinely use in competition. It was wonderful strolling around the campus afterwards and reflecting upon the great influence of my dear mentor, Isaac Levi, my Ph.D supervisor, and his insights on research programs that I use every day albeit in a context very different from what he expected. In the end, learning is learning, no matter what the context. I am so grateful to be able to take the gift of great teaching and mentoring I received and give a small amount back to a new generation of students, despite having completely changed paths in life.Leg locks in MMA I am often asked in whether leg locks are effective MMA competition. My answer is always the same ANY OF THE MAJOR TECHNIQUES OF THE VARIOUS COMBAT SPORTS CAN BE APPLIED SUCCESSFULLY IN MMA IF PERFORMED WELL AND AT THE APPROPRIATE OPPORTUNITY AND THEY CAN ALL FAIL IF PERFORMED POORLY OR AT AN INAPPROPRIATE TIME. The quality of the APPLICATION is far more important than the choice off technique within reason. Tonight, Emmanuel Vera, a very talented junior member of the squad, took his leg locking skills into the cage and won his fight in just thirty seconds via Achilles lock. Great to see him training hard and getting the reward of victory. I have always studied and taught jiu jitsu with the notion of application to a real fight in the background. It is great to see some elements of our work getting seen in the context of MMA. Fine work by Mr Vera who continues to impress with his work ethic and results.Angles for strangles Nothing beats a strangle from the back to demonstrate clearly the founding principles of jiu jitsu. Positional control that renders even the most dangerous opponents relatively harmless, a submission that can go from fairly gentle all the way to rendering someone unconscious or worse in extreme cases, and one which a smaller person can reasonably expect to apply successfully against a much larger and stronger foe. The first question is always how do I get there? It all begins with angle. In the most basic cases I MUST BE ABLE TO GET OUTSIDE MY OPPONENTS ELBOW EITHER BY MOVING HIS ELBOW OR BY MOVING MYSELF AROUND THE ELBOW usually both at the same time. This will give me the angle I need to initiate a movement towards my opponents back. A common problem I see here is that students will gain an angle by successfully getting outside an elbow, but then hesitate and lose that momentary opportunity. A phrase that I often use with my students is this if you can SEE the back, then you can TAKE the back. The most common ways you will be able to see your opponents back in a combat situation is if you get outside his elbow eg an arm drag or over his head eg snap down or inverted spin around or through his legs eg berimbolo. As you enter these, or any equivalent move, there will be a moment where you can see the back even just a small part of the back and that is where you must move decisively and with purpose. As you spar, LOOK FOR THAT VISUAL CUE that signals opportunity and take it. Of course you will fail sometimes when you first try that s normal but in time the visual cue will be followed by successful action and you will prove to be a dangerous opponent who can literally see opportunity and take it. Remember always that EVERY SUCCESSFUL PHYSICAL ACTION BEGINS WITH THE MENTAL ACT OF RECOGNITION OF OPPORTUNITY, WITHOUT WHICH THE ACTION NEVER WOULD HAVE EVEN OCCURRED. In time you will learn that you can take the back without even seeing the back but at the start this is the single best way to get students going beyond angle and getting all the way to the best position in the sport.The Yerkes Dodson law My entire approach to training athletes and preparing them for competition is based around a well known and very simple law described and tested around a century ago by two eminent psychologists, Yerkes and Dodson. Using rats as experimental subjects, they looked at arousalstress levels imposed upon rats as they tried to learn skills. The results agree well with our basic intuitions in the matter. HUMAN PERFORMANCE AT ANY GIVEN TASK WILL VARY ACCORDING TO THE AROUSALSTRESS LEVEL, FOLLOWING A PARABOLIC CURVE WHERE LOW AROUSAL WILL RESULT IN LOW PERFORMANCE. PERFORMANCE WILL RISE AS AROUSAL RISES, UNTIL A CRITICAL POINT IS REACHED WHERE AROUSALSTRESS HAS NEGATIVE EFFECTS RESULTING IN LOWER PERFORMANCE LEVELS. We all have a basic sense of this. When we are apathetic and uninspired, we typically perform tasks poorly. As we become more stimulated by excitement, anticipation, we rise in performance. However, when stress levels reach into fear, shock and extreme nervousness, we fall down the other side of the curve into lowered performance. Subsequent research into the YerkesDodson law revealed that simple tasks are less negatively affected by rising stressarousal levels. Complex problem solving tasks are heavily affected by rising stressarousal as stress rises, performance drops significantly. As a coach, I must be mindful of this as I teach different aspects of the sport. Problem solving is usually done in a relaxed informal fashion after class. Simpler Tasks involving more straightforward physical effort are coached with more stress and arousal. Interestingly, as even complex tasks become more familiar to a student, they are less affected by stressarousal. Occasional stress tests on a student will show me very clearly how well they have familiarized themselves with a given movement that I want them to excel in. It is well worth your time to familiarize yourself with this basic law of performance and look to see its effects upon your own performance and methods by which you train yourself to improve that performance level.Divide and conquer When practicing jiu jiu jitsu, ACTIVELY SEEK TO DIVIDE YOUR OPPONENT S BODY AND USE YOUR WHOLE BODY TO CONTROL AND ATTACK SEGMENTS OF HIS BODY. This is one of the most fundamental directives of the sport. One of the very best ways to begin investigating this principle is from bottom half guard. A central feature of most variations of half guard is that THEY EFFECTIVELY DIVIDE THE BODY IN HALF AND SEEK TO USE YOUR WHOLE BODY TO CONTROL AND FIGHT HALF OF YOUR OPPONENT S BODY. Here, I am working aspects of half guard control and positioning with my good friend, Tom DeBlass. You can clearly see that the very nature of the position creates a situation where half of his body is engaged by all of mine. Making this way of thinking central to your game is a key to your future progress ALL GOOD JIU JITSU IS BASED UPON IT. If you don t know where to start BEGIN WITH BOTTOM HALF GUARD, as it is a very clear expression of the principle and has tremendous applicability to everyday training and sparring. Use it to learn the critical notion of selecting a part of your opponent s body and through grip, movement and connection owning it.New directions Exciting news today Gordon Ryan signed an exclusive contract with the rapidly rising acbjj promotion from Russia. This team has done an amazing job of gathering the elite talent pool of current jiu jitsu and putting on first class tournaments around the world both gi and no gi featuring the best athletes in the sport in tournaments and super fights. Mr Ryan will compete initially no gi and then move to gi matches. This represents a major move for Mr Ryan as he will no longer to be able to compete in a wide array of different organizations as he has done his whole career thus far, but acbjj puts on many shows so he is hoping to keep his usual high volume of performances this year. The promotion has an interesting show format featuring ADCC and IBJJF rules, but with the twist of five minute rounds and no guard pulling in first minute. Should be very interesting! Mr Ryan is slated to first take on the very talented ADCC gold medalist Vinny Magalhaes. We always regarded Mr Magalhaes as one of the very best opponents the squad faced in EBI should be an amazing match between two great world champions!The return of the newly crowned champion New featherweight EBI champion Jon Calestine came back today to see his old friends at squad headquarters RGA. He told us all the remarkable story of his victory. The whole adventure began on very short notice as his senpai Eddie Cummings had to pull out at the last minute due to an extremely severe flu. Mr Calestine has only resumed training recently after a severe shoulder injury last year and was quite clearly the smallest and lightest competitor in the field. He spent the week in LA alone and was then told to be ready to compete just two days prior to the event. His friend and mentor Matthew Kaplan had to fly out at the last minute or he would have had to compete without even a cornerman! Despite all the confusion and far from ideal preparation, he stepped up to the plate and delivered a near flawless performance in the true tradition of the squad gold medal performance with blitzkrieg leg lock attacks to win the matches, the belt, the crowd and the shekels! It was so great seeing him return today and getting an ovation from the more than eighty athletes at the big RGA Monday afternoon class that produced so many squad members and sit next to other squad EBI champions and swap stories of success. Hats off to this talented young athlete who trained so hard, got the opportunity and ran with it! Here, JC proudly shows his EBI belt off to the entire class after a tough session. It was an inspiration to everyone in the room to be around that kind underdog success story and of course, wonderful to see a friend and team mate back in the basement telling us the whole tale and laughing about old times and talking technique. For all of you, my dear readers, you could not hope for a better example as you push towards your own goals and dreams, of a young man who trained with purpose and passion until when fate offered a chance he had the skills and confidence to step up and shine!Great performance last night by Jonathan Calestine to win EBI 15 in the featherweight division in his debut performance. Mr Calestine replaced his main teacher, Eddie Cummings on short notice after Mr Cummings came down with flu during the week. Mr Calestine was a regular training partner and apprentice in the squad, but left with Eddie Cummings due to concerns about training next to team mates who either did, or could potentially compete against them in the same weight classes. It s always a tricky thing to deal with this problem. Some athletes, such as Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, are fine with the idea of training with people they will compete against, others, such as Eddie Cummings and Jonathan Calestine feel awkward about it. As a coach I respect and understand that. We still think of them as alumni from the same team and carrying the torch of our approach to the game. Mr Calestine s strong leg locking pedigree was very much in evidence last night as he quickly heel hooked his first three opponents in regulation and then won the final against 10th planet stand out Geo Martinez in over time to take a great win. Great to see his success as a student and Mr Cummings success as a mentor. There are a bunch of other athletes emerging in the squad who can do similar things in future EBI s in various weight categories this should make for great shows as the seniors go in new directions in the future.Last moments before the action starts Usually the preparation for a bout is fairly extensive. The vast majority of the work that will determine the outcome has been done already. There is however, the day itself. By far the most important element on that last day is the athletes warm up routine. This is the final preparation for the match itself. After the warm up there is only those last moments of walk out to the stage and the tense moments as the athletes are being introduced to the audience. In These last moments it is critical that the themes and messages to the athlete be very simple focus on the main themes you think will be important for the bout. Essentially they are short and simple reminders of what you have worked in training for the bout. Keep the athlete in motion, physical motion helps relieve the natural tightness and anxiety that occurs in those moments. Everyone has their own preference on how to act and feel in these moments. Some like the tension and go with serious approach. Others like a more laid back, just another day in the office mentality When Garry Tonon went out to take on Ralek Gracie, someone in the audience yelled out in a stentorian voice, LEG LOCKS DON T WORK!! Mr Tonon quipped, someone s about to be disappointed. We all got a smile in before the action And of course, another smile when he won by leg lock! So in those moments of tension, focus on the simple themes and ideas that you believe will be important to win, keep your body moving fluidly for tension relief and let your own personality determine your precontest demeanor. Once the action starts you will feel right at home!Double Trouble One of the founding principles of my leg lock system is that of double trouble. This is the idea that for any given leg lock attack, the overwhelming majority of my opponent s defensive reaction will come from the OTHER leg. Knowing this, If I can constrain the other leg, MOST OF HIS DEFENSE WILL BE SHUT DOWN FROM THE START AND I CAN DOUBLE THE AMOUNT OF TROUBLE HE FACES IN ATTEMPTS AT ESCAPE. The clearest demonstrations of this principle in operation come from cross ashi garami situations, where the second leg can be bound up to totally negate an opponent s defensive options and create a quasi pin that rivals even the best conventional pins for control over movement. When my students began using this approach, observers were amazed to see them totally controlling even very talented opponents for long periods of time before finishing. Note that double trouble is a principle NOT A MOVE thus it can be applied in many situations and in many different ways. Making it a core element of your leg game will greatly increase your control over struggling opponents and make for more high percentage finishes. Here, Garry Tonon completely ties up the great Shinya Aoki, widely regarded as a master of leg locks himself, in a way that completely negated his ability to defend himself and enabled Mr Tonon to win via heel hook variation soon afterward.Jiu Jitsu Takedowns There are many styles of grappling, each has a rule set that encourages certain types of behavior and discourages others. In Judo, primacy is given to takedowns and throws above all else. A well executed throw can end the match at any time. In international styles of wrestling, throws and takedowns are graded by their AMPLITUDE. The bigger the throw, the more points it scores. There is a definite sense then, that in Judo and wrestling, amplitude is the desiderata of throws. Moreover, though it is possible to win Judo and Wrestling mostly on the ground, it is very difficult to envision a great champion in either sport who completely lacked skills in throws or takedowns. Jiu Jitsu on the other hand, looks at takedowns very differently. They score relatively low points and never end a match. Moreover there are many champions who went their entire career with virtually no takedown skills. Even for those who do study takedowns, the spirit in which they are trained and applied is very different from other grappling sports. In jiu jitsu, the key idea behind takedown training is not AMPLITUDE, since all takedowns get the same score regardless of how high or low the amplitude exhibited; rather, in jiu jitsu THE WORTH OF A TAKEDOWN IS ALWAYS ASSESSED BY ITS AFTERMATH. The question is always, WHERE DID YOU END UP AFTER THE TAKEDOWN? Takedowns in jiu jitsu are never seen as and end in themselves, but only as a precursor to ground grappling so the END RESULT of the takedown is a bigger concern than the takedown itself. It is no good applying a beautifully executed drop seoi nage throw if it results in your opponent immediately taking your back once you land. Your takedown can score a maximum of two points, while his back control scores four and now your are fighting for survival. As such the spirit of training takedowns in jiu jitsu needs considerable modifications from other grappling arts. Here, former US Judo National champion and double JudoJiu Jitsu blackbelt, Garry StLedger shows the Judo ideal of an ippon throw with projection and amplitude in competition. Learning to adapt these skills into a jiu jitsu context is a fascinating study.Tightness A crucial concept to understand in jiu jitsu and submission grappling is that of tightness. Once a lock is put in place, it is crucial that there be sufficient tightness that an opponent cannot easily pull out unless you are deliberately employing a tactic to allow him out to set up another move. The problem is that most people always use MUSCULAR tightness as the means of tightening a lock. Muscular tightness is tiring to maintain and usually inhibits movement. A much better sense of tightness to aspire to is MECHANICAL tightness, where my primary focus is upon a tight fit of my body into that of my opponent. In this way, BODY PLACEMENT AND POSITIONING create tightness around a lock rather than muscular exertion. The only degree of muscular exertion i need is that required to hold my body as a system of WEDGES AROUND THE PART OF MY OPPONENTS BODY THAT I AM TRYING TO IMMOBILIZE AND CONTROL. Here, Garry Tonon shows good mechanical tightness as he enters a juji gatame arm lock from bottom position. By using only enough muscular exertion to maintain his body position, he can maintain the lock for long periods of time without exhaustion and if necessary, move smoothly in response to his opponents defense. Learning to differentiate muscular tightness from mechanical tightness is one of the biggest conceptual steps students can make in their path to excellence.Jake Shields gets another win MMA superstar Jake Shields shows once again that he is one of the very few MMA fighters who can hang with elite grapplers in grappling competition today. Last night at Fight2Win he took on Australian grappling icon Kit Dale and took a hard fought decision victory due to use of guillotine and leg lock attacks to win a tight decision. Great to see an athlete take on new skills that he works so hard on with the squad every day getting him great results. People often say to me that they find it difficult to learn new skills on an already established game I always believed this is a self imposed limitation. If you had the ability to learn one set of skills, why should you find it difficult to learn a new set? The surest way to prevent to stop yourself doing anything is to tell yourself you can t do it. Mr Shields walked into the gym, saw something he wanted to learn and got down to the business of learning it, never questioning whether he would be able to do so, and last night that can do attitude won him a match.The return of the Wolverine The next EBI event in California will feature the return to top level competition of Eddie Cummings two time EBI champion at featherweight. Mr Cummings is one of my most brilliant and innovative students. He has been working hard the past one and half years developing his own emerging brand of submission grappling with his partner Ottavia BourdianBusia. Next weekend you will get a chance to see that hard work in action on stage at one of the most high profile submissions tournaments EBI the tournament format that really gave birth to the squad and helped establish them as a force. Watching Mr Cummings today he looked as sharp as a knife look for some new and exciting elements to his growing game! Of all my students, Mr Cummings always had the game that most closely resembles my own a game based upon grip and kuzushi off balancing from bottom position and then feeding into attacks in combination starting at the legs and then following wherever the action goes that always makes it a special pleasure for me to watch. Can t wait to see the Wolverine year it up again in the format that I believe best suits his style in a weight division that suits him best! Keep your eyes on this ebiofficial one! Feb 17 in LA at musclepharm MusclepharmHQ. Once Mr Cummings gets to grips, the action comes on fast!What will your jiu jitsu look like? One of the most obvious features of jiu jitsu as a sport is the tremendous variation among the many top players as they work for supremacy. It is very clear that there is no one body type, psychology or style that dominates the sport. Rather, we see many very different athletes exercise their unique individuality to get to the top. A natural question to ask is WHAT WILL MY GAME LOOK LIKE? We all want a sense of identity within the sport. Realize this your game will be a r reflection of many factors, but three will have the greatest effect. Your BODY TYPE, PERSONALITY and COACHING LINEAGE will be the biggest influences in building who you are as you mature within the sport. We all need to learn the fundamentals and they don t change much from athlete to athlete, but once you go beyond that into more advanced elements, you will be actively CHOOSING which techniques you will focus upon. Your body type will play a heavy role in those choices. You will also be choosing how you actually apply them in an aggressive proactive fashion vs a passive reactive fashion for example and your personality will play a massive role here. The third decisive element is the influence of your various coaches and role models. They have their respective strengths and weaknesses and will teach accordingly, obviously doing a better job with their strengths. This will filter through naturally to the students. These three influences, your body type, personality and teachers, will be responsible for most of the choices you make as you build a game that is an expression of who you are. It would seem that two of the influences, body type and personality, are internal, whilst the third, coaches, are external, but really even the third is internal, since it is an act of choice who we select to stay with as a student. When students ask me what directions they ought to take their game, I always counsel them to relax and let their body type and personality make the decisions for them over time. It will happen organically over time without the need for promptingThe principle of concentration of force One of the founding principles of all modes of combat, jiu jitsu included, is that of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE. The idea is that I want to take a large percentage of my total strength and apply it upon a a specific target that A has a high kinesiological value if it were damaged the opponent would find if very difficult or even impossible to continue fighting, and B represents a small percentage of my opponents total strength. So for example, in the case of a well applied ashi garami, both my legs, my entire posterior and anterior chains of force and both arms are committed against one of my opponents legs. I don t care how much bigger and stronger my opponent may be than me it will never be the case that one of his legs is stronger than almost my entire body if it is, then you should be using large caliber handguns against him, not heel hooks! The main target of the attack, the knee, obviously has great kinesiological value once broken it is very difficult indeed to keep fighting effectively at the very least your combat effectiveness will be severely degraded once it is broken. ANY COMBAT METHOD WHICH MAKES CLAIMS TO EFFICIENCY AND AN ABILITY TO OVERCOME BIGGER AND STRONGER OPPONENTS, MUST MAKE USE OF THE PRINCIPLE OF CONCENTRATION OF FORCE. As a student of jiu jitsu YOU MUST MAKE A LIFELONG COMMITMENT TO THE PRINCIPLE AND A DEEP STUDY OF HOW TO APPLY IT IN PRACTICAL WAYS. The first step on the martial arts journey is recognition of this principle every subsequent step is simply a further articulation of it. Recognize it and live by it.Coaching memories Georges StPierre s first lesson at TUF The twelfth season of the Ultimate Fighter TV show featured Georges StPierre against the very tough and dangerous Josh Koscheck. It would be filmed over six weeks in Las Vegas the longest time I ever left the Renzo Gracie Academy for. Due to prior commitments, none of Georges other coaching staff of that time could stay for more than a few days, so Mr StPierre and I stayed the whole six weeks and split training into standing position and ground where he taught the former and I taught the latter. We had to go against one of the most successful MMA organizations in the world Team AKA. When the smoke cleared we amassed a victorious record of 82 against them and both finalists were from our team. On the very first day of training with our team, Georges StPierre stepped up to teach the first class. The team was very excited to learn from arguably the greatest MMA fighter of all time and I was curious to see what he would begin with, as we knew very little about our new students would he begin with the essentials of stance, motion and jab? Perhaps he might get fancy and show Superman punch set ups and combinations? Maybe strikes into takedowns? Mr StPierre surprised everyone, including myself, by starting with a lesson on classroom respect. He taught how to sit, stand, listen and ask questions while instruction was being made. Only then did he get into actual instruction of fighting techniques. We were all rather surprised by this. After class I talked to him about it. He said something I never forgot only in a room that observes respectful decorum and has protocols for learning behavior is fast progress possible until that basic necessity is satisfied, nothing else will have much value. I thought it was a beautiful lesson, certainly one that I shall not forget.How would you do if you had to fight yourself? This is always an interesting hypothetical question in the case of Georges StPierre and Jake Shields it is actually a practical question! I have never seen two athletes so closely matched in skill level, tactics, technique etc in ground grappling. When they spar each other the only difference I see is their appearance and accent other than that identical! It s great to see Mr StPierre back in the gym despite his battle with ulcerative colitis. He has had to make considerable changes in his diet to lessen symptoms and still has to avoid certain modes of training, but his grappling looked great as he battled the squad and former rival and now good friend and grappling doppelgnger Jake Shields . It impresses me so much to see two great athletes who have a legacy so strong that they could easily stop training altogether and live comfortably as legends, come into the gym everyday and battle the youngsters giving all of them hell on the mats an then laugh together after giving each other hell with identical games!Hands In every jiu jitsu match you will ever have, whether daily sparring in the gym or the biggest competition of your life ALMOST ALL INTIAL CONTACT WITH YOUR OPPONENT IS WITH HANDS AND FEET. As such, I put a heavy emphasis on training hands and feet among my athletes. When people hear me say this, they usually assume I am talking about hand and foot STRENGTH, and assume we must do lots of strength work for our grip. I do believe that a strong grip is a good thing in jiu jitsu. Most world champions I have met and trained with had an impressive grip. What I really emphasize however, is hand PLACEMENT AND TACTICS. You can train grip strength for months and make only slight improvements and still run into problems of exhaustion and forearm fatigue but just a few pointers in hand placement and tactics can make a massive difference in combat effectiveness in minutes. The most common problem I see among aspiring athletes is a tendency to GRIP AND HOLD rather than the much more desirable and effective GRIP AND ENTER. The idea is not hold people per se, but to hold them just long enough to enter into a planned attack. I have a respectable grip strength, but i could not expect to hold a resisting athlete of world championship caliber for more than a few seconds that s why developing a mindset of GRIP AND ENTER is so important for your development. Have an idea of what you want to attack with, ascertain what is an appropriate grip to get to that attack, then get the grip and enter. That is the pattern of hand training we usually work with.Creating a leg lock system When I first began work on leg locks it became clear that ashi garami Based locks were the most effective. Ashi garami is a generic term that simply means something like entangled legs. An archaic version of it is even part of the old Kodokan Judo syllabus where is refers to one specific leg lock which is illegal in Judo competition Really it refers to any situation where, at a minimum, TWO OF MY LEGS CONTROL ONE OF MY OPPONENTS LEGS. Because the the legs offer substantial means to control an opponent s movement, they can be used as the basis of high percentage submissions. There were many different variations of ashi garami, each having its good and bad points. In time I came to believe that one of the most useful ways to help categorize and organize the system was to make a division between three main versions of ashi garami that controlled the legs in ways that were importantly different. 1 Straight ashi garami system 2 Cross ashi garami system 3 Reverse ashi garami Each of these three has a very different methodology of control and submission. As such, a big part of the ashi garami system is to see that really it is three distinct but linked systems embedded within an overall leg attack system. Within each of the three main ashi garami systems there are many different variations of leg entanglement and of course, it is important that one should be able to transfer at any given time between the three. A big part of effective system building comes from discerning the main methods of control and what directions they move towards. Then it is a matter of building infrastructure around those elements until you have effective solutions to the problems opponents create for you. Here, Gordon Ryan works on a variation of reverse ashi garami that leads into very effective attacks on both legs.A theory of Mixed Martial Arts For the longest time the sport of MMA has been misdescribed as an ECLECTIC sport. A means of fighting that is a mix of various sport martial arts such as Western boxing, Muay Thai, wrestling, jiu jitsu and others. This is to see MMA a patchwork of various styles sewn together. A much better way to understand it is to see it as four distinct skill sets 1 Shoot fighting The skill of striking and takedowns in open position 2 Clinch fighting The skill of striking and takedowns whilst locked in a standing clinch 3 Fence fighting The skill of striking and takedowns whilst propped on the fence 4 Grapple fighting The skill of striking, positional exchange and submission whilst on the ground. Each one of these skill sets derives much of its content from various sport martial arts. For example, ground fighting borrows much from jiu jitsu and wrestling, along with striking technique that can be derived from Muay Thai and boxing. It is crucial to understand however, the skill of ground fighting in MMA TRANSCENDS the various martial arts that form its base. Throwing elbows and punches on the ground is a very different action from doing so in standing positions and clinches, so the punches and striking strategy of boxing and Muay Thai must be greatly modified. Submission set ups may be derived from BJJ, but applying them in an MMA context will require extensive modifications. ONCE YOU START ADDING NEW ARTS AND SKILLS, THE OVERALL SKILL SET YOU ARE PRACTICING CHANGES DRAMATICALLY, UNTIL IT BECOMES A NEW, AUTONOMOUS SKILL THAT TRANSCENDS ITS VARIOUS SUBSIDIARY SKILLS AND IS ULTIMATELY QUITE DISTINCT FROM THEM. This is true in all four of the foundational skill areas of MMA. once you grasp this, you see MMA for what it is AN AUTONOMOUS MARTIAL ART COMPRISED OF FOUR MAIN SKILL SETS, EACH OF WHICH IS HEAVILY INFLUENCED BY, YET DISTINCT FROM, ITS VARIOUS COMPONENT ARTS. Each of the four skill sets transcends and stands alone from the various arts that form its foundation. Getting this vision of MMA through to new fans of the sport will help them in understanding the nuances of the action and appreciate all four domains of the sport.Senpai and kohai One of the strongest elements of dojo instruction is the relationship between juniors and senior students. When i was beginning jiu jitsu I had three senpai, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All three were world champions and all three were wizards on the mat whose every training session was downright inspirational to us juniors. It is natural for any beginning student to doubt the effectiveness of the techniques he or she is shown. When you first learn them, they seem difficult and convoluted impossible to perform on a resisting training partner, let alone an actual fight. More than anything else it is the senpai who create that confidence by providing everyday living proof of the effectiveness of the techniques by using them successfully with skill and elan upon the juniors and beginners. Nothing builds faith in technique better than having them used upon you in a way that makes you feel helpless. This, more than anything else, creates the belief that it works, that you want to possess it and that if someone else can get to that level, then so can you the three most important beliefs a beginner needs. When i build a room, I invest heavily in instruction of the class senpai. They will always provide much of the backbone of the training rooms ability to create a tide in which all can rise. Here, Nicky Ryan, outstanding kohai, watches his senpai, Garry Tonon, go through his shoot boxing drills watching, learning, getting inspired in ways that will boost his own performance tomorrow. Photo supersaiyanmagicalgirlI teach jiu jitsu backwards Jiu Jitsu always occurs in a SEQUENCE. The most common sequence begins by taking the opponent to the ground, then getting past his dangerous legs, then working through a hierarchy of pins that put increasing pressure on the opponent; and then finally, using that pressure finish with a submission hold. Most teachers of the sport teach in a way that reflects that fundamental sequence. Usually I do too. Most of the early lessons concern getting people to the floor, getting past the legs and working through various pins. Submissions are taught as the end of a long chain of events the icing on the cake as it were. As such, the majority of training time is spent ON THE PRECURSORS TO SUBMISSION. I think in a standard class this approach makes the most sense for a wide cross section of students. When an athlete comes to me with ambitions to be a champion however, I teach very differently. I BEGIN WITH THE END GAME SUBMISSIONS. I put an extreme emphasis upon THE DARK ARTS OF BREAKING AND STRANGLING. I look to create a student who has tremendous confidence in their ability to finish an opponent should they be able to get into a finishing position. THIS CREATES A MINDSET IN THE STUDENT TO HUNT RUTHLESSLY AND PERSISTENTLY FOR SUBMISSIONS AT ALL TIMES. If a student does not truly believe they are capable of breaking or strangling an opponent, how hard do you think they will push for the finish in competition? But if they truly believe they can finish anyone given the chance, THEY WILL FIND A WAY TO GET TO A FINISHING POSITION OR DIE TRYING. This creates a very different type of athlete, with a very different mindset and approach to the game. Rather than see submissions as an afterthought to a sequence, try to see them as the very soul of our sport and adjust your training regimen accordingly, even if just for a time I am certain you will find it a fascinating and rewarding change.Jiu Jitsu and humor Anyone who has trained for even a short length of time in jiu jitsu or any other combat sport will tell you that sometimes the grind can be rather taxing. All combat sports have a high attrition rate jiu jitsu is no exception. I find that humor is probably the single best means of students bonding together and with their teacher. When I teach, I try to use humor as a means of making an important point memorable. We tend to remember something that made us laugh. I also like to see students joking about the game, themselves and each other after class that s usually a healthy sign that they are getting along well and building the camaraderie that is essential to a long lasting and unified room. Visitors are quite often shocked at the constant pranks, off color jokes, teasing and taunting that we engage in after class almost nothing is off limits. Of course this is a serious game where the success is measured in the capacity to break peoples limbs and strangle them in a highly competitive setting so during training time it has to be all business. Finding the compromise between work and fun takes time and varies from gym to gym. The value of humor to make important information memorable and to build camaraderie cannot be underestimated but too, the danger of letting a room descend into a clownish atmosphere that can kill progress cannot be underestimated. Ultimately you will have to judge whether you have gotten the balance right by the results of the students and there retention of information and their willingness to stay in the program. When students think of their training as a fascinating, frustrating puzzle to be solved that improves them and their lives in a way that few others can, and brings a smile to their face when friends and acquaintances ask them about why they train then you have probably found the right balance.Any given Monday Teaching the big Monday afternoon class at RGA is always a source of joy and pride to me. It began mostly as a no gi grappling class that had a strong element of MMA ground skills woven in. On any given Monday you could see a large number of MMA athletes mixed with jiu jitsu players working their skills in the floor. One day ace jiu jitsu photographer Luca Atalla was taking pictures at caught this fairly typical scene from years ago Georges StPierre, the great Roger Gracie, Romulo Barral, Gregor Gracie, a VERY young looking Garry Tonon and his mentor Tom DeBlass, along with Shawn Williams and my dear Sensei Renzo Gracie, surrounded by sixty other people in the room. Everyone was getting ready for upcoming matches some MMA if I remember correctly this was prior to StPierreCondit some jiu jitsu but it is great looking at these old images of the titanic wars that were fought every Monday as the athletes fought towards their goals. It has been my privilege over the years to watch so many of the greatest jiu jitsu and MMA athletes test the ideas and concepts I teach and give the best possible feedback that made it easy for me to see what was working, what was not, what could be improved and what should be abandoned. I could not have had a better group of people over two decades to develop ideas and theories and test them in such a harsh proving ground.Teaching via heuristics When I teach I try hard to find a satisfactory compromise between precise details, which are necessary for efficient application of techniques; and HEURISTICS general rules of thumb that give the athlete a broad insight that guides the DIRECTION of their techniques. For example, I could sit in front of you all day and teach a thousand details on variations of ashi garami. Some would be of great value, many would have less value. However, none will have as much immediate value to you as a general heuristic that points you in the right direction in the overwhelming majority of applications and is simple enough to learn once and you will never forget it, you can use it tomorrow and it will never let you down. So if I say, The athlete whose feet dominate the inside position will always dominate the ashi garami game, this is a simple heuristic that I push upon all my athletes and which guides so much of their behavior in a simple and memorable way that can guide them for a lifetime. Of course, the heuristic must be backed up by technical details and a training program but it s the fundamental insight that can change more than behavior it can change your way of thinking about the leg game and get you thinking independently about where to go from there. Here, Nicky Ryan shows the benefits of good inside positioning, a skill at which he excels, as he enters a variation of ashi garami in a tough session at RGA.The four mechanical pillars upon which my approach to jiu jitsu is Based A huge part of my approach to jiu jitsu is based around what I believe are the four most important mechanical underpinnings of the sport. These are 1 The principle of LEVER AND FULCRUM 2 The principle of the WEDGE inclined plane 3 The principle of DIRECTIONALITY OF FORCE 4 The principle of KUZUSHI off balancing Through the lens of these four mechanical principles I see most of the sport of jiu jitsu. Everything I teach, every question I ask, and every answer I offer, will make reference to at least one of these principles. Lever and fulcrum are widely talked about. They are force multipliers that can make the weakest man strong. Wedges are used to immobilize and inhibit or direct movement among other things think of a humble little door stop that can hold any door open even in a hurricane. With regards your own force, a fundamental measure of its efficiency and effect will be the degree to which you apply the force in the appropriate direction. So often we apply large amounts of force in the wrong directions, when a much smaller force in the right direction would have garnered much better results. Kuzushi off balancing refers to our capacity to move an objects center of gravity beyond its base of support and destabilize it to create openings for attack. Kano wisely saw the value of this in standing positions. One of my biggest goals is to extend its use into bottom position ground grappling where it can play a tremendous role in advancing our bottom game. I teach jiu jitsu as a primarily mechanical enterprise, backed up by biomechanical and tactical elements. In the future I will talk more about these critical notions. Show me any move in the sport and I will show you how at least three of these four concepts are involved in its operation. Once you learn to observe the sport through these concepts you will see a very different sport indeed. Three of these four mechanical underpinnings have been widely discussed for generations but the principle of the WEDGE has never been emphasized in jiu jitsu. One of my primary goals as a teacher is to change this.Doing time Whenever you start of a new enterprise there is a period where you have to start off at the bottom and take your lumps. A well run and progressive training program can shorten this time, but can never eliminate it. It is up to the athlete to work through it as long as necessary until his or her stint is over. I see this all the time, even in grappling. We all want new skills, but they don t come overnight. There has to be several attributes in the athlete if he or she is to get through the frustration of the early learning process. First, patience, Second, resilience and third, faith. Patience to let time work it s magic, resilience to take the early knocks and go the distance required, and faith that a program will create in time the changes needed to take you to your goals. All of us have to do our time. Not just at white belt, but every time we incorporate new techniques and tactics into our game. That ability to endure these times is the key to progress. Here, Garry Tonon does his time just a couple of months into MMA training with the formidable Jake Shields.Ryan brothers getting recognition This weekend the Flograppling awards for 2017 were announced. Squad standouts, Gordon and Nicky Ryan were rewarded for an outstanding year. Nicky Ryan won juvenile grappler of the year after double bronze at USA ADCC senior trials and going on to be the youngest entrant in the history of ADCC world championships at just sixteen years of age. Big brother Gordon Ryan won the award for best no gi submission of the year with his superlative guillotine variation upon the great Keenan Cornelius to win ADCC gold as part of the biggest medal haul in a debut performance in the history of the event. We are all so proud of these two brothers and deeply impressed by the dedication and hard work they put in to get these awards. Interestingly, RGA had two nominations for juvenile of the year. Fellow sixteen year old phenom, Rayron Gracie was also nominated. My sensei, Renzo Gracie, and I are very happy indeed to see the future of the academy so strongly represented by these two outstanding youngsters.Rash guardsNew directions...new skills Garry Tonon goes through his MMA sparring with gstleger It s never an easy transition for a great single discipline athlete to transition mid career to MMA. The sudden influx of new skills can be overwhelming physically and daunting mentally. Elite athletes are well aware of what good athletic performance feels like in their own discipline, so to begin at white belt in three or four new disciplines can be very unsettling they feel very strongly the contrast between their high skill level in their established domain and their lack of skills in the new areas. Ultimately however, one has to strive to move forward and believe that time and training will work their magic just as it did when they first began. In the end it s a healthy reminder that we are all white belts in most areas of life and that the general spirit and desire for learning is more important than any knowledge we may have stumbled upon thus far. Photo supersaiyanmagicalgirlMake it memorable the fundamental problem of teaching in jiu jitsu The main concern of most teachers in jiujitsu is the information they GIVE to their students how much, how complex etc. The study of jiu jitsu is never about how much information you TAKE IN it is about how much you will be able to RECALL and use under severe stress. RETENTION, NOT OUTPUT, IS THE CENTRAL PROBLEM OF JIU JITSU INSTRUCTION. As such, we need effective methods of improving students ability to recall the large amounts of information we churn out. The most important method will always be the most basic simple repetition. There are others however, that I find very effective. One of my favorites is the QUESTION AND ANSWER method. When students are spoon fed information they are not actively engaged in the learning process and tend to see themselves in a passive role that quickly leads to inattention, boredom and inability to recall what was taught. Whenever I can, I try to make the student part of the lesson through engaging them in question and answer dialogue where they have to WORK towards an answer. This creates independent and innovative problem solvers rather than robotic followers. It also creates a strong memory association with the learning experience that greatly aids retention. The teacher guides the discussion by asking questions that lead the student in a given direction and the student works for the answers. This leads to a cycle of curiosity, frustration, insight and satisfaction that engages the student and creates a learning process and answers that are both memorable and beneficial one day the student will be able to put HIMSELF through that cycle and think autonomously. Things we are given for free we attach only small value to. Those things we work for, we value and cherish this applies to knowledge as well. Photo stephaniedrewsphotographyTHE THREE GREAT KEYS TO COMBAT Of all the activities that humans can partake in, none is more chaotic and unpredictable than fighting. THE WHOLE PURPOSE OF MARTIAL ARTS IS TO USE KNOWLEDGE AND TRAINING TO CONTROL THE OUTCOME OF COMBAT TO CONTROL CHAOS. The history of combat sports clearly show that there are definite limits in our ability to do this. IN A WORLD OF UNCERTAINTY THE BEST WE CAN DO IS TO STACK THE ODDS IN OUR FAVOR AS BEST WE CAN. When I coach, I constantly stress to my athletes the need to assert themselves in three critical aspects of combat sports that play a huge role in determining the probability of the outcome. The athlete who can control the DIRECTION of the fight, the PACE of a fight and control the SET UPS and precursors to the main moves used by both athletes will win the vast majority of the matches he or she enters. This a huge topic that cannot be addressed in an Instagram post, but I shall give a simplified example. Georges StPierre is a quintessential example of an athlete who career was built around the three general keys to combat. Mr StPierre almost always was able to immediately dictate the most basic direction of a fight. If he wanted it on the floor he could put it there at will with his double leg. If he wanted it to remain standing, he was notoriously difficult to take down and hold down. With regards pace, he was always capable of slowing a match on the fence and tiring a dangerous puncher there. He could always return to center octagon and increase speed and generate movement that would set up double legs in the open. With regards set ups, in standing position, he had a complete arsenal of feints, misdirections, jabs and linked Superman punches that enabled him to use his king weapon, the double leg. On the floor he had an elaborate collection of protocols and striking from guard that created pressure to set up his Queen weapon, strong striking allied to guard passing that led either to submission,TKO or a dominance that won the round. In the chaos of fighting, we can never fully determine the outcome, but devoting your time to the study of these three key aspects of combat will always give you your best chanceMeanwhile, back in New York...The squad kohai Juniors went on a rampage this weekend at the Rise Invitational Grappling competition last night. My great friend and Renzo Gracie alumni, Matt Serra has a very talented student, Jason Rau, who he sent to train with us. Mr Rau has worked hard to become one of the best in the room and last night defeated 10th Planet standout, Jon Thor Blank via submission sankaku triangle variation. In addition, Frank Rosenthal showcased his rapid improvement by winning gold in the event 8 man tournament that featured EBI standouts JM Holland from 10th Planet and Mike Davila. Mr Rosenthal defeated Mr Davila via strangle in the final to take first place. Stanley Rosa from bxmartialarts also won in a fine display from these talented young men. Great to see their hard work and drive being converted into shekels, notoriety and medals!I am very happy to say that next Monday I shall join Joe Rogan on his weekly podcast discussing jiu jitsu and the squad along with other topics. Mr Rogan is a great student of the game and very adept at 10th Planet style jiu jitsu as well as more conventional styles of jiu jitsu. He is a great voice for the sport who has done a tremendous job of trying to educate MMA viewers of the subtleties of all forms of jiu jitsu and grappling not just 10th Planet, as some claim in UFC competition. Once I was at a dinner and was asked who I believed was the most influential person in jiu jitsu. I surprised everyone by answering that it was probably Joe Rogan. My reasoning was that he talks to a larger audience than anyone and does so with a passion that has probably brought more people to the sport than any athlete. It will be a pleasure to talk with him and friends about the game.Facing your challenges and fears A huge part of the martial arts journey is bound up with the notion of confronting and overcoming tough challenges and deep fears. The very nature of martial arts is that of dealing with confrontation, conflict and violence. Any kind of confrontation is likely to create some level of fear response to it. The question is how will you deal with it? I have seen myriad ways in which different athletes have overcome anxieties to win, so many in fact, that I don t believe there is any one right way to do it. It will come down to individual preferences. I have always found however, that one approach always seems to help in those times where fear, doubt and anxiety threatens to inhibit your performance and prevent you getting to your goals. YOU MUST AVOID THE TWO PITFALLS THAT COMPOUND FEAR AND ANXIETY AND WHICH LEAD TO INDECISION AND PARALYSIS IN THOSE CRITICAL TIMES WHEN DECISIVE AND WELL DIRECTED ACTION ARE NECESSARY. These are INACTIVITY and INDECISION. Show me a man feeling fear before a major event who is inactive and lacking any plan of action once the event begins, and I will show you a man WHOSE FEAR LEVELS INCREASE WITH EVERY PASSING MINUTE as the deadline approaches. THE SUREST WAY TO RELIEVE ANXIETY IS TO HAVE A CLEAR PLAN OF OPERATIONS AS TO WHAT YOU WANT TO DO AND BE ACTIVE IN YOUR PREPARATION TO ENACT THAT PLAN. In all my years of coaching, I have seen every kind of psychological counseling, visualization, hypnosis etc. I HAVE NEVER SEEN A BETTER ANTIDOTE TO ANXIETY THAN INTELLIGENTLY DIRECTED ACTIVITY. Let planning and activity be your sword and shield whenever fear and anxiety threaten to overwhelm your ability to perform. When you are alone with your fears, they will be your guardians.Two forms of grappling aggression There are two primary forms of aggressionattack in grappling SUBMISSION and POSITION. Interestingly, THE THREAT OF EACH IS MAXIMIZED ONLY WHEN YOU THREATEN BOTH EQUALLY. The squad is primarily known for our heavy emphasis on submission attacks, but we never overlook the need for constant and strong positional attacks at the same time; FOR ONLY WHEN THERE IS A DUAL THREAT TO PROVOKE STRONG DEFENSIVE REACTIONS WILL THE OPPORTUNITY FOR SUBMISSIONS ARISE. Conversely, ONLY WHEN THERE IS A DANGER OF SUBMISSIONS WILL IT BE EASIER TO WORK YOUR WAY TO BETTER POSITIONS. This constant interplay between position and submission AT ALL TIMES, rather than only positional attacks first, and then submission attacks, is a distinctive feature of our game. Most people use the positionsubmission duality as a SEQUENCE position first, then submission. We like to do this also, but often use it as a DILEMMA threaten both at all times to make each easier to attain. Here, Garry Tonon applies strong passing positional pressure to open up a submission opportunity on the legs that would take him to victory in this match.Relaxation, tension and body geometry A huge part of your success or failure in grappling will come down to your ability to control your opponent s movements by FITTING THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF HIS in ways that MAXIMIZE CONTACT AND CONNECTION and thus inhibit movement through CONNECTION RATHER THAN MUSCULAR STRENGTH. The insight you must gain is that THE ONLY WAY TO MOLD YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR OPPONENT S BODY IS TO RELAX AND SOFTEN YOUR OWN BODY. However, the only way to KEEP yourself locked into that position is to tighten yourself. Thus you must play the same delicate balancing act between relaxation and tension that a python does when it wraps around its prey. YOU MUST BE SOFT WHEN MOVING TO FIT INTO YOUR OPPONENT, THEN TIGHTEN TO SOLIDIFY YOUR POSITION ONCE THERE. Often you will have to work in cycles of tension and relaxation to get the job done. Here, Gordon Ryan shows superb conformity to the shape of his opponent s body made possible by relaxation but also tightness to hold himself once there against a very skilled opponent like Yuri Simoes as he patiently works towards a match winning strangle.Creating good habits Training is designed to INSTILL GOODSOUND HABITS IN ATHLETES THAT BECOME SO INGRAINED IN THEIR THOUGHTS AND MOVEMENTS THAT THEY WILL MANIFEST THEMSELVES EVEN UNDER THE GREATEST PRESSURE. The path to building those habits is DAILY DRILLING. Drills are often rushed through, ignored, performed half heartedly or otherwise downplayed by students. Let me tell you this WHEN YOU ARE TRUELY UNDER PRESSURE IN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP COMPETITION, YOU ARE EXHAUSTED, OUT OF IDEAS, CAN T HEAR YOUR COACH ABOVE THE CROWD, YOUR OWN MIND SUGGESTING WAYS OUT TO QUIT WITH DIGNITY THE ONLY FRIEND YOU WILL HAVE ON YOUR SIDE IS THE UNBREAKABLE HABITS BUILT OVER COUNTLESS HOURS OF DRILLING TO ACT CORRECTLY AND IN WAYS THAT TAKE YOU BACK TO THE PATH OF VICTORY. Don t devalue them. Here, Nicky Ryan and Nick Ronan work on their daily ashi garami drills at Musclepharm HQ in LA in preparation for competition that saw both win in fine style by submission.Double danger All of us try constantly to improve our skills in the combat sports. Persistent, intelligently directed training will eventually create results and you will develop some weapons that will earn the respect of your training partners and opponents. However, if you want to further your success ALWAYS LOOK TO DEVELOP WEAPONS THAT WORK AS COMPLIMENTARY PAIRS. The fundamental feature of real combat is RESISTANCE from your opponent as you fight for advantage and victory. It is critical that you have at least one strong complimentary pair of attacks so that as one attack runs into resistance it opens the door for the second attack. The way in which pairs of attacks can compliment each other is varied. Sometimes they compliment each other in terms of DIRECTION forward and backwards or leftright for example. Sometimes they do it from one side of opponent s body to another, or from lower body to upper body, so that as an opponent defends one he offers the other. One of the strongest complimentary pairs of attacks among my students was the jabtakedown pairing of Georges StPierre. He would use his jab to harass, frustrate, hurt and move opponents. If they did not fight back against it he would easily win the round, so opponents HAD to fire back in order not to fall behind on the scoreboard. The jab is a long range weapon, so that meant opponents typically had to CLOSE DISTANCE to fire back. However, their attempt to step forward and fire back put them in danger of the second complimentary weapon the double leg takedown a weapon that he had developed to an extraordinary degree. Mr StPierre also had well developed guard passing and ground striking skills that made time on the floor very hazardous for opponents. So they would have to struggle back up to their feet where the same cycle could be repeated until victory was attained. FINDING AND DEVELOPING A POWERFUL COMPLIMENTARY PAIR OF ATTACKS IS A BIG PART OF YOUR EARLY DEVELOPMENT IN THE SPORT. Only when your attacks come in complimentary pairs that take advantage of defensive reactions will you be able to break through the strong resistance you will encounter as you rise in level.The first battle in any grappling match is the battle for grips In any grappling bout, whether it be a friendly match in the gym among white belts or a titanic struggle in black belt world championships competition, is the battle to attain functional grips upon your opponent. The number one theme I also coach in this regard can be stated very simply ALWAYS FIGHT FOR GRIPS WITH A PURPOSE AND A PLAN. So often I see people nonchalantly working for grips first and then try to figure out on the fly what they will do with those grips once they get them. THE IDEA IS TO KNOW WHAT YOU WANT TO DO FIRST SO THAT YOU KNOW WHAT GRIPS YOU WILL NEED TO BRING ABOUT THAT END. This will immediately give your grip fighting a purposeful and energetic feel that will make you stand out in a training room. Here, Gordon Ryan and Dillon Danis settle into position to begin fighting for grips in a hard fought, tactical match that prominently featured grip fighting and grip denial. Both athletes knew what they needed to win and what the other fellow needed to win and had a plan as to what grips they had to get and which they had to deny in order to get what they wanted. Much of high level competition is determined by the outcome of these grip battles. Photo banejitsuHard working problem solvers People come to me all the time asking what kind of attributes they need to need to develop in order to excel in jiu jitsu. Conversely, they will also claim that they can never beat a certain opponent because they are possessed of a certain attribute that they cannot overcome. Thus do I get endless numbers of inquiries asking how to build certain attributes such as strength, speed, Flexibility, mental toughness etc. etc. These attributes are all good and desirable and will definitely help your progress BUT THEY ARE NOT THE ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES I LOOK FOR WHEN APPRAISING THE POTENTIAL OF A STUDENT. What I look for can be said in a single short sentence. I look for HARD WORKING PROBLEM SOLVERS. Nothing more, nothing less. When you look at a list of great world champions you will see tremendous variation in physical and mental attributes. BUT YOU WILL SEE TWO THINGS THEY ALL HAD IN COMMON they worked harder and proved more adept at solving the problems in front of them in the time available than their opponents. How hard working you are is not some innate quality. I ACTUALLY DON T BELIEVE ANYONE IS LAZY JUST UNMOTIVATED. WHAT WE CALL LAZINESS IS SIMPLY A LACK OF PASSION IN THAT DOMAIN. I shall write more about passion and laziness in future posts as I believe they are very important notions in our quest for improvement. As for problem solving, I think this is something we all find happiness in and we all have different ways of finding solutions. Look at the squad as an example. Eddie Cummings and myself come from a formal academic background and our problem solving methods reflect that, with a wordy, fine grained distinctions look to them. The Ryan brothers do not, and their methods of solving problems have a more practicalworkshop look to them. Garry Tonon and Georges StPierre are somewhere in between BUT ALL GOT OUTSTANDING RESULTS AND SOLVE THE PROBLEMS OF JIU JITSU WITH EQUAL EFFICACY just in somewhat different ways. Work on your attributes but don t think they are the key to your success realize that the keys are your capacity to work over time and solve the problems that arise as you work. Photo banejitsuBegin with denial Most jiu jitsu athletes begin their matches with a clear sense of what their favorite moves are and how they want to employ them against their opponent. This is good, but I recommend you begin with something else first. BEGIN EVERY ENGAGEMENT WITH DENYING YOUR OPPONENT THE TOOLS HE NEEDS TO IMPOSE HIS GAME UPON YOU ONLY THEN DO YOU WORK TO IMPOSE YOUR GAME UPON HIM. Any time both athletes are simultaneously working to implement their own moves, it immediately becomes a dog fight. Top tier athletes typically focus first on shutting down their opponents avenues of attack and only then switch to the positive act of launching their own attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan shuts down the dangerous open guard game of World champion Romulo Barral with his signature body lock. Once Mr Barral s guard was sufficiently nullified, he switched to a positive passing game leading to a decisive strangle attack a near perfect demonstration of the denialimpose sequence that is such a key feature of our approach to the passing positional game. Photo banejitsuThe bicycle wheel Students often come to me concerned that due to some circumstances in their life, be it injury, career, familypersonal, they have to reduce training. Their concern is that with reductions in training time they will lose the skills they had worked so hard to develop. Don t be concerned. Skills take tremendous work in order to be CREATED OR IMPROVED, but very little work in order to be MAINTAINED AT OR CLOSE TO THEIR CURRENT LEVEL. My friend, Jean Charles Skarbowsky, used a fine metaphor to express this idea. Remember when you were a child playing with a bicycle? You could prop the bicycle upside down and spin the front wheel with your hand. When you first began to spin the wheel, it took a fair amount of effort to get it spinning quickly you had to overcome the inertia of the stationary wheel through effort. BUT ONCE THE WHEEL WAS SPINNING QUICKLY YOU COULD EASILY KEEP IT MOVING AT SPEED BY PERIODICALLY BRUSHING THE WHEEL WITH A LIGHT TOUCH OF YOUR HAND. Realize this YOUR PHYSICAL SKILLS WORK THE SAME WAY. Once they are well developed, even minimal efforts will maintain them close to their current level. Have faith that should life and circumstances take you in directions that mean you have to reduce training time don t despair. Just stay in the game to the degree that you keep most of what you worked so hard to gain. THE ONLY TIME I SEE PEOPLE DRASTICALLY LOSE SKILLS IS WHEN THEY COMPLETELY ABANDON THE GAME BOTH MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY. All the time I see athletes keep ninety percent of their skills with just minimal upkeep for extended periods of time. As soon as circumstances change favorably you can get back in the saddle very quickly and then devote the extra time and effort to making improvements and innovations which require considerably more time and effort. Whenever training time gets compromised let the metaphor of the bicycle wheel be your guide.Victories at No Gi world championships The squad s Canadian contingent had an outstanding performance at the No Gi world championships this weekend. Oliver Taza won the gold medal at lightweight brown belt and Ethan Crelinsten won a silver medal at light featherweight brown belt. Both athletes had a very high submission rate despite not being able to use the weapon we are most associated with heel hooking. These two young men always impress me with the dedication they show to travel long distances to train with us and keep improving. This was the last big show of the year and to see their progress rewarded in this fashion is very gratifying. Thanks also to Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon for traveling out to the competition with them to corner and coach. This has been an amazing g year for Messrs Taza and Crelinsten both had very strong performances at ADCC despite relative inexperience and now at the IBJJF world championships as well. Expect even more next year as they continue to train hard and make the technical and tactical progress needed to get to the next level of achievement.Integrated systems Earlier in the week I discussed a central theme of my approach to jiu jitsu that we constantly seek to select isolated, highvalue areas of the sport and build complex systems around them so that our athletes can have a significant knowledge advantage in that domain. If the athlete can maintain that domain and dominate the action within it HE OR SHE WOULD BE SUCCESSFULLY CHANGING THE GAME FROM ONE WHERE PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES, WILL, YEARS OF EXPERIENCE ETC ETC DETERMINE THE OUTCOME; TO A SITUATION WHERE DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE DETERMINES THE OUTCOME. If the system itself is sound and the students application of it is better than his opponent s ability to interfere with it success will follow. Unfortunately the tremendous success that my students had with certain systems created the impression that all we did was invent some fancy systems in a few areas legs and back and that was the limit of their skills. This lead to many accusations of them being one trick ponies incapable of beating top level competitors with well rounded games. This year my students did a fine job of showing what our actual approach is, rather than the public perception. ALWAYS THE INTENT WAS TO CREATE DIFFERENT SYSTEMS THAT COVERED THE WHOLE BODY, NOT JUST SUBMISSIONS BUT POSITIONAL ATTACKS ALSO AND THAT THESE SYSTEMS SHOULD BE INTEGRATED WITH EACH OTHER SO THAT FAILURE IN THE APPLICATION OF ONE WOULD LEAD TO OPPORTUNITIES TO EMPLOY ANOTHER UNTIL A COMPLETE BREAKTHROUGH WAS ACHIEVED. This use of INTEGRATED SYSTEMS is the real goal of all my students and the direction of my work in jiu jitsu. Here, Gordon Ryan uses the interface between our Kimura system and back attack system to work his attacks against the great Xande Ribeiro in a very tightly contested match in ADCC. Mr Ribeiro is doing a fine job of blocking two dangerous attacks at the same time. This kind of sustained multi directional pressure is what you must try to build towards in your training. Photo by banejitsuOne of the most interesting moments of my jiu jitsu year was accompanying Gordon Ryan to his bout with Ralek Gracie at the legendary Gracie Academy in Torrance CA. After the bout, Rorion Gracie graciously showed us around the beautiful dojo, which features many historical artifacts and memorabilia and even a museum! It was fascinating to hear his perspective on the development and changes of the sport and his insights on the early history of Jiu Jitsu in America. When I first began jiu jitsu, Rorion was one of the chief figureheads of the sport. All my life I trained exclusively with my sensei, Renzo Gracie and had only very sporadic contact with Messrs Rorion, Royce, Rickson and Royler Helio s side of the first family. Most of the early jiu jitsu students in America will agree with me that early UFC s and Gracie s in Action were the major reasons why we got involved in the sport Rorion was directly involved in both. It was an honor to see the man who had such a profound effect on the history and development of modern martial arts in his dojo. Of course any person who makes major change in the world will have his advocates and detractors change will always thrill some, appall others and lead to green pastures for some and burnt bridges for others but I know that I and many others owe him a great deal of gratitude from afar for his efforts to expand the sport and revolutionize modern martial arts. I sometimes wonder if I and many others would even have ever heard of jiu jitsu without his work. It was an honor to be able to show some of the new directions and talents of jiu jitsu in the home of one of the most important historical traditions of the sport.Orientation, disorientation and control A common feature of jiu jitsu sparring and matches is the degree to which athletes are put into very contorted positions whilst upside down, inverted, spinning around an axis etc. Usually these situations occur spontaneously and in a very short time frame. Often they are quite different from the usual moves we practice in the gym. In any extreme, uncontrolled scramble situation of this kind, it is vital that the athlete have a general sense of direction and a few key concepts in mind SO THAT THEY CAN CREATE ORDER OUT OF CHAOS AND STEER EVENTS IN THEIR FAVOR. So often I see students clamoring for endless details on a specific position. This is a good thing, but even better is the student who seeks to place the details in ORDER OF IMPORTANCE and focus primarily upon the most vital ones. In wild scrambles where your orientation is very different what you are used to and time is of essence, a few key concepts will be far more useful to you than a mountain of details. Here, Garry Tonon finds himself in a position, ashi garami, with which he is extremely familiar, but in an unusual manifestation vertical with the foot uncontrolled. Focusing upon the main features of ashi garami control, he was able to rein in ADCC medalist Vagner Rocha and bring this unpromising situation back under control into a much more standard ashi garami so that just a few seconds after this photo was taken, his opponent was tapping in submission to a finely applied heel hook variation. Photo by banejitsuIntegrated systems Most of you know that a distinctive feature of my approach to jiu jitsu is to focus upon specific, easily attainable scenarios and build complex systems around them that enable an athlete to control that position and work towards submission. Because the system is very comprehensive it offers the athlete a tremendous KNOWLEDGE ADVANTAGE over his or her opponent in that specific domain which the opponent will find very problematic to deal with and overcome. Very often you will see my students making use of some of our more well known systems back, front headlock, Kimura, juji gatamesankaku, And ashi garami among many others. In truth however, ANY ONE SYSTEM CAN COME UP SHORT UNDER THE PRESSURE OF TOP LEVEL COMPETITION. It is of the first importance then, that athletes work towards the most important goal of my approach to jiu jitsu THE INTEGRATION OF THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS SO THAT THE ATHLETE CAN APPLY PRESSURE WITH ONE, WITH THE ABILITY TO PASS SEAMLESSLY TO ANOTHER AND RENEW THE ATTACK UNTIL THE SUSTAINED PRESSURE BREAKS THROUGH RESISTANCE AND SUBMISSION IS ATTAINED. This INTEGRATED SYSTEMS APPROACH is what all my athletes strive towards. Here, outstanding apprentice kohai, Nick Ronan shows superb integration of ashi garami and back systems to create extreme pressure on opponent, Mike Davila to get the breakthrough and submission in fine style at kasaigrappling championships this weekend.Aussie in Manhattan Outstanding Australian Grappling star, Craig Jones came by the blue basement to train with the squad in the morning class today! When I was visiting family in Australia, Mr Jones gym in Melbourne was very welcoming when I taught a leg lock seminar it was a pleasure to return the favor and host Mr Jones here in our town When squad members achieve notable wins we have a tradition of awarding them a finely made knife as we consider the blade the perfect metaphor for our life in jiu jitsu. In true Crocodile Dundee in NYC fashion, Mr Jones looked at the knife and deadpanned, That s not a knife... A wave to all our Australian friends Mr Jones is an amazing example to us all, Australian or otherwise, as to what can be achieved by dedicated, self starting individuals far away from the more well known centers of the sport.Quest for improvement I love the excitement of watching junior students working hard to catch up to the skills of the inspirational seniors and drive towards their goals and dreams. Jason Rau has been doing exactly that. This weekend he entered sapeteiro Invitational 185 pound division despite being a 170 pound athlete and took gold winning every match by submission in regulation time. Mr Rau has a formidable arsenal of attacks that just keeps growing, but sankaku triangle and ashi garami Based attacks are his favorites. He used both to win the gold. In the finals he faced EBI standout Josh Hayden, who has a reputation as a strong leg locker and a very difficult person to leg lock. Mr Rau had no problems breaking through and getting the win via heel hook variation to take a fine victory. This all happened prior to the big Kasai show last night and it was inspiration to his team mate and great friend Nick Ronan, who got the good news and then went out on stage to win via strangle in his superfight with Mike Davila. A great weekend for these two friends and students of our approach. This constant quest for improvement is the heart and soul of jiu jitsu study. We all need a reason to get up and go every morning without such a reason every step is an effort but when you have a passion and goal every dawn is a renewed chance to get what you want and your feet feel light indeed.Victory in New York City Gordon Ryan capped off an incredible year in NYC tonight, defeating multi world champion and two time ADCC gold medalist Yuri Simoes by submission with just seconds left on the clock after a dominant display of reversals and guard passing pressure. This has been an amazing three weeks for Mr Ryan. In a three week spree he defeated Ralek Gracie, won EBI 14 and defeated a two time ADCC champion in a weight division above him. Garry Tonon competed in the tournament and had some memorable moments in his characteristic style but did not want to play the point game that is required to win the format. Young gun Nick Ronan had a fine performance in the preliminaries putting on a submission clinic on opponent Mike Davila culminating in a fine strangle from the back. It was great to be able to represent our style in our home town in Kasai grappling s inaugural show. Hope you all enjoyed the event!Working against resistance Daily drilling of moves is a good thing, but only live sparring will get you proficient in your ultimate goal of being able to control and submit a fully resisting opponent who is trying their best to defeat you. The first line of resistance on the part of your opponent IS THEIR ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE WHAT YOU ARE ATTEMPTING TO DO TO THEM. Only when they make that recognition can they formulate a defense. A huge part of success in combat then, is TO DISGUISE YOUR REAL INTENT UNTIL THE LAST MOMENT. The best attacks typically begin with feints and misdirection that subvert your opponent s ability to read and recognize your real intent. Once you have gained proficiency in the fundamental movements and skills of the sport go further AND MAKE MISDIRECTION AND SUBTERFUGE YOUR PRIMARY SKILL. More than anything else, you will need this to break through knowledgeable resistance and bring about the ends you seek.Reflections on my sensei When my sensei, Renzo Gracie, first moved permanently to the United States, jiu jitsu was in its absolute infancy here. It s only publicity had come from early MMA fighting. The Martial arts scene in general was very primitive with all kinds of crazy arts making wild claims of fighting prowess and occult abilities. MMA proved to have a wonderful cleansing effect on the world of martial arts as it made all claims subject to empirical testing but tha...Kasai Grappling Championship This weekend the squad will go out for the last time this year at the First Kasai professional grappling championship. Garry Tonon will enter the 170 pound tournament against some of the most talented Welterweights in the world, most of whom are world champions or ADCC veterans. Gordon Ryan will take on two time ADCC gold medalist and multi time BJJ world champion, Yuri Simoes. This a tremendous line up of talent for an inaugural event. The organizers have done an incredible job of getting the best athletes in a first class venue in a show with great production quality. Rich Byrnes and Rolles Gracie have assembled a tremendous team of experts and I am really looking forward to what may become one of the premier grappling organizations. The rule set is a great compromise between positional skills and submission skills that will reward purposeful action and punish passivity a first period of submission only and then if no submission, a period with conventional points scoring to decide a winner. It s wonderful to have in here in NYC we normally have to travel to get to premier shows. The squad is working their way through the week getting prepared. Check out kasaigrappling it s up to us as jiu jitsu fans and athletes to create the support that can give the athletes a forum to showcase the sport! Hope you all enjoy the show!Victory in Texas Gordon Ryan won his fourth EBI title tonight in Austen Texas in a tough tournament winning three hard fought elimination matches and then a dramatic overtime finish against Australian grappling star Craig Jones. Mr Jones has had a breakout year with an outstanding performance in ADCC and now again in EBI 14. In a very memorable overtime, Mr Ryan had to use all his escape skills to break out of a tight juji gatame armlock. He was able to prevent his extended arm from going into hyperextension and then strangle Mr Jones in the next exchange. Two outstanding victories in two weeks for Mr Ryan now it s back to NYC on a 545am flight to NYC to resume teaching and training as Mr Ryan and Mr Tonon prepare for the Kasai grappling tournament in NYC next weekend! Thanks to Onnit Gym here in Austen for hosting a great EBI event. Also thanks to Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila for putting on another great EBI and giving all the athletes a great venue to express their skills in a thrilling format. Thanks to all our loyal fans for your support as the squad takes on all comers Wishing you all the best in NYC to my students in NYC see you all tomorrow Victory in LA Part 2 Big wins via submission by both Nicky Ryan and Eddie Cummings at Fight2Win Pro in LA tonight! Both wins were via strangulation from the back after reversals from bottom position. Nicky Ryan, just sixteen years old and recent purple belt defeated twenty five year old 10th Planet black belt Ricky Lule and Mr Cummings defeated Jacob Sandoval, a talented blackbelt from Cobrinha. Fight2Win continues to impress with strong shows that mix grass roots support for local talent mixed with big name main events in exciting venues. Thanks also to Musclepharm who provided a great training center all week. Special thanks to Garry Tonon who thanklessly worked hard all week to help Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan and Eddie Cummings prepare for their respective matches in between his own MMA training. Now the squad heads to Texas tonight to support Gordon Ryan as he seeks to defend his EBI Open weight title in Austen. Thanks as always for your support and interest in our work and progress. Wishing you all the best from LA History It was an honor to go to the legendary Gracie jiu jitsu head quarters in Torrance for Gordon Ryan s match with Ralek Gracie. Inside the dojo was a beautiful mini museum of Helio s side of the family a side I am not very familiar with as I trained exclusively under Renzo Gracie and the Gracie Barra lineage. It was a wonderful experience to be a small part of the match and then walk around and observe the famous dojo with its memorabilia and images from the past, all the way back to Helio through the early days of MMAUFC in the United States. There were so many iconic images from the beginning of the UFC, events that I had long forgotten but which were important in my early development and inspiration. Our sport changes and adapts so quickly that it is very easy to lose historical perspective and get entirely wrapped up in current developments and emerging trends. In truth however, whatever achievements we make today are only possible because of the work and achievements of our forebears in the art. In addition, these earlier authorities often came at problems we still deal with today from a very different perspective, which can often provide insight to a thoughtful person today. Sometimes an old idea, combined with contemporary context, can be a path to something new.Going old school California style When Gordon Ryan defeated Ralek Gracie at the legendary Torrance Gracie Jiu Jitsu academy on Sunday, I got a chance to talk to jiu jitsu icon Rorian Gracie and some of his students about the early history of Gracie Jiu Jitsu in The United States. Gracie Jiu Jitsu was first taught out of a small garage here in California! There were no schools it took a long time for the first Gracie s to build a following and work their way up to becoming one of the foremost martial arts in the world. Well, here I am in California, teaching private classes out of...a garage! Ha ha! Looks like things have come full circle!! New school Jiu Jitsu leg locking 101 taught old school style out of the garage Here my friends Josh and Chris from dynamixmma go to work on ashi garami and other skills. Cars replaced by mats and we are ready to go! Now it s on to team training as the squad pairs with Keenan Cornelius to get Gordon Ryan ready for EBI 14, Nicky Ryan ready for Fight2Win and Garry Tonon ready for MMA debut some time next year. I always love to take inspiration from the past and love to give credit where ever I can to those who came before us and made our work possible. It s a pleasure to get a small sense of what it must have been like for those Jiu Jitsu pioneers who gave birth to Gracie JiuJitsu here in California and helped make it possible for people like myself to find happiness in the sport.Back in training After the excitement of Gordon Ryan s victory in Torrance yesterday The squad was back in the gym today, joined by Keenan Cornelius. Here, Mr Ryan battles Mr Cornelius while Nicky Ryan goes toe to toe with Garry Tonon in the training cage at Musclepharm HQ in LA. Mr Ryan is preparing for a very tough field in Texas this weekend at EBI 14 Open weight tournament while his younger brother will take on outstanding 10th Planet Black belt Ricky Lule here in LA Friday night. This evening it will be more grappling training and then MMA work for Mr Tonon. In jiu jitsu as in life, the higher your goals and aspirations, the more you must demand of yourself. The more you want the more you must give in sweat and effort. When people TALK to me about their goals and aspirations, I don t even listen. I WATCH WHAT THEY ACTUALLY DO TO BRING ABOUT THOSE GOALS AND ASPIRATIONS AND SEE HOW MUCH THEY ARE WILLING TO GIVE IN THE ATTEMPT. Only then will you really see how serious they are.Victory in LA Gordon Ryan defeated Ralek Gracie at the Metamoris event held at Gracie Academy Headquarters in Torrance today. On a bet placed shortly before the match he limited himself to sankaku triangle and juji gatame armbar attacks the bet was that it had to be performed between ten and twelve minutes a closer time frame than the ten to eighteen minutes he declared earlier in the week. At ten and half minutes he secured the submission win via sankaku variation. It was an honor to be at the famous Torrance academy and see so much history and meet people who were heavily involved in the early history of jiu jitsu in the United States. It created a fascinating atmosphere for the match, which had the no time limit rule structure of early matches in the history of the sport. Now it s back to the gym to get Nicky Ryan ready for Fight2Win Friday night, Gordon Ryan ready for Sunday night, Nick Ronan ready for Kasai grappling event in two weeks and Garry Tonon ready for MMA!Polishing the edge When sharpening a dull knife, the initial work is heavy grinding of the edge on very abrasive surfaces that remove metal in ways that gradually change and thin the edge geometry to Bring back the sharpness. As the sharpening process continues, progressively finer abrasives are used that remove less and less metal. At the end of the process the edge of the blade is polished by the finest abrasives. At that point there is no more metal removal, just light polishing that leaves a mirror smooth edge that gleams and cuts like a razor. So too in jiu jitsu contest preparation. During the normal training cycle, the work is heavy and designed to change the athletes skill set. As the contest approaches, the training changes to light work designed to polish already existing skills. Here, Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan, Garry Tonon and Nick Ronan polish their skills for upcoming events at Musclepharm HQ in LA. Following this approach creates an athlete who arrives on match day with skills as sharp as the finest bladeThe return of the Wolverine Eddie Cummings, founding member of the grappling squad, will be returning to the stage at Fight2Win Pro 56 against Jacob Sandoval, an outstanding black belt from the great Cobrinha, in LA. He will be headlining the event alongside Nicky Ryan. Mr Cummings has been working hard in the shadows always seeking improvement and refinement of his game. Everyone knows his prowess in leg attacks he was the first to show our leg lock Ashi Garami system to the world. Less well known mostly due to the overwhelming success of his leg game is his great proficiency in upper body attacks and his positional game. It will be great seeing him back in action Interestingly, of all my students, Mr Cummings has a grappling game which is the most similar to my own, based upon off balancing kuzushi from bottom position into Ashi Garami, sankaku triangle and back attacks. Keep your eyes on this one to see some modifications and improvements on an already devastating game!Ryan brothers back in action Gordon Ryan is preparing for a tumultuous end to the year with three major engagements back to back. First he takes on Ralek Gracie in a submission only match in LA, then a very tough field in EBI 14 in Texas where he defends his open weight title, then Straight back to NYC to take on double ADCC gold medalist Yuri Simoes a truly great champion in a weight division above his in the new Kasai event. Sixteen year old purple belt Nicky Ryan will take on 10th Planet adult black belt standout Ricky Lule, who in addition to being a fine jiu jitsu player, is also an excellent wrestler in what will be an exceptionally tough test for the gifted youngster. The match will take place in LA at Fight to Win pro Eddie Cummings will be there to compete on the same night more on that soon! The squad will head to California on Thanksgiving Day in preparation for these big events and stay for a week. We are hoping to connect again with our Californian fans and show some interesting new directions in our training program. This was always my favorite photo of the Ryan brothers. It conveys well their focus and shared vision and experiences attributes that have brought them both astounding progress in very little time. The only odd thing about the photo is a sinister Michael Myers impersonator lurking ominously in the background...SankakuTriangle Jiu Jitsu is about using a large percentage of our strength against a small percentage of our opponent s strength at a vulnerable point of his body. No move exemplifies this sentiment better than sankaku the triangle. In all its many variations it uses the strongest part of our body the legs and hips to isolate a weak part of an opponent the neck and a single arm in order to strangle or armlock him. As such it a big part of our approach to the sport. As a coach I use sankaku as a crucial measurement of a beginner students progress the day I see a student consistently and persistently entering into and looking to finish with triangles, I know he or she is on the right path and making good progress. It shows me clearly that they are using their legs as the forefront of their attacks and are developing the leg dexterity and movement skills that will enhance their game overall. Rookie grapplers do the majority of their work with their arms experts do the majority of their work with legs and hips. Here, Garry Tonon shows superb leg and hip work to lock on a devastating sankaku attack on his way to a record fifth EBI title in LAFighting to the top The entire pattern of human existence is based upon competition. Combat sports are an excellent means of preparing our minds and character for that reality. In jiu jitsu, as in life, nothing comes for free. In order to get people to take notice of you, you must achieve something. As time passes and your achievements grow, you will gain recognition from your peers. This simple vision is the basis of our progress within the sport. I always love to see the apprentice students kohai working hard to make their mark. Young Nick Ronan, who splits time between the squad at RGA and my team mate Matt Serra s school in Long Island has been making waves on the local grappling scene. Today he won a local eight man tournament in which he had to take on EBI veterans. He won every match by submission, using some advanced elements of our leg and back attack systems. Just a few weeks ago he won another tournament, again every match by submission and again against black belt EBI veterans he was a purple belt at the time and just received a brown belt Amazing to see a young student who has not been training long at all show very clearly he is already at EBI level performance. I find daily inspiration in the hard work of my students as they grapple with much more than just jiu jitsu, but with the eternal human struggle to make their way in a competitive world where hard, intelligently directed work combined with self belief are required to make us stand out from the crowd. Work your goals one step at a time start small and grow over time. Every hurdle jumped takes you closer to your final goal. In truth we are all apprentices, so their struggle to advance is close to our own heart.The fundamental principles of combat are universal One of the more fascinating aspects of working as part of an MMA camp is the interplay between the various specialist coaches and listening to their perspectives on fighting within their domain and in MMA. I have had the honor of working alongside many great coaches. One who greatly impressed me was Freddie Roach. His vast experience at the highest levels of boxing makes him a fascinating and captivating repository of knowledge in both the history and theory of the sport. Each of the various arts that comprise MMA has its own approach to victory in unarmed one on one combat. The broadest division is that between the grappling arts, which typical focus upon maximizing control as a prelude to strangles and joint locks as the path to victory, versus the striking arts, which use mastery of distance, positioning, timing etc to create situations where sufficient kinetic energy can be imparted upon a vulnerable part of the opponent s body to end the fight. Then within each of these two approaches there are many different variations, each of which goes in different directions or emphasizes different aspects from the others. Underneath all the differences however, the basic pillars of a rational approach to personal combat remain the same. ALWAYS SEEK SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE INITIATING AN ATTACK, SEEK POSITIONS FROM WHERE YOU CAN ATTACK YOUR OPPONENT MORE READILY AND WITH GREATER EFFECT THAN HE CAN ATTACK YOU. Fundamental Maxims like these hold true across the board. Only when we get down to specifics on how to actualize the maxims do we get differences. Once you see this clearly, all the various arts can become a source of learning for you and the cross over from a single art to MMA becomes easier. Here I discuss boxing footwork patterns with Mr Roach and their application to MMA on the morning of Georges StPierre s return to the UFC. Interestingly there was much common ground in his insights with footwork patterns in boxing for standing grappling in Judo and Jiu Jitsu. Movement is movement, advantage is advantage, whatever form in which they are made manifest.Regardless of your martial art, be it grappling or striking VARY THE LOCATION OF YOUR ATTACKS AND TARGET THE WHOLE BODY. When my three senior grappling students, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan first exploded on to the national and international grappling circuit, people were shocked at their efficiency in attacking the lower body a target that had been systematically undervalued throughout the history of jiu jitsu. Their tremendous success in this regard had a downside. People thought we were advocating leg attacks above others. This was NOT the case. All of my senior students are just as proficient in upper body attacks. When they train with each other, the attacks are evenly distributed. When they train with outsiders they tend to score much more on the legs since their opponents are not familiar with our system and usually struggle to resist in that area. WHEN YOUR THREATS CAN BE TARGETED OVER THE WHOLE BODY, OPENINGS WILL APPEAR WITH FAR GREATER REGULARITY THAN IF YOU TARGET ONLY A LIMITED AREA. This is true in all martial arts, not just grappling. As your opponent moves to resist a threat in one direction he will become vulnerable not another. Here, Georges StPierre digs hard to the body of rival Michael Bisping. The power of the blow is apparent and Mr Bisping HAS to address it with defensive measures. You can clearly see how those defensive measures have made him vulnerable to a second blow with either hand upstairs to the head or with the right leg to the lower body. Such is the way of all martial arts. In grappling you must have at least one very strong means of attacking legs, arms and neck so that you can distribute your attacks across the whole body. VARIATION OF DIRECTION OF ATTACK AND THE RESULTANT UNPREDICTABILITY IS A CORNERSTONE OF AN ATTACKING GAME.Structure and movement A good coach can look at a student whom they have never met or seen before and within a few seconds of observing them train, know very accurately their skill level. What are the cues they look for to make that assessment? An answer to this question will tell you a lot about what is truly important in your daily training and what is merely frivolous. The two most fundamental aspects the coach will first observe are structureposture and movementtransition skills from one position to another. Excellence is these two foundational aspects of the sport immediately suggests not only competence in the sport, but also an ability to easily learn new skills upon those already attained. Deficiencies in structure and movement suggests the opposite. YOU CAN HIDE MANY DEFICIENCIES IN JIU JITSU BUT THOSE TWO YOU CANNOT HIDE, FOR THEY WILL PERVADE EVERY ASPECT OF YOUR GAME IN A DETRIMENTAL WAY. A good therapy to this common problem is to look regularly at the best athletes in the sport in competition or sparring randori. Don t do what most people do, which is look only at the move being performed in order to copy it. Rather, spend time looking at the structurestanceposture of the athletes and their movement patterns. Preoccupy yourself as much with studying MOVEMENT as much as MOVES and you will gain something much greater from your observation than a single move you will gain insight into the foundations of ALL moves rather than one. Here Georges StPierre shows flawless body structure and dynamic movement as he transitions from a single leg to a head inside double leg as part of his preparation for his bout with Michael Bisping. Even a novice could look at this photo and see the apparent efficiency of the performance that comes from strong physical structure allied to efficient movement from one structure to the next.Last moments before the action begins keep it short I am known as one of the most long winded people on the internet a reputation that you, My long suffering readers, know is well deserved but when a match is just about to start, I am a man of few words indeed. I actively look to take the main themes of the training camp and crystallize them into short pithy phrases that remind the athlete in a simplified form what he or she worked so hard upon and what we believe are the keys to winning this match. This is not the time for discussion or articulation but for action. A quick collection of bullet points convey the main ideas and often serve as a valuable means of focusing upon the essential themes required for victory. I also find they can calm nerves as they convey a plan of action that the athlete can focus upon in those last adrenaline charged moments. Here, Gordon Ryan and myself run through some brief advice to a very relaxed looking Garry Tonon, who would use it perfectly to take another submission victory around ten minutes later.Know how you intend to win and practice relentlessly Here is a photo of Georges StPierre practicing the elbow strike sequence on the ground against his opponents guard position on Saturday afternoon November 4 at 3pm in Madison Square Garden. This was part of his grappleboxing program design to create enough pressure to force an experienced and mentally tough opponent like Michael Bisping to turn and expose his back to a stranglehold. Here we work the sequence from elbows to strangle in front of empty seats and curious construction workers as they prepare the arena for the big show. Around eight hours later, Mr StPierre would perform exactly this sequence in front of a packed audience under the lights and cameras. It is critical the athlete have a strong plan of attack and the means to enact it. Improvisation is a wonderful thing to observe, but so is a well conceived plan backed by a training program that builds the skills and tactics required to make it work when everything is on the line. Clarity of purpose is crucial in professional fighting. This marriage of ground striking with submission was the focus of ground training in this camp and this was the last training session before the event, held in the actual cage where it would all transpire in front of the world.Gordon Ryan vs Ralek Gracie The squad returns its focus to submission grappling as Gordon Ryan takes on Ralek Gracie in his hometown of Torrence, California on the 26 November. The squad has faced Mr Gracie before, Garry Tonon overcame a big size difference to win via leg lock. This time the match is a no time time limit submission only match. Mr Ryan will be the same weight and height as Mr Gracie. He has boldly declared that he will limit himself to only two forms of submission the juji garami armlock variations and sankaku triangle variations. Just one week after this match, Mr Ryan will take on the field at EBI 14 open weight and then the next week take on the formidable double gold world champion Yuri Simoes in a mixed submissionpoints event, going from California to Texas to NYC in three weeks against some of the world s best! That is certainly a tough way to end the year. Training and preparation is under way after going in very different directions assisting Georges StPierre prepare for his great bout with Michael Bisping. Back in the basement of despair and knowledge again and researching.Experiment with mixed results The victory by Welterweight Georges StPierre at middleweight to gain a new world title was a bold experiment with a truly great result, but was not without its problems. The fundamental problem was always going to be size. Mr StPierre always walked into the octagon around 189 pounds on fight night throughout his career. This made him a very averaged sized Welterweight. In order to move up to middle weight, Mr StPierre took on a nutritional program designed to facilitate weight gain and hold weight during the rigors of a full fight camp. The result was a disaster. Two weeks into camp he developed severe stomach pains and vomiting. Initially it was suspected that he had an illness, but all tests came back negative. The situation deteriorated to the point that for two weeks of a six week camp there was no training at all. At a critical point we gave him a two day window to either get back in the gym or call off the fight. The first grappling workout he had he vomited heavily prior to workout and then went to work. The next day he had the worst standing sparring session I have ever seen him have. Finally the stomach issue issue resolved itself to a degree where he could train satisfactorily and the workouts improved dramatically though the vomiting continued all the way up to the day of the fight. He was eating so much more than usual in an attempt to keep weight on and stay close to 200 pounds. When he went through the final weight cut the big question was, would he return to his bigger size? The answer was a resounding no. On fight night he weighed in at 190.5 almost identical to his usual fight weight as a Welterweight. The great effort to increase size just didn t work out and Mr StPierre went in to win the title as a mid sized Welterweight. It seems his body just finds a comfort zone around 190 pounds for fighting after a weight cut and no amount of work to change that has any effect. It s one thing to gain weight, it s another to do so through a fight camp culminating in a weight cut and then regain the weight. It seems his body has an optimal weight for athletic performance which cannot be drastically changedCoaches and athletes The case of Georges StPierre An interesting part of the story behind any great athlete is the influence of various teachers and coaches upon his and her development. A feature of Mr StPierre is that he had a long time affiliation with highly specialized coaches. He had specialist boxing coaches, culminating in Freddie Roach, specialist Muay Thaikick boxing coaches, of whom Firas Zahabi was foremost, specialist wrestling coaches, mostly from the Montreal Wrestling club the importance of Montreal Wrestling club, particularly Victor Zilberman and Gia Sissaouri, in Mr StPierre s development has never been sufficiently acknowledged in the MMA press they were a tremendous resource throughout his career. I was the groundjiu jitsu specialist. However, THE REAL KEY TO MR STPIERRE S SUCCESS IN MMA WAS NOT IN ANY ONE ASPECT OF THE SPORT, BUT RATHER IN THE INTERFACES BETWEEN EACH SKILL AREA SO THAT HE WAS MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE, THE KING OF UNIFYING DISPARATE SKILLS INTO A SEAMLESS WHOLE. No one coach taught him this his coaches were specialists but he was the quintessential all rounder. The only logical conclusion is that Mr StPierre is personally responsible for the majority of his development in the area that bought him his success. He was not a passive learner BUT AN INNOVATIVE SELF RELIANT INTEGRATOR. Whatever assistance myself and others may have offered, the primary credit must go to Mr StPierre himself. Watching his adaption of our specialized knowledge into his own integrated art has been a privilegeTension into triumph The day of a big headline fight is always one of prolonged tension and anxiety. When Georges StPierre goes to fight he rarely sleeps the night before and the team spends the whole day together periodically reminding ourselves of the main themes of the camp, then distracting small talk, crass humor, anything to pass time. Being the headline fight means the bout will not begin until around midnight that s a long day of anticipation. When there is a great result it is a tremendous feeling of release and happiness one so strong it is difficult to convey in words. A camp is a grueling six to eight weeks of obsession culminating in the longest and most anxious day. Most of our lives are built upon this pattern, only in less extreme form of working hard to get to a goal, the joy of getting there or the pain of failure, and then on to new goals and repeating the cycle of desire, striving, successfailure and then a new adventure but nowhere is it more clearly seen than in the path from fight camp to fight day to aftermath. In times of victory you will never see greater joy, in defeat, never will you see greater heartbreak. It is the pattern of all our lives, made more extreme by being compressed in time and amplified.Calculated risk Probably the single toughest thing for a professional athlete to do is comeback from a long period of inactivity either to to injury or retirement and come back into the competitive arena. Inactivity is death to an athlete. Combat sports in particular are very unforgiving of those who step away and then try to return into the maelstrom. History reveals a mixed bag of success and failure. Muhammad Ali came back after a three year hiatus and even with the benefit of warm up fights, lost his first title fight back in action. Sugar Ray Leonard took three years off and came back to edge Marvin Haggler in a controversial decision, then had other comebacks with mixed results. Floyd Mayweather had some brief retirements of around two years and came back successfully. Dominick Cruz had two years off for knee surgery and came back to win again. Study of great comeback success and failure convinced us of several things. If the athlete had maintained a rigorous training schedule throughout the time off and worked to develop new weapons then success was certainly possible, despite the obvious disadvantage of ring rust. Mr StPierre attacked the skills required for FINISHING ability harder striking and submissions. The time off meant that he was not under constant demand to ready himself for a next opponent, but could develop new skills. He developed very strong leg submissions from bottom position and excellent back finishes from top position working with the squad. Working with his striking coaches he blended boxing, Muay Thai and karate with increased emphasis on punching power and accuracy. The question was HOW to return. As a Welterweight? That would do little to enhance what he had already achieved. It would just be more of the same. I pushed for a match at middle weight as this would represent something genuinely new in his career and add to his legacy in a significant way. This was however, a big risk. Four years is a LONG time, plus a new weight, with no warm up. In the end, you can juggle risk and reward as much as you want the final step is always into the unknown and in that realm courage and self belief are your ultimate guide and refuge.Victory in New York! Georges StPierre came back after four years of inactivity to win the UFC middleweight title against the great Michael Bisping at Madison Square Garden tonight. It was perhaps the most dramatic fight of his incredible career. Despite his incredible past successes there have always been three constant criticisms of his work, the first, that he did not finish fights, the second, that he never fought above his weight, and the third, that he fought in a tactical fashion that made some of his fights convincing, but unexciting. Mr StPierre took time off to train and reconfigure himself in a way that would enable him to prove people wrong. He worked with Freddie Roach on his punching power and with the squad on submission skills and tied everything together with Firas Zahabi. Tonight he stormed back into the octagon and finished a great opponent in a heavier weight class above his own in a very dramatic and action packed fight. This fight had it all striking, takedowns, submissions all encased in back and forth action. When Mr StPierre first mentioned to us his desire to come back, it was me who suggested taking on Mr Bisping. My reasoning was that all his career, He had beaten tough welterweights. If he came back as a welterweight it would add nothing to his legacy. Only a significant change in octagon demeanor and weight made sense, so we began planning. All credit to Mr StPierre and his worthy opponent Mr Bisping. We are all so proud!Counting down the inversion of discipline Georges StPierre and the team, Firas Zahabi, Freddie Roach, Jorges Blanco, Gordon Ryan, Phil Nurse, Erik Owings and myself get final preparation done in midtown Manhattan. Normally the challenge for athletes is to possess the discipline to get to the gym and train hard. In fight week there is a total inversion of discipline now the discipline is required not to work out hard BUT TO STOP YOURSELF FROM WORKING OUT HARD SO THAT YOU FOCUS ON LEAVING EVERYTHING YOU HAVE FOR THE CAGE RATHER THAN EXPENDING YOURSELF IN THE GYM. Just a light sweat, reinforcing the themes of the camp the athlete has to be stopped from going too hard now. Now it s light dinner time and then sleep and weight loss tomorrow wishing you all the best from NYC and looking forward to the show at Madison Square Garden America s traditional home to combat sports.Why submissions? Most people who follow the adventures of the squad in Jiu Jitsu competition know that we put a huge emphasis on submissions both in training and competition. A natural question to ask is why is this the case? Why not just take the safer route of pointsadvantage victory? A big part of it is our philosophy of jiu jitsu. We define it as control leading to submission. We see control as a means to an end submission. Most jiu jitsu practitioners see jiu jitsu as position before submission. As such, the majority of their training time is spent on positional control with submissions seen as a icing on the cake something desirable but not essential. This is a good and sensible approach, since the point structure makes positional dominance the most likely way to win a match, and in addition, in a real fight, good position allows for strikes on the ground that can open an opponent up and even end a fight. One of the main reasons for our unusually heavy emphasis on submissions is that we see them as the GRAPPLING EQUIVALENT OF A KNOCKOUT PUNCH. Just as there is something frightening about an opponent throwing very hard punches with skill and bad intentions at you, so too, it is intimidating to come across a grappler who is not just looking to get a position on you but to BREAK you. It is the submissions of Jiu Jitsu that more than anything else, make it a MARTIAL art. Without them it would just be another form of grappling among many. These are some of the reasons we strive so hard to increase our submission skills in addition to the other skills of the sport and why we have a strong interest in sport formats that encourage athletes to exhibit their submission skills. There are many skills within Jiu Jitsu, all are necessary for success, but none catches our attention like a finely applied submission hold!Rules of engagement Any time there is a sport competition it is absolutely crucial that everyone involved have a crystal clear understanding of what the rules of the competition will be. It always surprises me how often, even at elite level, athletes and coaches are unclear about the rules of the event they are participating in. A sound practice before big events is a rules meeting where any underlying confusion can be rectified. Here, Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila, head referees of EBI tournaments, go over rules with the athletes prior to the big show. Here we discuss the exact interpretation of back escapes in overtime scenarios. At this event, we did not need any overtimes as Garry Tonon won all his matches in regulation time, however, in the past, knowledge of the rules combined with technique has been an important factor in the success or failure of athletes in these match winninglosing tie breakers. Remember, all forms of losing are a bitter pill to swallow for a hard working and passionate athlete, But none is so bitter as having everything you needed to win, and losing nonetheless because of a simple failure to research properly the rules of the event. How strange that there are so many athletes who are fully prepared to put hundreds of hours of exhausting work into physical preparation for a tournament, but who are not willing to put fifteen minutes of easy work into understanding the rules that will play a huge role in who wins and who losesOutstanding talent Rayron Gracie One of the most talented youngsters at RGA in NYC is fifteen year old, Rayron Gracie, son of the late Ryan Gracie. This young athlete is very big and powerful for such a young man, but more importantly, he is a very keen student of technique. He came to NYC to train with my dear sensei, his uncle, Renzo Gracie. In his time here we have seen an incredible rise in his effectiveness that shows tremendous promise for the future. This past weekend the young world champion got another chance to show the world his progress at the Kasai grappling event in NYC he won gold in both his weight division and absolute IN THE ADULT DIVISION!! This was no surprise to us here in the gym we see him doing extremely well against black belt adults every day, but it was certainly a shock to those watching who do not know this young man. Mr Gracie is doubtless one of the top prospects to carry the torch into the future for the first family of grappling. It s a pleasure to see his progress under my sensei and his cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor Gracie and also our great mutual friend, Bernardo Faria. Look for more great performances from this young man this is just the beginning! Exciting news Just released today is the news that a new grappling organization kasaigrappling will be running a premium event in Brooklyn NYC December 9th with the headline event being Gordon Ryan against the great Yuri Simoes. Both Men won gold in their weight divisions in the ADCC world championships this year. Mr Simoes also won gold in the previous world championships and now has the great distinction of being a double gold medalist in two different weight categories. He is one ADCC weight class heavier than Mr Ryan. The two have met before, at EBI 6 Openweight, with Mr Ryan winning via strangle in overtime. However, Mr Simoes was not familiar with the rule set and had fought an exhausting battle with Garry Tonon in the previous match. This time he is working in a much more familiar rule set ten minutes submission only, then if no result, six minutes overtime with all submissions legal, but IBJJF type points scored though no advantages there must be a positive score. It s a tremendous match up between two great athletes in their top form. Mr Ryan will be juggling training in Gi, EBI open weight training, MMA training and this event as well! Should be an interesting holiday season! 3 Very happy to hear about the emergence of a new high level grappling show in NYC it is run by Rolles Gracie a man who truly understands the game and the athletes this first show sounds like a firecracker! There will also be a superstar eight man tournament on the same night that I will talk about soon!It s a family affair Proud moment for Garry Tonon as he wins EBI 13 in perfect fashion every match via submission in regulation time to take the maximum prize money and for the first time in front of his family as Mom and sister came all the way to California to watch his thrilling performance. Here we are backstage after the big show as a very youthful looking Mr Tonon shaving the beard and dropping a little weight makes him look like a junior high schooler tells his family about his adventures and his sister reminds him he still sucks and mom tells him to wash the dishes after dinner. It was a joy to see the pride on his family s faces after such a stellar performance and the happiness that that gave Mr Tonon. Back in NYC now heading to RGA and then on to the Bronx to see how the bombers are doing with their submission grappling training.Flawless victory Garry Tonon won an unprecedented fifth EBI title here in LA tonight every match by submission three heel hooks and a sankaku triangle variation to win the maximum possible prize Twenty thousand shekels. It was one of the most impressive performances in the history of the event. Mr Tonon defeated the man he narrowly lost to via points at ADCC Wagner Rocha but tonight he turned it around with a brutal heel hook variation to win a decisive victory. The tightness and power of his locks was matched only by the relaxed fluidity of his positional movements into attack positions. We are all so proud of his tremendous achievement. Congratulations also to some other incredible performances tonight. 10th planet athletes, PJ Barch and Nathan Orchard went through some absolute wars to make their way up the tournament brackets. Old rival Wagner Rocha had some incredibly tough matches and prevailed all the way through to the final. It made for a very exciting event overall that was a pleasureto be a small part of. Hope you all enjoyed the show. Now it s back to NYC to prepare for Georges StPierre back in the UFC and then Garry Tonon in a combat jiu jitsu event back here in LA! Thanks again to Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila for putting on another amazing show and helping take this great sport to a new level.Teaching in California The squad had a great day of teaching in LA today. I had the pleasure of teaching at the dojo of my great friend Shawn Williams 5starmartialarts It was great to see the Californians are really improving in the leg lock game! Mr Williams students along with some talented visitors went through some of our counter attack game and did a very fine job assimilating difficult material and made it work well. There is no doubt in my mind that the overall level of submission grappling is improving around the nation as I observe it in my teaching and traveling. Mr Williams and I talked at length afterwards about emerging trends in contemporary jiu jitsu, he has some fascinating views on this topic which I am sure he will talk about when he commentates for big jiu jitsu events in the future. Afterwards Mr Tonon went through his final workout for EBI 13 tomorrow night at the Orpheum in Downtown LA. He is looking very sharp and lean for this 155 pound event. Now it s back to the hotel room to map out the remainder of Georges StPierre s grappling training for the UFC show on November 4. Wishing you all the best from LA!Danaher airport curse continues My propensity to run full speed into disaster at airports continues. Despite being early for the first time in my life to JFK, a major slowdown of the security boarding system combined with massive Friday night crowd created the longest lines I have seen in my twenty fives years in NYC. Then a long walk, a bus ride to a separate gate area followed by another long walk to furtherest extremity of terminal, a last sprint on crippled leg to gate and I was last person boarding with barely a minute to spare! Somewhere in a past life I must have DEEPLY offended the gods of flight. A strange thing about the worlds greatest city it is serviced by the worst three airports I have ever encountered. Perhaps they could go all the way and add burning hoops and scorpion trapdoors to make getting to ones plane an even greater challenge. whydontothercitieshavethisproblem. Now it s on to LA to meet up with Messrs Tonon and Ryan to get ready for another big challenge in EBI 13 at our old home of the Orpheum theater. I shall teach a seminar tomorrow at my good friend and team mate, Shawn Williams at 5starmartialarts It will be a pleasure to see our West Coast friends and fans again See you all soon!Young guns running amok Squad apprentices kohai jasonraubjj89 nick.ronan and frankrosenthal11 dominated the action last weekend while we were away training Mr StPierre and Mr Tonon. The Rise grappling event featured east coast talent at the center of the action was Matt Serra BJJ and RGA. Two of Mr Serra s students train regularly with us in the basement. Jason Rau won his superfight via heel hook submission, Nick Ronan had an outstanding performance using our back and front headlock systems to strangle four opponents back to back and take gold in the main tournament and Frank Rosenthal won a superfight via submission in short order. Great to see these talented young athletes going out and developing their resume and their brands and doing it in the best way possible convincing victory out on the local stage with an eye for bigger wins ahead a fine example to all those among you looking to build your name in the sport. A big hello to our brothers out on the island at serrabjj same lineage working together. Mr Serra was always an inspiration to me and it s a pleasure to help the progression of his students in any way. Back in NYC now! Heading to the basement to see how everyone is doing and get our training back on then off to LA and return to Montreal to get Mr Tonon and Mr StPierre ready for action!One step at a time When competing at world championship level the finishes don t come easy. At the recent ADCC world championships, Gordon Ryan shocked the world by exhibiting a submission rate of around seventy percent across two weight divisions despite the fact that half his opponents were former champions andor medalists. A big part of his success in this regard is our approach to working through resistance one step at a time. This requires that we first identify where we want to bewhat we want to accomplish, then what problems the opponent is creating for us that are currently preventing us from getting there. Then we must establish what ORDER these problems need to be addressed if we are to work systematically through each problem towards our desired end. This requires a certain calmness on our part. It s difficult to solve problems in a state of agitation or excitement. It also requires a clear goal on our part and the ability to identify the obstacles in front of it being created by our opponent. Lastly, we need the ability to put the problems in a list from first to last and the knowledge of how to solve each in turn. Working along these lines every day in the gym creates the results you saw Mr Ryan achieve. It was surprising to many to see such a young athlete working so calmly and methodically against very dangerous opponents to get breakthroughs. This calm step by step approach is the one I reinforce every day in the gym with my athletes. The physical speed that different athletes pursue it varies, but the mental process underlying it never does.Jiu jitsu and friendship Though the purpose of jiu jitsu is ostensibly that of controlling an opponent in ways that lead to his submission, there are other elements involved in the study of the art that run deeper than this. Perhaps the most important is friendship. Jiu jitsu is fought alone against a single opponent, but it is practiced in a community. That community, due to its strong sense of shared goals, frustrations, hopes, dreams, fears, failures and successes, becomes extremely tight. When one of our number falls, we all feel the jolt. One of RGA s most beloved students, the inestimable and highly unorthodox black belt Shy Aces, has a dear friend who has fallen upon hard times and needs help. Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan and myself will teach a seminar in our home gym The Renzo Gracie Academy in Manhattan to help raise funds for Shy Aces friend. It will be this Saturday at RGA at 11am until 1pm. We will be showing our approach to jiu jitsu to anyone interested in coming by. You can call RGA or contact Shy Aces on Facebook yep, there s only one . Shy tells me it s nearly sold out now but we will do our best to get you in. Gordon Ryan will teach tasteful tattoo selection, social media decorum and manners, modesty training for young adults and how to avoid overdosing on protein powder. Garry Tonon will teach hair coloring technique, how not to drive an automobile if you wish to live a long life, and prioritizing chicks over cash and championships. Shy Aces will teach an introduction to car jacking and high speed chase strategies. I will teach some jiu jitsu. Hope you can make it if you are in the city! Nothing beats a strangle I have always given a special priority to strangles in my approach to jiu jitsu. At the higher levels of the sport there is tremendous resistance to any form of submission hold. Occasionally you will run into an opponent who simply chooses not to submit to a well applied joint lock and is prepared to keep fighting even after taking extensive damage. The truth is that the decision to stop fighting after being put in a tight joint lock is exactly that a decision. In the case of a strangle, once it is well applied, THE DECISION TO KEEP FIGHTING IS NO LONGER YOURS. Whether you choose to keep fighting or not is no longer up to you, since if you choose not to tap you will simply pass out the outcome of the match will not be altered by your decision. Thus in any highly competitive situation, if you are presented with a choice between a stranglehold and a joint lock, all other things being equal I ALMOST ALWAYS FAVOR THE STRANGLEHOLD of course there will be some exceptions to this general rule. Here, Garry Tonon does a good job of first attaining the positional control that makes strangulation possible, now comes the battle to apply the strangle itself, never easy on a skilled opponent.Traveling band Garry Tonon and myself at LaGuardia airport getting ready to board plane to Montreal. Going back to where it all started MMA with Mr StPierre. Another huge upcoming challenge for the Montreal native and the squad is happy to be a small part of it. Thankfully traveling with Mr Tonon ensured that I would actually be on time for the first time in my life You know it s a sad day when Mr Tonon is the most responsible person in the group!! Looking forward to another challenge whilst also getting Mr Tonon ready for EBI 13 in two weeks! To all my students in NYC don t forget our beloved sensei Renzo Gracie is teaching the big afternoon class tomorrow Monday afternoon he carries a mountain of knowledge within him and really knows how to communicate it Take advantage! Can t wait to hear all about it when I get back! See you all Wednesday! Renzo Gracie Academy does it right One of the great features of The Renzo Gracie Academy is the depth of teachers that enables our team to take on multiple projects simultaneously and get it done. Tonight Jake Shields, Garry Tonon and myself fly to Montreal to train Georges StPierre in preparation for his upcoming bout with the great Micheal Bisping on November 4th in Madison Square Garden here in NYC. That means I won t be in town to teach the infamous Monday afternoon class at RGA. However great news my dear Sensei, Renzo Gracie himself is taking over! Tomorrow the noon class will be filmed for Brazilian television as Mr Gracie runs the show. Let me tell you now this is not something you want to miss. I always try to tell people what it was like to learn from Mr Gracie in my early days and always struggle to do it justice. Now is your chance to see it for yourself you will love it! Can t wait to work with Mr StPierre and can t wait to hear the stories of my sensei teaching in his unique and unrivaled style! Great week ahead for RGA in NYC!Back to our roots The squad initially made its name in the submission only grappling scene. That was a deliberate policy on our part. My three main students, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan were adherents of my belief that jiu jitsu must be understood as control that leads to submission. Submission only tournaments were the best way to express our approach to jiu jitsu and bring attention to it. Our favorite venue was EBI as it offered an exciting rule set, well run organization and great visibility. Since then, the squad has moved into other rule sets and venues with great success, but we never forgot where we started and what we stand for. Coming up soon we go back to our roots for EBI 13 The lightweights. Garry Tonon returns to the Orpheum theater against a stacked field including outstanding ADCC world championships medalists, Wagner Rocha and AJ Agazarm, two 10th planets standouts, former EBI champion, Nathan Orchard along with the extremely talented PJ Barch Also there will be Bill Cooper former EBI finalist and as with every EBI, new talented athletes fighting to make their way into the upper echelons. Mr Tonon is beginning his journey into MMA now, but is anxious to train hard and put in another strong showing in the event that did so much to spur his development. Keep your eyes on this one! It s going to be a great show!Squad senpai officially loses his mind goes on tattoo rampage in midtown Manhattan Gordon Ryan fresh off the most successful debut performance in ADCC world championships history decided a good first move upon return would be a bucketful of new tattoos 33. Mr Ryan s earlier tattoos are a constant source of banter and ridicule from team mates here in the blue basement. This time he appears to have put more thought into the project and had the Indian goddess Kali, some of whose followers formed a sect based around strangulation hmmmm....perhaps he is taking that back attack system thing too seriously! Along with, how surprising, some King motifs Whatever one thinks of the tattoos, I have to admire his dedication to the project a marathon nine hour session to get it done quickly so he can return to training in the least time. I hope this does not set a precedent where every time he wins something he gets another giant tattoo there s not much room left at this point!Australian jiu jitsu gets a hero One of the features of this years ADCC world champions was the growing internationalization of jiu jitsuGrappling. Russia had a strong team and though they did not win medals this time, they impressed with their skills. The local Finnish team had much to cheer about with a standout performance by 10th Planet representative, Elvira Karppinen. USA had a great showing via Gordon Ryan, JT Torres and Orlando Sanchez among others. One of the really unexpected breakthrough performances however, came from the Australian team. This was a shock to many, but not to me. Most of my family has moved to Australia and after my hip replacement surgery I went down to see them. I taught seminars there and was impressed by the enthusiasm and skill of the locals. At one gym in Melbourne my demonstration partner for a three hour seminar on leg locks was Lachlan Giles, who had distinguished himself in EBI events here in the US. After the seminar he talked to me about the local team and a talented fellow called Craig Jones. I got to see him up close at EBI 11 he did not win, but I thought his game looked very impressive and he and Lachlan were doing a great job developing their game, even having some success with some of the material we worked at the seminar. On the first day of ADCC, Mr Jones was absolutely one of the most impressive performers, with two fine submission victories over heavily favored Leandro Lo and Maurilo Santana both extremely well established world champions. This is increasing internationalization of the sport and greater diversity on the medal podium is a very healthy thing for the growth of the sport. It is also a welcome reminder that anyone in any location from any gym can beat the best if they create a sound training program and have the discipline to stick to it. Well done Mr Jones and hats off to the Australian jiu jitsu culture that created such great competitors in relative isolation from the more well known centers of the sport. Hiding an ace up your sleeve An odd thing about many great jiu jitsu players is that very often they are known primarily through their favorite moves tokuiwaza. People expect to see them in competition and they become that athletes signature move. Many great athletes however, are also extremely good at other moves and often use them in the gym with great success but for some reason the opportunity to use them under the lights on the big stage just never seems to arise and that move just never gets used publicly. This is often a good thing for an athlete, for it means they have a highly refined and developed weapon that no one knows about and which thus has great surprise value. A good example occurred in the recent ADCC world championships in Finland. Gordon Ryan has one of the most devastating guillotine strangles I have ever seen. Every day in the gym I see him use it to great effect yet in competition his leg locks and back strangles are so successful he does not get many opportunities to use it. In fact he never used his guillotine in a high profile event previously. In the finals of the 88kg division Gordon came up against the great Keenan Cornelius. The two had met before in a very different rules format and Mr Ryan had won via concentrated leg attacks leading to a final breakthrough. This time it would be very different. Mr Ryan focused upon controlling the head and shoulders rather than the legs and hips and sank his guillotine from a standing start and controlled it to the ground for the win. His teammates always knew he had a world class guillotine but few others did. The excellence of his execution combined with the surprise of its use got the breakthrough when Mr Ryan needed it most giving him the rare honor of winning gold in a debut performance. We all have our favorite moves just because you have a reputation for some moves does not limit you to those. Keep developing more and who knows when you really need them they will be there for you to get the breakthrough that your usual big guns may not be able to secure. Photo banejitsuAggression A key feature of good jiu jitsu is a spirit of active aggression throughout a match. When I say aggression, I don t mean it as we do in normal daily discourse, where it typically has a negative connotation and usually implies antisocial behavior. In a sport context it simply means the desire to actively pursue victory, in particular, the most complete victory possible, in the case of jiu jitsu submission victory. It is a desire to go out and actively pursue the ideal of the sport control leading to submission. One of the biggest problems in previous ADCC events has been slow paced tactical play where athletes sought to win by doing the least work possible, by taking the least risk. This is a very successful strategy for many, but it runs contrary to the spirit of the sport and makes for disastrous viewing. The most popular competitors have always been those who took risks and had the skills to make those risks profitable. I was very happy to see the officials at this years world championships actively calling out stalling penalties on a regular basis to keep the action moving. The result was a much faster paced event, fewer overtime periods, and a very high rate of submission for such an elite field of athletes. Some of the biggest names in the sport got caught in submissions this year and it made for very compelling viewing. In general I prefer the athletes to do the work of winning and losing themselves, with as little referee intervention as possible, but this ADCC showed how good work by impartial officials can significantly improve an event and help keep it in line with the ideals of the sport. Coaches must take the bulk of the responsibility for making athletes compete with an aggressive spirit, but some help from competent and fair officials is a welcome helping hand. I came away form the event thinking it was one of the most exciting in years and hope that this trend can be extended into future events. Photo banejitsuReducing intensity increasing effectiveness When preparing for a major competition, the intensity of the training sessions must be correlated with the time remaining before the event. Our camp for ADCC 2017 put a heavy emphasis on standing grapplingtakedowns tachi waza which is typically more physically demanding than ne waza ground grappling . In the final week in Finland prior to the event, I eliminated live standing grappling from the workout and focused entirely upon drilling and limited ne waza sparring. This was to give the athletes a chance to physically recover from a grueling two and half month camp that had severely tested their bodies and to reduce the likelihood of last minute injuries. In the final days it is very unlikely that any additional training will improve performance there simply is not enough time to adopt new techniques. Instead the focus is upon coming in healthy and rested. Here, Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza go through ashi garami drills three days before they got to use them so effectively on the big stage at the world championships. Learning to vary the intensity of workouts is a big part getting athletes to peak at the right time. For those who are not actively competing, it is still a crucial concept. Varying workout intensity is a fine way increasing longevity in the sport by decreasing physical demands on days when your body is not ready for high output. Not every day needs to be maximal effort. I would rather see an athlete consistently workout seven days a week with big variations in intensity than say, twice a week at maximum intensity over the course of a year. Just as we don t try to live every day of our lives at maximum intensity but rather follow a pattern of easy days with intense days interspersed among them, so too, we ought to act similarly with our workouts.Counter offense One of the key themes of our approach to jiu jitsu is a heavy emphasis upon counter offense. Whenever your opponent goes to attack, he must to some degree open himself up in order to initiate that attack. If the initial attack can be contained or nullified, he will, for a short period of time, be left in a vulnerable state of extension and open to your own attacks. Some of the most frustrating experiences we can have in jiu jitsu involve attacking an overly defensive opponent who will not open up at all. Counter offense gets around this problem by allowing him the initial attack so that his defensive posture is broken. Most people are happy enough merely to defend any given attack BUT THE BEST DO NOT SEE AN OPPONENT S ATTACK AS SOMETHING TO DEFEND, BUT RATHER AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO LAUNCH THEIR OWN ATTACK. This requires more than technique. It requires a mindset that is not satisfied with stopping an opponent from doing what he wants to do, but only with using that as an opportunity to do what WE want to do. Here, Gordon Ryan stops the single leg takedown attempt of the great Keenan Cornelius and is already thinking about how he can use his opponents over extended position to his advantage in this case via a combination of Kimura grip and sumi gaeshi throw. Always remember that there are two main families of attacks in jiu jitsu direct attacks and counter attacks. If you do not fully exploit the latter you are losing half of your attacking opportunities.Reflections on ADCC 2017 The lesson of Xande Ribeiro One of the stand out performers at this years ADCC world championships was doubtless the great Xande Ribeiro. He had some truly memorable matches including an epic showdown with the man generally believed to be the best currently active jiu jitsu player in the world, Marcus Almeida Buchecha. In addition, Gordon Ryan s toughest victory was over Mr Ribeiro in a match so close it could easily have been ruled a draw in any other setting. An interesting feature of Mr Ribeiro s game this year was that he chose a very traditional style he pulled closed guard on many of his opponents, especially those he believed were better than him in standing position. In an age of leg locking and innovative open guards, this is rarely seen in contemporary no gi tournaments. It was a brilliant decision however, as Mr Ribeiro was able to apply three of the best arm bar attacks from bottom position closed guard in ADCC history on very tough opponents. The Technical precision and composure of his attacks was impressive not only to the crowd, but also the other athletes watching from the sidelines. Mr Ribeiro s brilliant ADCC performance paints a very clear lesson to all athletes in the sport WHICH TECHNIQUES YOU SELECT IN PURSUIT OF VICTORY IS NEVER AS IMPORTANT AS THE DEGREE OF TECHNICAL PRECISION WITH WHICH YOU APPLY THEM. Don t obsess over which techniques are best, the truth is, almost all the major techniques of the sport can be used to attain victory worry more about how good you are at applying whatever techniques you choose for your arsenal. Trends come and go but technical excellence and precision in the execution of your chosen moves never goes out of style. Mr Ribeiro s fine performance was all the proof you need.Memories ADCC 2017 The recent world championships in Finland were doubtless a source of great pride for me due to the accomplishments of my students first for qualifying an unprecedented number of entrants and secondly for fine performances in the event itself. One of my favorite memories however, and one that I shall treasure for all my life, was my time cornering my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie in his Masters rematch with the former ADCC champion, Sanae Kikuta. They had fought an epic MMA match years ago, with sensei winning via his legendary guillotine stranglehold. Once again they had a closely contest match with Mr Gracie winning a very close bout due to higher work ratepassivity penalty. It was a great honor to watch sensei prepare for and contest his match I have watched him spar ten thousand times over two decades in the gym seen changes and adaptations in his game as he gained in age and experience to watch it all up close and be a small part of it was a memory I shall always cherish. Photo banejitsuIt s a long way to the top One of the more remarkable aspects of our younger team members at the ADCC world championships is how little training time they have had in total. Gordon Ryan s total training time in the sport is substantially less than the time most of his opponents have been black belts. Nicky Ryan has trained less than three years. Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza around four. Part of the reason for this is the heavy emphasis I put in truly progressive, directionally fixed training programs. Another part of it however, is the dedication my students had to enter competitions whenever possible traveling long distances and enduring tough camps for each one. My students all had an excellent sense of progressive competition. People know that ADCC and EBI are currently the major no gi events. No one however, gets straight to the big shows. The pattern all athletes must follow is to begin small and build incrementally over time until you have sufficient experience to make waves among the best in the sport. I can think of no better example than Gordon Ryan. For years he tested himself in small shows against unknown opponents. Building upon each minor success until by the time he got to his first ADCC show, he was more than ready to get to the first place position on the podium and gain a higher medal account than any athlete in ADCC history in a debut performance. Here, from some time ago, Mr Ryan battles the impressive grappling and MMA star, Antonio Shoeface Carlos Junior as part of his quest to get to the highest level. That day he prevailed via triangle sankaku submission another rung in the ladder leading to his deepest goals. This idea of incremental progress is just as important to those of you who choose not to compete or have limited competition aspirations. The only difference will be that you use different yard sticks appropriate to your different goals.Reflections on ADCC 2017 The rise of submission only grappling. The last few years have seen a significant growth of a new facet of grappling the submission only movement. It was spearheaded by Mr Eddie Bravo s EBI shows, which quickly gave rise to others based on a similar format. Unfortunately the movement ran into a lot of entrenched resistance when it first emerged as most new ideas do. For years I heard numerous complaints that these shows attracted only mediocre talent and exhibited only limited skill sets. I just smiled and said nothing. I knew the criticism was based on the erroneous idea that a new movement would emerge fully mature. That is not the way the world works. ANY NEW MOVEMENT TAKES TIME TO DEVELOP. Submission grappling is no different. ADCC is almost twenty years in existence. If you look at early ADCC competition it often looks amateurish compared with contemporary events. EBI type competition has only been around a few years. It was a pleasure to see athletes who have figured prominently in submission only formats do so well at this years ADCC. Gordon Ryan, Wagner Rocha, Craig Jones and Elvira Karppinen were either Medalists or were able to take on and defeat prominent champions in ways that would have to impress even the harshest critics of submission only events. Our squad had its beginning in sub only events, in particular EBI, We don t forget that and will always be grateful for Mr Bravo giving us a great format to make our start in. I am happy that the world got to see that sub only grapplers can play a strong role in other forms of grappling. Rather than see ADCC and submission only as opposed formats, I hope the effect will be to break artificial and unreasonable divides between them. Given more time I expect submission only athletes will mature and develop in much the same way ADCC athletes have and lead to many dual champions in both styles each has so much to offer with regards skill development of the athletes involved.Golden boy Gordon Ryan had the weekend of his life at ADCC world championships the grappling Olympics. In the most successful debut performance in the history of the sport he won gold in his weight category and silver in the open weight category. There were too many notable features in his performance to list them all in one post, but I will say this is one of the most memorable performances in my entire coaching career it was a privilege to play a small role in his preparation and then observe up close this incredible debut. Mr Ryan is not even close to his full potential and is determined to improve for future world championships. This is only the second time an American has won two medals at one ADCC Mark Kerr won double gold in the early days of ADCC. Our whole team is so proud of his great accomplishment, as are his Mom and Dad, who traveled all the way from New Jersey to watch their Uber talented progeny. So much great work from the whole squad I will say more in the near future. I hope you all enjoyed the big show. Happy that the approach we bring to jiu jitsu and try hard to communicate to you all through words and deeds had such a strong showing. I am so proud that my dear sensei Renzo Gracie was there he had a fine win today which I shall talk about very soon and that I could make him happy with the teams performance. Wishing you all the best from Finland. I will head home to NYC soon to begin the training of Georges StPierre for his comeback fight November 4. Thank you to ADCC for another great show thank you to all the athletes who participated so many legends among them Your presence and achievements fill me with pride for our sport.Great first day for the squad Very proud of all our team members who put on such a strong performance today. Our two Canadian boys Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza both had great matches attacking relentlessly and impressing the crowd with their submissions arsenal. Young Nicky Ryan at sixteen was by far the tournaments youngest competitor He had a fine match against a black belt no gi world champion lost narrowly on points, but impressed everyone with his attacking style in such an elite event. Tom DeBlass had two titanic matches at heavyweight, winning the first and losing the second on a tight referees decision against last adcc world champion. Jake Shields looked great in his match but as he seemed to be controlling his way to win he got caught on a sweep and then additional points as he tried to recover impressive as he was fighting two weight categories above his own to avoid clashes with team mates in his actual weight category 170 pounds. The two standout performances came from squad seniors, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. Mr Tonon won tough matches against the Brazilian trials winner and also the very talented world champion Marcelo Manfra. Mr Ryan had a tough match against his very talented and tactically sound rival Dillon Danis taking a narrow decision win due to getting a full leg locking position just as time expired and then getting close to a back position in overtime. He saved his best performance for his second match against multiple world and former ADCC champion, Romulo Barral. In a classic display of positional play, Mr Ryan was able to take home down, pass his guard twice, then take his back and finish with a tightly applied stranglehold. Day 1 is over now it s time to prepare for tomorrow, recharge batteries, plot and plan and head into day 2 So proud of our young athletes performance in the Olympics of grappling they will be back even stronger next time! Excited for the continuation tomorrow hope you are all well and enjoying the show! Quick salute to our Australian friends Australia had an amazing day through the incredible work of Craig Jones who had a breakout performance, Submitting two jiu jitsu legends todaySquad gets last light workout in When the squad travels, we always like to get a light workout in the day before competition. Today we worked out in a place like no other before! This jiu jitsu gym in Finland is a former nuclear bomb shelter! It is deep underground encased in reinforced concrete! It looks like something from a James Bond movie a jiu jitsu lair! We work out every day on the blue basement back in NYC, but this is a whole new level of dungeon! The squad was joined by beloved sensei Renzo Gracie and superstars Lovato Jr and Xandre Ribeiro among others. It was great watching everyone roll together and listeningwatching a great interchange of jiu jitsu ideas and concepts used by so many great champions. Experiences like these are always among my favorite coaching memories. Now it s off to rules meeting and official weigh in So proud of Nicky Ryan nickyryanbjj who has just been announced as a starting athlete at the 2017 ADCC world championships under 66kg division after another athlete failed to make weight. Mr Ryan won bronze medals at both North American adcc trials and has now won the distinction of being the youngest ever competitor in the history of the event Just sixteen years old he won two bronze medals at trials at fifteen!. At a bodyweight of only 134 pounds he will not only be the youngest competitor but also by far the smallest. Here Mr Ryan orders a big dinner to try to beef up for the weekend A jealous Garry Tonon lets him know how he feels about the youngster eating like a king while he can eat no more than salad Hats off to young Mr Ryan who has come such a long way in such a short time representing his country after just two and half years of training and setting a record before he even steps on the mat Unknown talents of the squad most people know the squad has some very respectable submission skills tonight I learned they have a whole other side to them that I never knew. After evening the workout it was time for dinner fearless leader Garry Tonon immediately went to the kitchen with his able assistants Matthew Tesla and Ethan Crelinsten where he immediately went to work cooking a splendid feast for the entire squad!! Here he is doing his best Gordon Ramsey impression as Gordon Ryan calls out instructions from his Anthony Bourdain book in the background. Amazingly no one has died of food poisoning yet. Nicky Ryan appeared to eat more weight of food than his actual body weight while Tom DeBlass drank from a massive bottle of Pepsi in between salmon and asparagus truly the diet of champions! They say from chaos comes order there was a hell of a lot of chaos in the kitchen but a very orderly dinner was served, so I guess its true!! Now its bed time and on the road to the competition tomorrow Sharpening the edge The squad went through drills and sparring in Finland today and tonight. Everyone looking sharp as the days count down. Finland is a deeply impressive country it reminds me a lot of the Southern parts of my old homeland, New Zealand. The people are extremely sensible, practical and extraordinarily well educated. All those I have met are multi lingual and well versed in world history and politics. Tomorrow we will go through another two sessions, joined just now by big Tom DeBlass who came of the plane plus a three hour train ride and straight on to the mats to put in great work always an inspiration to the younger students In between I will teach a seminar on leg locking to our Finnish hosts and fans at JKL Fight Club where we love to train. Now its back home to plot and plan over some good local food Wishing you all well from Nordic Europe!Bigger opponents Probably the single biggest problem that beginning students will face and one which will continue to be problematic through their entire jiu jitsu career is that of dealing with bigger opponents. The game is hard enough already, but becomes significantly more difficult when your opponent enjoys a size advantage. There are a great number of methods that can be employed to lessen the effects of size difference in grappling, but the two I put the most emphasis upon are back positions and ashi garami. These are the two positions where a bigger opponent will find it more difficult to employ his weight advantage over you. In the case of ashi garami, your opponents weight goes into the floor rather than directly down on to you. Success or failure in the ashi garami position is almost entirely a question of who knows more about the subtleties of leg and foot positioning. Due to the fact that bodyweight cannot be used by either player in this position to pin the other, knowledge of limb positioning becomes the rubric of success rather than size. Bear in mind however, that this good feature comes at a price. By its very nature ashi garami, prevents you as well as your opponent from using bodyweight to pin him, so it tends to have a very different form of control from that typically used in jiu jitsu which takes a lot of getting used to. Moreover, it entails a much greater degree of exposure to counters than the more standard attacking positions of the sport and thus requires a very deep knowledge of safe and unsafe positioning if it is to be used successfully at higher levels. Once students learn to get around these issues they quickly learn that the various variations of ashi garami, along with back positions, represent two of the very best means of reducing the effects of bodyweight disadvantage in grappling.All rational approaches to combat are founded upon the idea of creating an asymmetry between your ability to attack your opponent successfully and his ability to attack you successfully. The greater the asymmetry, the greater will be the chance of your success. There are many fine attacking positions in the sport of jiu jitsu, ashi garami, the mounted position, knee on stomach variations etc. However, none can match the power of the rear mountback position when it comes to creating this asymmetry in your favor. The very nature of the human body is well adapted to dealing with threats from the front, but poorly set up to deal with threats from the rear. Much of your training then, most be devoted to getting to, maintaining and finishing from this position. Here, young Nicky Ryan works hard on his skills utilizing our back attack system, an area that he excels in.Mixing things up Great training in the Monday afternoon class in the blue dungeon today as two different directions of grappling training took place alongside each other. The squad got ready for ADCC grappling world championships while Georges StPierre got ready for his MMA fight on November 4 in the UFC. Its always a fun and challenging coaching experience to look for the common ground between them and also emphasize the important differences in ways that help prepare the athletes for very different challenges. Somewhere in between the takedowns, the positional advantages and the submissions are the answers for both. Great to see old rivals Georges StPierre georgesstpierre and Jake Shields jakeshields getting each other strong for upcoming challenges. The Ryan Brothers gordonlovesjiujitsu nickyryanbjj continue to amaze me with their progress. Garry Tonon garrytonon has been electrifying the training room lately with his skills. Wonderful to see my great friend Shawn Williams shawnwilliamsbjj back on his hometown mats at RGA along with the very talented wrestler Kyle Cerminara. What a room! Always great to see the fine balance of competition and cooperation between athletes, friends and training partners that is the core of fighting to the top in sports and in life.Reflections on my Sensei One of the most valuable attributes a jiu jitsu player can have in order to make sustained progress over long periods of time is a SENSE OF CURIOSITY. Quite often I talk to senior instructors who complain of getting burnt out through constant teaching. Burn out is a real problem for hard working students, competitors and teachers alike. The root cause of the problem is a sense that one is doing the same thing every day without progress. This feeling can be soul destroying and in some cases, even push people out of the sport. The best antidote to this problem is to nurture a sense of curiosity. When you are fascinated by the nature of your field of study and constantly asking how you can know more about it, investigating new ways of looking at and understanding it, and experimenting with new ways to perform within it, burnout will rarely be a problem. My sensei, Renzo Gracie and I are almost exactly the same age. I did not start jiu jitsu until the very late age of twenty seven I had done other martial arts, but in jiu jitsu I was a very late starter as very few outside Brazil had really heard of BJJ prior to 1992. When I started jiu jitsu as a white belt, MY SENSEI HAD ALREADY BEEN LEARNING IT FOR TWENTY TWO YEARS! Yet at no time have I ever seen him tired or jaded of teaching or learning techniques. Today we talked about guard passing and he was very excited to show some new concepts of guard passing he has been working on lately showing the very same enthusiasm and drive I would see daily when I was a white belt more than two decades ago it was fascinating stuff. It was a great reminder of how that sense of endless curiosity is the root of enthusiasm and success in both teaching and learning the moment a man loses that, it is only a matter a time until his study and teaching suffers. I believe the key is to always keep one question in mind at all times IS THERE A BETTER WAY OF DOING THINGS THAN YOU AND YOUR PEERS ARE CURRENTLY USING? As long as you push this question to the forefront of your consciousness the game will always be exciting and continue to make you grow just as it does for my sensei.Escape, evasion and following through When learning submission holds, one typically begins with the skill of GETTING TO THE LOCK. That is difficult enough on good opponents, however, as you go against good opponents you will soon find a whole new challenge awaits you THE SKILL OF FIGHTING THROUGH AND OVERCOMING SKILLED and sometimes wildunorthodox RESISTANCE TO THE LOCK AND GETTING TO THE FINISH. You must be able to anticipate and counter common defensive measures to your attacks, mapping out strategies ahead of time as to what you will do when the usual escapes are attempted. Sometimes when unorthodox escapes are attempted, you must be able to improvise on the spot. Remember NO ONE WILL REMEMBER HOW MANY SUBMISSIONS YOU ATTEMPT, ONLY HOW MANY YOU FINISH. Constantly work on your ability to follow through your submissions against resistance. Live sparring is the most important form of training for this. Here, Nicky Ryan follows the unorthodox rolling movement of his opponent in the midst of a triangle sankaku attack, following the motion through to a mounted triangle to get the finish.Two different pairs of eyes will look at the same event and see two entirely different narratives Whenever we look at some event unfold, there is an interpretive element where we fit the event into a story mold that allows us to make sense of it. This is an essential part of our human nature. Nonetheless, it can have a limiting effect where it makes us see certain things and completely ignore others. Sometimes those things we ignore are the very things we ought to be focusing upon. As such, its always a healthy thing to consult other well informed and knowledgeable peoples opinions or thoughts on a given subjectevent that you are working on. At the very least they will often make you question your own view more thoroughly and in ways that help your project. In some cases they can save you from making potentially disastrous oversights either way its a usually a good thing. Very often I consult the views of my senior students and teachers and almost always find some profit in it. There is no need to do everything yourself at all times, and often there are dangers of oversight associated with such an approach. THE SKILL YOU WANT IS NOT SO MUCH SELF SUFFICIENCY, BUT THE ABILITY TO DISCERN VALUABLE INPUT FROM ALL RELEVANT SOURCES AND MESH THESE WITH YOUR OWN TO CREATE IMPROVEMENTS.Counting down to the world championships There is nothing like the ADCC world grappling championships to bring together the best no gi grappling talent on the planet. Our primary direction in training and style is towards submission only style, but no submission grappler would deny that ADCC currently brings the greatest talent pool in one place every two years. Its an amazing event to be a part of it has a an international flavor that makes it stand out from other events. Last time it was in the homeland of the sport Brazil this time it is in the Nordic nation of Finland. I am extremely proud that our small team succeeded in qualifying more people for the event than any other. Half of our competition team are youngsters in their first adcc, but I am confident they will qualify and compete for many more. Training has been a joy to watch and the change in competition rules from our usual events created new directions in training are exciting for me as a coach and for the athletes created a great deal of growth in a short time. Everyone is looking forward to meeting up with the worlds best and growing as a result. I feel all the athletes on our team who are going have already made big strides forward just in the preparation phase from who they were only two months ago, and that sense of improvement made necessary by meeting the best in competition will only get stronger as the event itself unfolds. In the end, thats the greatest benefit of all competition personal growth out of the stimulus of intense opposition.The tale of the army of darkness one time after an EBI show, if I remember it correctly it was an EBI that Eddie Cummings won, the squad was relaxing after a good nights work backstage at the Orpheum theater in Los Angeles where the event was held. Mr Cummings, Tonon and Ryan were doing interviews joined by Ottavia Bourdain, I went outside to reflect on the nights work and ponder over where improvements could be made. As I stood outside a rather strange looking Californian fellow who looked like a genetic splicing of Nicholas Cage and the bad guy from the 80s classic Stallone movie Cobra approached me. He stood silently in front of me, staring with an intense gaze. Finally he addressed me in a gravelly voice. DANAHER...I watched the show...leg locks...everywhere...leg locks...no escape...I see what youve done. Rather taken aback by his dramatic opening, I answered, Thank you, sir...ah...what actually have I done? The stranger stared at me awhile and then answered, your students...Cummings, Tonon, Ryan...very impressive...I see what youve done... Again I replied, ah...what do you think Ive done. The rather ominous nature of the conversation continued. I see the way you walk...the way you move...your hip...your knee...youre in PAIN...I see what youve done... Rather intrigued by this strange dialogue I said back, Im sorry sir, I dont really follow you, Im not really sure what you think Ive done. He immediately replied, Youve raised an ARMY OF DARKNESS. They travel around breaking everybodys legs so that everyone else feels the same pain you feel THATS WHAT YOUVE DONE!! And with that dramatic statement the stranger wheeled around and shuffled off into the shadows of central Los Angeles.Observing, analyzing and adapting As a coach, the single most important part of my work is the process of observing the gym training and competition matches of my students and their peers, analyzing their successes and failures and finding the causes of these; and then adapting the training program to be able to replicate those successes and avoid the failures into the future. YOU AS A STUDENT MUST ENDEAVOR TO DO THE SAME WITH YOURSELF. Of course your coach will be able to help, but recognize that he has many others to help also, and so only a certain amount of time and attention can be paid to you. The bulk of this work must be done by you. This might seem ludicrous advice to someone who is a beginner in the sport, since they may not feel qualified to make such observation and analysis, let alone adapting your own training program. Dont worry, you will learn in time. Just as you learn the physical skills of the sport over time, despite beginning from a state of ignorance, so too will you learn over time the greatest skill of them all the ability to assess your own success and failure and make rational modifications to your behavior to bring more success and avoid previous failures. The problem for most people is that they approach jiu jitsu as a PHYSICAL quest thats natural, since a huge part of the sport is physical. The whole observation, analysis and adaption aspect is largely mental. It requires you to put as much work into your THINKING about the sport as you do your workouts. As Ford said, hard thinking is the hardest work of all thats why most people do everything they can to avoid it. Yes, you need your coaches, especially in the early days, yes, they will give you great insights and guidelines but dont get lazy with your own self reflection ULTIMATELY THE LEVEL OF JIU JITSU YOU ATTAIN WILL BE THE LEVEL YOU DESERVE. it is crucial that you take a proactive role in the observation, analysis, adaptation cycle especially as you climb the ranks and gain experience. In the end you will not only experience much greater sports performance, but also a deeper sense of satisfaction that comes with self expression in your art.Comeback Anyone who plans a long term investment in jiu jitsu will have to go through at least one big comeback before their time in the sport is over. Life has a way of taking us out of our plans and sometimes our training gets derailed. The ability to come back, get back to where you were, and then move past into a new level of development is critical if jiu jitsu is to be a lifetime activity for you. Georges StPierre georgesstpierre is beginning his comeback now as a professional MMA athlete, but the very same trials he is currently going through doubts about his ability to regain past form, to be able to present new skills beyond the old ones, the ability to keep with an ever changing sport these are all things YOU will have to go through whenever circumstances take you out of the sport for a time. Its important to scale back the early workouts there will always be time to go harder in the future. Gradual progress over time always trumps unsustainable surges in the long run. Here, Mr StPierre works on elements of our back attack system with one of the true masters of it, Gordon Ryan gordonlovesjiujitsu Afterwards they went through some hard sparring in standing position, a skill in which Mr StPierre excels. It was a great example of two outstanding athletes using their domain of excellence to benefit the other, so that MUTUAL benefit the finest and most sustainable form of benefit can occur.Composure There are many important attributes that athletes must possess if they are to rise to the top echelons of competition. One attribute that I attach great importance to, but which does not get much attention in most peoples minds, is COMPOSURE. The reason I value it so highly is because I see jiu jitsu first and foremost as PROBLEM SOLVING ACTIVITY. It is awfully difficult to solve complex problems in a state of mental exhaustion or chaos. Having a clear mind is the prerequisite to identifying a problem and searching for ways to overcome it. Many people identify combat as a battle of WILLS. The person who wants victory more will take it. Whilst I agree that there definitely is a contest of wills, the MEANS by which that contest is decided is typically through one persons superior ability to create problems for their opponent while solving those problems the opponent creates at a faster rate than the opponent can. This is best done by maintaining a level of composure that facilitates thinking, whether it be conscious thought, or semi conscious reflexes honed by training. It is thus of the first importance that in your gym training, you train this attribute of composure just like you train other attributes such as strength, speed, flexibility, tactical aggression or passivity etc etc. I often find students really struggle with developing composure. We all have natural instincts in stressful situations. In combat, these often push us in the direction of maximum effortaggression in ways that preclude thinkingproblem solving. The result is a short period of thrashing about followed by exhaustion leading to greatly diminishing performance as time passes. We all put great value on developing our physical attributes But you may be pleasantly surprised how much more successfully you can use those physical attributes when you work equally as hard to develop your mental attributes alongside them. Begin with composure for only then will your physical actions be governed by a mind that is calm enough to actively seek to solve problems rather than fight instinctively. Here, young Nicky Ryan shows composure well above his fifteen years at the adcc trials seconds after this photo was taken, he had won by submissionGuard passing and submission only tournaments Quite often I am asked if the skill of passing guard the skill of getting past your opponents legs and into upper body pins is a worthwhile skill for someone interested in submission only tournaments. The idea here is that in a tournament without points scoring, it is not worth the effort of passing guard because one does not receive points for doing so. Accordingly, it might seem a better idea just to go straight to leg locks where there is some chance of outright victory via submission. My answer to this is very clear. It is definitely worth your while to work hard on your guard passing skills and apply them EVEN IN SUBMISSION ONLY MATCHES WHERE GUARD PASSING SCORES NO POINTS. The reason is simple only when an athlete has well developed guard passing skills can he or she distribute their submission attacks OVER THE WHOLE BODY. The moment you limit your attacks to one part of the body legs you have become predictable and thus less likely to break through a skilled opponents defense. As a general rule, I prefer to see my athletes attacks legs predominantly from bottom position. When on top, I like to see them initiate with hard passing work even in submission only tournaments so that the whole body becomes a target, rather than half of it. This ensures that an opponent will find it difficult to put anticipatory defenses in place. An unfortunate consequence of the success of my students with leg locks in competition has been a misunderstanding guard passing skills are not necessary for submission only tournaments this is, in my opinion, a major error. Here, Gordon Ryan works hard to pass the guard of one of his most formidable opponents, powerful world champion Yuri Simoes, in a submission only EBI tournament.Coming back One of the toughest things for a professional athlete to deal with is coming back to his or her sport after an extended lay offretirement. During that time off two things happen. First, there is an inevitable decline in the athletes performance without the incentive for growth spurred by upcoming competition. Second, the sport itself progresses forward in the athletes absence as new athletes uncover new avenues to victory. The combination of these two makes a successful comeback a very difficult thing the longer the lay off, the tougher the task. An interesting feature of this weekends match between the great Floyd Mayweather and Conor McGregor was that Mr Mayweather was coming back after a two year absence. There were several moments where that lay off seemed to be evident as his overall movement quality was not as high as it normally is. History shows many examples of both success and failure in coming back. One of the great successes was that of the great Sugar Ray Leonard coming back after three years to take on the formidable Marvin Haggler. He took a controversial victory and showed it could be done even against the very best opponents. On November 4th at Madison Square Garden, Georges StPierre will take on Michael Bisping after a massive four year lay off. Not only is the time off a problem, he will fight at a heavier weight class. This will surely be the most difficult comeback project I have ever been involved in. The success or failure of comebacks is often related to the amount of training the athlete has engaged during the time off, their motivation levels coming back in and the physical state of their health. Mr StPierre never got out of shape in retirement and has trained well throughout. He is very motivated to try the challenge of the bigger weight class. The two biggest problems will be his health two major knee operations and recent eye issues leading to surgery and the degree to which the game itself has evolved in his absence. Due to the relative youth of MMA as a sport, it changes and evolves with great rapidity. This will be a fascinating camp, played out among the warnings and inspirations of past comebacks.Reflections on the big show As is usually the case, most people are focused upon the RESULT of the MayweatherMcGregor bout last night. There are endless discussions over whether the fight was stopped too early, whether if Mr McGregor had worked on cardiovascular fitness more he would have prevailed etc etc. The truth is, to anyone familiar with both sports, the RESULT was never in serious doubt all rounders generally dont step into the domain of a refined specialist and beat them in that domain. The result was never the interesting feature of this bout. What IS interesting is the ramifications of the MMA vs boxing debate. As I have seen so many times in similar match ups in the gym, the MMA athlete did quite well early in the match and can create a competitive first few rounds. However, there is a dramatic difference in energy expenditure on the part of the MMA athlete versus the more efficient boxer it has nothing to do with base line cardiovascular fitness both men are in great shape, but one is burning energy at a considerably higher rate than the other due to lesser refinement in this domain As such, there is an inevitable change over as the match progresses. Mr Mayweather was doubtless aware that this would occur and waited patiently for the midlater rounds to switch from a passive game to one of forward aggression I suspect that if the bout was against Golovkin or Carnelo, both of whom exude more forward pressure, the match would have been shorter. What has become clear however, is this ELITE MMA ATHLETES ARE CONSIDERABLY BETTER EQUIPT TO HANDLE A BOXERS GAME THAN BOXERS ARE TO HANDLE AN MMA FIGHTERS GAME. There is almost no chance an elite boxer could get to a tenth round with an elite MMA athlete. Even if the bout permitted kicks and elbowsknees in the clinch, the outcome would almost certainly be different. If takedowns and ground work were allowed it would be over in seconds any one of the innumerable clinches in the fight would be an immediate takedown from which a boxer is extremely unlikely to recover. Mr McGregor may have predictably lost the bout, but he won something much bigger. He showed that the endless criticism of MMA athletes in standing striking over the years is grossly exaggerated. At elite levels they are highly competent and can provide a good match for a time with even the best boxers in the boxers domain. So much so that it becomes blindingly obvious that if the domain were expanded, it will be a very easy match for the MMA athlete. The daring Irishman may have lost a bout, but he won the cultural war between boxing and MMA and showed clearly that he can do far better in their domain than they can in his. For the courage, self belief and skill it took for him to do that, he can always count me as a fan.Tonight is the biggest fight show of the year a fight that has been dismissed by many knowledgeable pundits as farcical but which has nonetheless garnered more viewer interest than any boxing event in a very long time. On the face of it, this is a huge mismatch. Mr Mayweather is unquestionably the finest boxer of his generation and arguably of all time. He is both a master technician and a master tactician in the ring who has made the best boxers of his time look ordinary when matched with him. Mr McGregor is an an outstanding MMA fighter with an amazing penchant for proving doubters wrong. In truth however, this project would be the equivalent of having Mr McGregor compete in an IBJJF jiu jitsu tournament in a gi against say, Rafa Mendes do you really think he would prevail against Mr Mendes under these conditions? My experience of watching very good MMA athletes spar against elite boxers in the gym is always the same they are quite competitive for the first 34 rounds and do surprisingly well. Then around the 5th round the elite boxer begins to figure out the unorthodox or awkward movement and begins to employ ring craft tactics to tire the MMA athlete by making him work harder than he is, making him miss punches etc etc. around the 8th round a very noticeable shift occurs where the elite boxer takes over. I expect a similar pattern tonight though probably taking less time, given the incredible skill level of Mr Mayweather. Mr McGregors only advantages are youth and size, but heavier punches are not much use if they are thrown at a target that cant be hit, and Mr Mayweather is as always, in fine shape and has never tired in a fight. I would consider it a fine victory for Mr McGregor if he survived 12 rounds and had some competitive rounds among them. Like most people, I love to see an underdog take on impossible odds and win, so my heart is with Mr McGregor, but my mind knows this is exceedingly unlikely. In a world of uncertainty I will offer you one certainty that I truly believe however well Mr Mcgregor does in tonights boxing match, I ASSURE YOU IT WILL BE MUCH BETTER THAN MR MAYWEATHER WOULD DO IN A REAL FIGHT AGAINST MR MCGREGOR.Pioneer Probably the most challenging assignment for a jiu jitsu coach is to go into an area that has no jiu jitsu background and start a program from the ground up to produce good athletes and a jiu jitsu culture. The fruit of that culture can expand the sport and over time, convert naive students into knowledgeable teachers who can in turn create new students and a sustainable expansion of the art in what was once a place devoid of jiu jitsu. My sensei, Renzo Gracie was a true pioneer. He came to the United States when there was almost no knowledge of jiu jitsu. I still remember him having to tell us in beginners class that being bottom mount and bottom guard position were not the same and that one was desirable and the other was not! Yet from those unpromising beginnings he forged a very large body of students that now sustain themselves and contributors the sport in ways that would have seemed impossible twenty five years ago. One of my favorite jiu jitsu pioneers is Mauricio Gomes, one of only a handful of men promoted to black belt by Rolls Gracie and father to the greatest jiu jitsu exponent of all time, Roger Gracie. He is in many respects, one of the fathers of BJJ in England. He and his son, Roger have produced a great number of talented athletes in a country that got a relatively late start in the sport of Brazilian jiu jitsu. Our recent trip to England was more than just a chance to catch up with Mr Gomes it was also a chance to see just how far jiu jitsu has progressed on English soil. There are many more schools and students than even just a few years ago, and the level of skill is rapidly rising. Here I talk to Mr Gomes about his incredible achievements in Great Britain and his plans for the future. I have always said of British jiu jitsu, they may have started later than others and with fewer instructors, but the black belts they got, spearheaded by Mauricio Gomes, Roger Gracie and Braulio Estima, were the very best they could have hoped for. With these outstanding men at the helm and the rapid growth of the sport, I have a feeling English and European jiu jitsu will be a power house in a short time!Strength begets strength ADCC world championships camp. The squad is working hard on new skills. The slog of training is always at its toughest about half way through. Days just seem to blend into each other and the aches and pains mount rapidly. Much of what gets the athletes through is the camaraderie among them. Shared suffering is easier to bear than lonely suffering but most important of all is a sense of purpose. Purposeless suffering will break in a man in a matter of hours but if a man has a purpose that he holds dear, he can endure any conditions indefinitely. Keeping the athletes eyes open to their end goal is critical in these hard weeks where the body and mind are put to trial. Here, Gordon Ryan goes through another tough workout with teenage sensation and world champion, Rayron Gracie, son of Ryan Gracie. Both have a tremendous future the extent of which, like all of us, will be determined by their ability to cope with the pressures of training and preparation by remaining focused as much on where they want to be in the future as where they are now.Roger and me Last weekend the squad went to London to compete in Polaris grappling, winning all three matches. London is the base of one of my greatest friends in the sport, Roger Gracie, who, along with his great father, Mauricio Gomes, teaches jiu jitsu in Englands greatest city. At Polaris, the squad met up with Mr Gracie and Mr Gomes in the warm up room as we got ready. I asked Mr Gomes if he would like to assist in cornering the squad I have always found his insights very illuminating and instructive and he has a good calming presence about him in the hectic atmosphere before a match starts. Suddenly Mr Gracie excused himself and said he had to go. The staff of the show advised us that it was time for Oliver Taza to go out and begin his bout. Mr Taza was scheduled to fight the outstanding British black belt Ross Nicholls, who is widely considered the best British black belt and has won many British and European titles. Oliver is a brown belt he should actually still be a purple Belt according to IBJJF Regulations but trains very hard and has made great progress in a short time. Last time they met, Mr Taza won via heel hook. When we went down to the stage I was shocked to see Mr Gracie in Mr Nicholls corner and Mr Gracie was equally shocked to see me in Mr Tazas corner!! Neither of us had any idea that the opponent was one of our students! We just laughed and wished each other luck. It was an unexpected honor to corner against the greatest jiu jitsu player of all time the best part is that Mr Gracies father was in our corner! It was a great match between two very impressive youngsters, arguably the best of the night. Mr Taza prevailed that night with positional play he could not get a submission breakthrough against a much improved Mr Nicholls but it gave me a wonderful coaching memory of cornering against one of my best friends with the help of his dad! Here we are laughing about the confusion afterwards and enjoying the rest of the show. In the near future I want to talk about Roger Gracies online teaching platform I sincerely believe it offers an unprecedented opportunity for students to learn the highest level jiu jitsuMeanwhile...back in New York City The squad had a big weekend in London, winning all three bouts at Polaris 5, but back in NYC Gordon Ryan stayed home to compete in The Grappling Industries absolute no gi event as part of his ADCC preparation. He won first place, taking every match by submission and showing great progress in positional control and linking that with submission skills. Grappling Industries put on a very fine event for local athletes and it was great to Mr Ryan step in and get back on center stage. The advantage of local shows is that they can provide excellent stage experience with no significant interruption to ones training schedule ideal when the world championships are right around the corner. Moreover, because they are local, they tend to involve matches with known local rivals and thus provide a great measure of progress when you can assess previous matches versus current matches. As such they are a great resource for athletes to both prepare for big events and gauge their development over time. Here Mr Ryan relaxes on the podium and it seems, looks to gauge his progress in the skills of flexing and posing in addition to his ever growing jiu jitsu skills.All weighed in All athletes weighed in today for Polaris 5 in London. Garry Tonon faces the very talented Dillon Danis. Originally the bout was set for 170 pounds, then modified to 180 pounds as Mr Danis is competing in a higher weight category in the upcoming ADCC world championships. Today he weighed in at 184 so he will have a good size advantage. Mr Danis has greatly improved his wrestling and leg locks since the two last met both factors that will make this a very tough rematch. Jake Shields goes up against British strong man and jiu jitsu stand out Daniel Strauss, who must be among the strongest men in the game. Apprentice Oliver Taza will battle against local stand out Ross Nicholls. Last night of training tonight nothing too intense as the athletes go into final phases of preparation for the big show in O2 arena here in London. This marks the first time that Polaris will be available on UFC fightpass the same move that helped propel EBI into the spotlight of grappling world. Here hoping the exposure can take our sport to a new level of viewer participation. Happy to see rising stars like Mr Tonon and Mr Danis and established stars like Mr Shields along with Shaolin and Cael Uno creating a buzz and interest level that in time will pave the way for expansion of the sport overall.Grass roots jiu jitsu The squad went out into East End London to train tonight at the new gym of UFC fighter Claudio Silva claudiohannibalsilva who has opened a new school and does a fine job teaching jiu jitsu. The squad spends most of our time in a basement in NYC so its always a pleasure to get outside and train in new places around new people. It often reminds me of my early early days in jiu jitsu when my dear sensei Renzo Gracie would teach in small clubs and Dojos to tiny groups. It is like going back to the grass roots of the sport small groups of dedicated enthusiasts learning our craft far from the big centers of the sport. I always feel like its good for ones soul to do this to go back to where you started from and get that same feeling of wonder you had as a white belt its a rejuvenation we all need periodically. Here Garry Tonon, Jake Shields and Oliver Taza work their submission skills as I run them through a workout at Claudios little London gym claudiohannibalsilva Preparation is going well at this stage its polishing skills rather than developing skills more of the same tomorrow as show time gets close!Reflections on my sensei real respect vs superficial respect my sensei, Renzo Gracie is widely acknowledged as one of the best jiu jitsu coaches of the modern era. For his students, most of our lessons were technical in nature but some of the most memorable had nothing to do with technique, but instead with other aspects of the sport. One day I was away with the squad, traveling for a match. Mr Gracie stepped in to teach the afternoon class that I usually teach, so I was not there to witness the lesson, but heard it second hand from those who were there, but its importance was apparent as soon as I heard it. A visiting athlete who has considerable exposure on the grappling circuit and who often visited to train was present for the class. As Mr Gracie began teaching, the visitor sat on the sidelines and played around with his phone. The rest of the class went to work as Mr Gracie went through technique and drills. Eventually it came time for live sparring randori. The visitor suddenly put down his phone and decided it was now time to enter the class. He approached Mr Gracie and bowed solemnly and asked to join in the sparring. Mr Gracie did not even look at him, he said, next class begins at 6pm. The visitor was surprised. I cant train now? Mr Gracie replied, weve been training for forty five minutes while you played with your phone now you feel like training? My sensei has the most transparent face I ever saw. When he is happy, everyone can see it and when he is pissed off everyone can see that too! The visitor wisely stepped off the mat. Superficial symbols of respect dont count for much compared with actions that convey REAL respect training with commitment and giving your all. No one cares how solemnly you bow or how many times you say osu or any other mere symbol of respect if your actions convey the opposite. Dont get caught up in the symbols worry about the substance. My sensei never asked us to bow, call him professor or say osu to everything he said. The only thing he asked was that we gave our best effort that was the only form of respect he taught and, for us as students, the most important we could learn.Illusion When athletes go out to compete in high level shows there is always much fanfare and bombast as they enter lights, music, cheers and boos. All this is to create an illusion the illusion that what is about to transpire is something bigger and greater than they have ever done before. The simple reality is that IT IS EXACTLY THE SAME THING YOU DO EVERY DAY, it just so happens to be performed in front of a group of strangers in a noisy and colorfully lit arena instead of your gym. The only reality is you and your skills setpreparation vs him and his skill setpreparation adjudicated by a referee under an agreed upon rule set ALL ELSE IS ILLUSION, NO MATTER HOW STRONG THE FEELINGS AND THOUGHTS YOU HAVE WITHIN YOU TELLING YOU IT IS REAL. Acknowledge this and go forward with confidence, deny it and go forward in fear and anxiety.Memories Jiu jitsu is best seen as a lifetime activity, so along the way there will be a vast store of memories for all of us. Keeping track of them is often a great way to help stay motivated and reflect on progress and make future goals. I was very lucky as a student to study under my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie, quite possibly the most charismatic man in the sport a master technician and proponent of open experimentation in development that made him a creator of a student body with greatly disparate styles and viewpoints. Under him were his senior students, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie, who did so much to motivate and inspire us every day in training. Every time I cast my mind back to those early days, I find reasons to remember old techniques and insights I never should have forgotten, goals I lost track of and should never have stopped pursuing, and most important, reasons to laugh and smile. Dont lose track of these memories they are yours and yours alone. No one can take them from you, few can understand the value they hold in your heart. Whenever you feel you are losing your way they are the best means to get you back on track. Cherish them as you would your best techniques and accomplishments. Here, my fellow students, Shawn Williams and Paul Creighton and myself finish up another session with our dear sensei this must be around the late 1990s early 2000s the only rashguards you could buy then were made for surfing Never lose sight of cherishing your time in the sport, the characters, the hopes and dreams, the temporary failures and the laughter. Remembrance of the past makes for a stronger future.Ink to paper A big day for Georges StPierre today as he inked the contract for his return to the octagon on November 4 in the world headquarters of the fight world Madison Square Garden, New York City, against current middle weight champion, Michael Bisping. This is a huge test for Mr StPierre. First, it will be four years since his last fight. Second, it is in a weight class above his own. By the end of his career, Mr StPierre was a very averaged size welterweight, now he is taking on a big middleweight. In addition, Mr StPierre has been through two acl surgeries this will be a very stern test indeed no warm up fights right back into the fray after a very long lay off against the bigger champion. However, in my coaching experience there has never been an athlete so well suited to taking on the most difficult of tasks and finding a way to break through to success. Mr StPierre is much more than a great athlete. He is a strategist of the highest order, Both in preparation and in the cage. The professionalism of his approach is unparalleled in my experience and I am certain that on November 4th he will be ready for action and these two legends of the octagon will put on a show worthy of the incredible fight history of Madison Square Garden. Grappling training will run concurrently with the squads preparation for adcc world championships and will make for some incredible training experiences I am sure. Looking forward to seeing the troops gather for another battle and a Season of plotting, scheming, training, experimenting and learning.When the actions done when most people think of a training session, they only focus upon the physical work aspect. Every bit as important as the physical work is the feedback that the successes and failures of the session offer as guidance for future workouts what needs to be improved, which aspects are showing potential, errors to be avoided etc etc. Of course there are days where we are all tired and just want to talk about anything other than jiu jitsu after a session usually sex and violence or jiu jitsu scandal but most of the time we always conclude with a brief assessment of what was good, what was bad and what needs to be changed for next time. Only in this way can training be PROGRESSIVE rather than just an endless slogging of one athlete against another. All of my best athletes are extremely adept in this post session feedback analysis. We usually gather as a small group after class and discuss the three main lessons learned and hold a brief congress on what we can do to improve next time and then switch conversations back to mockingridiculing each other, any absent friends, anyone else we can think of and then steer the conversation back to sex and violence Here I go over post workout reflections with one of the most astute and obsessive workout debriefers I ever knew, Eddie Cummings. A big part of his rapid skill acquisition was his relentless self analysis of success and failure in training which we could trouble shoot after class to help prepare for the next session.Order of importance Very often students come to me with a desire to learn the many precise details of a given move. This is a healthy and good attitude, as precision is very important for the successful application of moves in jiu jitsu. However, it is critical that BOTH THE INSTRUCTOR AND THE STUDENT BE ABLE TO RANK THE DETAILS IN ORDER OF IMPORTANCE, SO THAT MORE ATTENTION IS PLACED UPON THE CRUCIAL DETAILS RATHER THAN THE AUXILIARY DETAILS. In truth, when you go to apply the moves in a match situation you will be under severe stress, and in any stressful situation, our cognitive abilities are greatly diminished. In a scenario where you can only recall a few details, ranking those details from most important to least important is the single best way to increase your effectiveness. Focus upon one crucial detail will do more for your performance of a given move in a tough match than ten trifling details. So when learning details, focus as much on the RANKING of the details as you do upon the ACCUMULATION of them. Making this a habit will enable you to make the most important adjustments quickly and under pressure a skill you will need in a tight contest. Here I point out the most crucial elements of an ashi garami variation at a recent seminar so that beginners can make quicker progress towards development in this aspect of the game.Big Tom DeBlass getting ready for action with the squad This Saturday night in Bayville New Jersey at Fight2Win 43, my good friend and comrade Tom DeBlass will take on the great Joao Assis of Brazil former ADCC world gold and silver medalist. These two titans have battled previously to a draw and both are looking to show how improvements in their game will make a difference on Saturday. Mr DeBlass is a student of one of my most important mentors, my senpai, Ricardo Almeida and a very well known and respected member of the BJJ community. In preparation for this bout he came in weekly to train squad style and impressed everyone with his drive and commitment. Hats off to Fight2Win for continuing to put on great shows with impressive matchups. They do a great job of building grass roots support through local athletes, along with big name main events. They are continuing to grow and develop whilst offering developing athletes a great venue to showcase their skills. This will be a ten minute submission only match, but if it should go the distance, a judgment will be made on the basis of submission aggression and positional control skills that both athletes excel in. Looking forward to a fire cracker when these two meet big men, big skill sets, big following, all going down at the big show!Details vs direction When instruction is offered in jiu jitsu, the two general types are first, those that offer a general sense of purpose or direction. This is essential for giving the student the big picture of what he or she is trying to achieve. Second, there is instruction in the small technical details that make it possible for the athlete to perform the actions that enable us to fulfill that sense of direction. Deficiencies in either of these two areas will create problems. A sense of direction is worthless if you cant perform the tasks that get you moving in that direction; and endless details can create a myopic student who can pontificate at length on a given area of skill, but who cant place it in a context that lets him improvise and quickly identify the key features of the scenarios she finds himself in. Somewhere in the middle is a satisfactory compromise between the two. It is usually different for different people and problem areas. One of the trickiest times to work this problem is in seminars when I visit schools. Often there is a considerable skill and knowledge discrepancy between the various attendees. I usually find I can make on the spot adjustments based upon how people manage the drills they over as to whether I can get more complex, or stay longer on foundational aspects of the game. The success of my students in certain aspects of jiu jitsu has created a widespread interest in our game and something of a cottage industry in study and emulation of our tactics and skills. As a result, I can often get more advanced in seminars nowadays than I could have several years ago. Here I am teaching a seminar in Pittsburgh stoutpgh where the students did a fine job of moving through some complex material on ashi garami based leg locking. It is becoming quite clear that the overall knowledge and understanding of lower body submissions around the nation has increased quite dramatically from five years ago I am happy that my students garrytonon eddiewolverine gordonlovesjiujitsu nickyryanbjj and myself can help this trend. Already I am seeing some excellent leg locking students as I travel and teach. Taking on bigger opponents Jiu jitsu is a difficult enough activity even when matched against someone our own size, but things get very interesting when we have to take in a skilled opponent in a weight category well above our own! This weekend squad apprentice, Ethan Crelinsten, took on 10th planet standout, Nathan Orchard in the Submission Series in Nova Scotia in an open weight event. Mr Orchard is a fine competitor who has an outstanding record in EBI competition and in other high profile events. Despite a sizable difference in weight, Mr Crelinsten was able to put considerable pressure with a mix of positional and submission attacks, getting past guard to mounted positions and several strong Kimura attempts, ultimately taking the back as the ten minute match came to close and finishing in a dominant position to take a one sided decision victory. I always feel its a great experience periodically for athletes to fight up a weight division to really test their skills there are some risks involved injuries are more likely, but nothing else provides such a clear test as to the efficacy of your technique than seeing it work well on a skilled bigger stronger opponent.An inspiring story Last night was the first EBI event for women a milestone for professional womens grappling. There were some outstanding athletes representing their various teams, including world champions. When the smoke cleared it was eighteen year old Erin Blanchfield who won the EBI belt. She is relatively unknown in grappling circles, I thought it would be a good idea to talk a little about her and her achievement, as I believe there is much to inspire and educate us all as we train and try to make progress. Ms Blanchfield trains at an RGA affiliate run by Karl Pravec silverfoxbjj a black belt from my sensei, Renzo Gracie. She got her purple belt there around six months ago. When she heard about the female EBI event, she began coming into the city to train alongside the squad, doing the very same drills, conceptual training and sparring that our athletes do to prepare for these events. Now bear in mind, she lives one and half hours away from NYC and still came in all that way most days a week, in addition to her night training at Siver Fox academy it shows the dedication this young woman approached this great test. She was a great student, very quiet and respectful. She would wordlessly perform all the drills and complete every training assignment. Within a short time she showed incredible improvement and was submitting partners that previously overwhelmed her. In her final week of training she submitted two partners I had never seen her submit before. On the big night she showed the same kind of quiet, determined, well directed and technically sound jiu jitsu that she showed us in the training room all summer and went on to go further than all the more highly ranked and more well known opponents to take the belt! She submitted two 10th Planet athletes who specialize in this kind of event, and beat in over time two other athletes to win. It is a great lesson in how a determined self starter with motivation and a plan can overcome the odds and get to their cherished goal. What a remarkable performance by Ms Blanchfield not just on Sunday night, but all summer, as she quietly and professionally laid the groundwork for her success at the big show!Making progress This weekend, talented apprenticekohai, Jason Rau competed in a local submission event, Rise Submission Invitational at 170 pounds with EBI rules. Mr Rau is a student of one of my mentors, Matt Serra. He came just a short time ago to begin training in our method and has made great progress. This weekend he won every match by heel hook submission to take first place and impress the crowd. He is a fine example of someone who already had a certain skill set, and adding to it in new directions to create positive change in his jiu jitsu. So often I hear people say that some part of jiu jitsu is not for them, or that they have their way of doing things and they are not interested in some other part. Mr Rau is a fine example of what is possible when you add new skills to an already developed game. Its never too late. Even if you never actually end up favoring those skills, you will at the very least have a much better idea of how to defend if someone should use them against you. In addition you will learn new ways of using and moving the body that will help you in other aspects of the sport. Here, Mr Rau begins a nice heel hook sequence out of his opponents offense, but a quick counterattack creates opportunities for his own offense through to the win.New York always has a surprise in store So here I am in a shockingly empty JFK departure lounge, doing some writing and reading and plotting to burn the three hour delay in my plane departure, when alongside me sits a fellow I have not seen in thirty years! And that was on TV! When I was in college in New Zealand, I was an avid weight lifter and many of my gym partners were part of the small Pro Wrestling circuit in New Zealand. They took their inspiration from American pro wrestling, especially the WWE I believe it was WWF in those days one of their favorites was a bad guy character called Virgil, who was the sinister accomplice of Ted Dibiase, the Million dollar man. Their schtick was money money money you hear that Gordon Ryan?. Money rules all. Here I am sitting in JFK and out of nowhere Virgil sits next to me I know, no one under the age of thirty five knows who he was but there have to be some old cronies out there that remember . It turns out he is a huge UFC fan and loves Anderson Silva I have to explain that I coached Chris Weidman to defeat Mr Silva oops! He is a great character and apparently doing very well. Its making me think about the links between pro wrestling and MMA. Sometimes the link can be destructive, but sometimes it works well look at Sakuraba. Chael Sonnen masterfully used pro wrestling antics to build a great career. Ha ha!! NYC is crazy you never know who you will run into, even on a boring wait in an empty airport lounge! Travel I am well known for my incompetence in many areas, none more so than travel. My poor students will attest to my miserable record of missed flights, missed connections, lost luggage pretty much every error possible in an airportplane. airportloser Every time I head out to JFK airport, there is some freak car accident, thunderstorm, flash flood, anything that will prevent easy passage to the airport. theghostofameliaearhearthauntsme Tonight I made my way to the airport preparing for leg lock seminar in Pittsburgh tomorrow. I decide that this time it will be different this time I will be in time. Of course Friday night in summer time NYC, everyone leaves for the Hamptons, so traffic out of the city is terrible. I wisely decided to leave early to beat traffic. As soon as I leave, I get a text that my flight has been delayed two hours. when we get to the highway, there is NO traffic at all. In twenty five years in NYC I have never seen this. When I get to JFK, the line at security is usually massive tonight, barely a person there and I Get through in less than two minutes. Usually my metal hip replacement sets off the alarms and I have to get frisked and explain how someone my age has a metal hip tonight they just waved me through. Just as I got through I get another text saying my flight is delayed another hour! Ha ha! The one time in my life I dont need to be on time and I get to JFK in record time! godhatesme Hope I dont fall asleep in the seminar tomorrow! Its going to be a long night!! airtravelismynemesis looking for adventure in a very quiet and boring Friday night JFK Grappling and geography One of the great pleasures of spending a long time in the sport of grappling is the opportunity to see various styles of grappling from around the world. My sport is jiu jitsu, in particular the Brazilian style derived from the work of the Gracie family. Living in NYC and having students who compete globally, we often get a look at others styles Of grappling from around the world, and the what we see is often incredibly impressive. Whether it be Judo players from Japan and Korea, Sambo athletes from Russia, Senagalese wrestlers from Africa, Mongolian hybrid grapplers somewhere between Judo and wrestling and many others, they each carry a distinctive style has has tremendously impressive strong points, from which a jiu jitsu stylist can learn and improve. One geographical area in particular has long impressed me with its incredible depth of grappling talent, out of all proportion to its population numbers the Caucasus regions. This area, separating Europe and Asia, running from Black Sea to Caspian Sea, encompassing whole countries, such as parts of Russia, Armenia, Georgia, Iran, along with republicsfederal regions such as Dagestan, Ossetia, Chechnya and others, has produced an unbelievable number of world class wrestlers that have produced incredible results in Olympic and World championships competition. The sheer number of all time greats coming out of this area clearly points to the fact that whatever training systems these fellows have in operation, it is clearly one of the absolute highest quality. The wrestlers from these regions often appear to have a distinct style and approach and like jiu jitsu athletes, pride themselves on the refinement and quality of their technique above all else. I always get the feeling that if they put their attention to jiu jitsu, they would excel at it in a short time. The NYC area has a big Russian population and so often we get wrestlers from the Caucasus stop by and they always impress with their smooth and subtle style. Here, Rustam Chsiev, combining wrestling with submissions, impresses the crowd at an EBI event, where he got all the way to the finals against Gordon Ryan.Spreading the word I always love teaching some of the key elements of our approach to jiu jitsu in a new environment. Its a great chance for me to focus on the fundamental parts of our game that myself and my full time students tend to take for granted when we work with each other, but which are not obvious at all to the uninitiated. Any chance to revisit the foundations of jiu jitsu, whether it be jiu jitsu in general, or our approach to it, is a healthy thing for a student. IN ANY GIVEN SKILL BASED ENTERPRISE, MASTERY OF THE FUNDAMENTALS WILL DETERMINE HOW FAR AND HOW FAST YOU PROGRESS THROUGH THE HIGHER LEVELS. This Saturday in Pittsburgh I shall get a chance to teach some of the core features of our leg locking game to a new group. Though I currently have some severe physical limitations, most of the essential features of my system can be demonstrated. Here, I work with GarryTonon garrytonon and Nicky Ryan nickyryanbjj in Singapore at Evolve gym, covering intricacies of grip and positioning to a curious audience and a very stoic drill partner! UkeTwo kinds of strength two approaches to combat This weekend welterweight champion Tyron Woodley takes on jiu jitsu master, Demian Maia in what will be a fascinating contrast not only in fighting style, but body type. It is rare these days to see such diametrically opposed approaches to fighting. Mr Woodley is one of the most explosive fighters ever seen in the octagon just a single blow from his right hand is fully capable of ending a fight at any time in a match against anyone in the division. His body is perfectly disposed to create explosive power, and accordingly he has created a fighting style based around that. Mr Maia on the other hand, almost completely lacks explosive power, but excels in isometric tension and static strength. If he secures a controlling grip and position, he is capable of holding it indefinitely all the way through to a finish against anyone in the division. Their modus operandi is so different, yet equally deadly. One gets the impression that if either man can assert their mode of strength under their conditions, they shall win easily but who will be able to do so? Thats what makes this such a fascinating battle. Normally in modern MMA, the two athletes have fairly similar, well rounded skills, which usually results in very even matches but here the contrast is so extreme it would seem whoever can get their strength in place first will win comfortably. Behind this fascinating match up there is a valuable lesson for us all the correlation of fighting style with body type. Our body is the medium through which we must express our skills; as such it is critical that we choose wisely our techniques, strategy and style. The better our choices in this regard, the easier the task of maximizing our effectiveness in combat. It is wonderful to see even at this level, the many possible means to combat effectiveness offer such divergent approaches equal opportunity to championship glory. This match posits the critical questions we must always ask ourselves WHAT ARE MY PERSONAL STRENGTHS AND WHAT AM I DOING TO MAXIMIZE THEIR VALUE IN TRAINING AND COMPETITION?Reunion When Georges St Pierre was getting ready to fight Jon Fitch, he kept telling me about this incredible Karate fighter, Steven Wonderboy Thompson wonderboymma he had brought into the camp for sparring. He came back for the Carlos Condit camp and I was shocked at how effectively he used movement, distance and angle to set up effective strikes whilst avoiding counters. Later on, I brought him in to Chris Weidmans camp for Anderson Silva to prepare him for the striking pyrotechnics of the great Brazilian champion. The two worked so well together, they became great friends and training partners, swapping grappling and striking knowledge. Both went on to super stardom in MMA and many more accolades to be won in the future. It was a pleasure to catch up with him again Saturday night as we cornered Chris Weidman to a dramatic victory. Watching him illustrate evasive movement into strikes is one of the most impressive memories I have in coaching MMA. So often I hear people disparage certain martial arts as part of an MMA program karate is a common target. I always laugh when I hear this for I am quite certain that five minutes of sparring with Mr Thompson would drastically change these doubters opinions! In truth, all of the martial arts that have a sport component which necessitates live trainingsparring with competition have valuable contributions to make to an MMA program. They each have areas of specialty that we can benefit from. It is up to us as individuals to find a balance between each of their offerings that works for us. Here we get a chance to catch up on old times after the show.Perfect performance! The great Roger Gracie took on Marcus Almeida buchecha in a rematch today in what was essentially a battle for the title of greatest of all time. Their first bout had been a titanic struggle to a draw. Few were aware however, that Mr Gracie had fought in the immediate aftermath of a severe staph infection. This time he came in healthy and despite a long lay off from competition, put on a characteristic display of classical jiu jitsu perfection to shut down a very powerful and dangerous opponent, and, as he has done throughout his career, make it all look easy and simple. He went back to a theme exhibited so often in his matches, strong gripping sequences in the standing position to shut out his opponents standing attacks, then dragging his opponent to his guard and coming up from bottom to his opponents back in such a calm and relaxed manner that it always seems to make his opponents look like beginners except that it is the second best jiu jitsu athlete in the world. From there, the usual inevitability of the finish and the seeming impossibility of escape for the opponent. Fittingly it was a last show for Mr Gracie. There is simply nothing more he can do in the sport, and, like all great performers, he saved the best until last What a night, what a fight!! Chris Weidman did exactly what he said he wanted to do to show that the hallmark of champions is their capacity to deal with loss and adversity and come back stronger than before. He did it tonight against a very tough and dangerous Kelvin Gastulem who has been on a tremendous winning streak and who again proved dangerous with his powerful rear hand tonight at the closing stages of the first round. However, in front of his fervent home town supporters, there was no denying Mr Weidman tonight. He came back brilliantly with his own rear hand interspersed with takedowns and ground control. Ultimately he got the breakthrough with his tokui waza favorite move kata gatame the head and arm strangle. This was a fitting end, it represented what this fight was all about a return to his roots that made him a world champion. He came in tonight at the same weight he fought Anderson Silva, looking much better than recent fights where he sacrificed too much weight. It was a joy to be a part of his preparation again. I have not been involved in Mr Weidmans camps since his second fight with Anderson Silva so it was an amazing experience tonight to once again watch this amazing athlete thrill the crowd with his skill and heart. Heading from Long Island to Manhattan tired but happy, ready for a day of teaching tomorrow Hope you all enjoyed the show as much as I did!Another day, another room I am a big believer in consistency in training. Most of your training should be in one room with a group of like minded people. Only in this way can a routine be established over time that can create skills that can produce great results. Nonetheless, any athlete must be able to perform anywhere and at any time. Thus it is good periodically to get out of your regular spot and train in a new place with new people. Very often a simple change in routine can get positive results. This becomes a necessity for professional athletes who must travel to compete. They must develop the adaptability to get a great workout with anyone in any room that is a real skill in itself. Here, Garry Tonon trains in England at a Polaris event in a small town called Poole, where we showed up randomly last year and trained with some excited locals in their interestingly painted gym. The action must have been good because the entire room steamed up like an English mist!Fighting for advantage One of the central premises of jiu jitsu is this ALWAYS GAIN SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE COMMITTING TO AN ATTACK. The most widely understood form of advantage in jiu jitsu is positional advantage, but there are many other forms as well. Adherence to this fundamental principle is probably the single biggest and most important commitment the student can make. It is so easy to focus upon the moves that comprise the actual attack, and fail to pay attention to gaining the initial advantage that makes it possible against a knowledgeable and resisting opponent. The higher you go in the sport, the stronger your adherence to this essential axiom of the sport must become, for at the highest levels, EVERYONE KNOWS ALL THE MAJOR MOVES AND ALL THE MAJOR COUNTERS TO THEM victory will go to the athlete who gains sufficient initial advantage that his his opponent cannot stop it, despite knowing what it is and how, in theory, to stop it. Here, Garry Tonon works hard to gain advantage in the standing position against the powerful Yuri Simoes in an open weight EBI event.Seeing the old gang It was my pleasure to trek out to Long Island NY to see Chris Weidman and Gian Valente prepare for their matches this weekend at his gym. Mr Weidman and Mr Valente worked out under the watchful eyes of Ray Longo and welterweight title challenger, Stephen Thompson. Coaching such a talented athlete will always be a highlight of my coaching career. When Mr Weidman opened his own gym his ability to come in to train in Manhattan was curtailed, but whenever he comes in its a joy to watch his skills on the mat. He is looking very well prepared for what will be a very tough match indeed against the outstanding Kelvin Gastelum the first time the UFC has ever been in Long Island. This is a great honor for Mr Weidman I know he is intensely proud to headline a big show in his home town. Here he is relaxing after his last full power workout with Gian Valente, Ray Longo and Wonderboy Thompson , along with Wife Marivi and his charming children. Its impressive to watch the input of Mr Thompsons electrifying standing skills combined with the tactical sense of Mr Longos direction. This will be a fascinating match up to be sure! Both fighters have evolved and come so far. I am heading out to Long Island now to run Mr Weidman through some grappling drills, an area he always excelled in One move with many faces One of the central demands jiu jitsu makes of us is to adapt the various techniques of the sport to the limitless and rapidly changing circumstances in which we may have to apply them. Accordingly, any given technique will often have many variations that allow it to cover a vast number of contingencies. This is why at the higher levels, I often am reluctant to say someone is doing something incorrectly though I am usually not reluctant at all to say something is wrong at beginner levels . Very often good athletes can discern a different means of performing a technique THAT STAYS TRUE TO THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF THAT TECHNIQUE and thus remains effective, BUT INVOLVES SOME UNORTHODOX ELEMENTS THAT MAKE IT APPEAR INCORRECT. This is a good thing, for it allows for adaptation to the actual circumstances, rather than an artificial adherence to correct form that may not apply in that particular circumstance. Here, standout apprentice kohai student, Oliver Taza, takes gold at the IBJJF New York open with a juji gatame arm lock from his opponents back, but changes into an unorthodox leg positioning to better cover the angle and positioning of his opponents body during the transition and subsequent defensive movements. Despite the cosmetic changes, THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF THE MOVE ARE RETAINED AND THAT IS WHAT IS IMPORTANT FOR VICTORY.Clash of Titans Next week in Rio de Janeiro will be a super fight as big as any in the history of jiu jitsu the two greatest heavy weights of all time will meet for a rematch. Roger Gracie will once again take on Marcus Almeida at Gracie Pro, run by the great Kyra Gracie, who has done an incredible job getting the best people together in competition in the birthplace of the sport. Last time these two titans met it was in a twenty minute submission only context officially it was a draw, since neither could submit the other within the allotted time, but it was clear that Mr Almeida got closest with a beautifully executed juji gatame armlock that Mr Gracie, a veritable master of defense, had to use all his skills to extract himself from. However, Mr Gracie was recovering from a severe staph infection at the time, which clearly sapped his strength i the closing stages of the match this time, both athletes appear to be one hundred percent healthy. It will be played as a standard IBJJF ten minute match an excellent format for the match both athletes excel in both submissions and positional attacks, so they will get a positive result that wont leave any doubts at the conclusion. Mr Gracie will be cornered by my sensei, Renzo Gracie, who has a been a mentor for Roger throughout his professional career and who has assisted him to most of his greatest wins. Both men can legitimately claim to be the best of all time to see a match were they get a chance to solidify that claim is a great day for not only the athletes, but the sport itself. Of course, I am biased in favor of Roger Gracie, he often comes to NYC to train with his cousins and sensei Renzo. I consider him the pinnacle of classical jiu jitsu positional control through to submission and in addition, one of the great role models of the sport. However, there is no denying the achievements and skills of Mr Almeida, who has built up an incredible array of wins that absolutely rival the record of Mr Gracie, and all done at a young age. In addition, he will bring a weight, strength and overall athletic advantage to the match that will test Mr Gracies world renown skills to the limit! What a match!!Subjecting the student to stress A well known image of teaching is that of the drill instructor. In every military of every nation their modus operandi is the same to subject the recruits to severe pressure as they learn the skills and organizational structure necessary to secure peace and wage war. Have you ever wondered why they all teach the same way? And have done so in this manner since the earliest days of military history? In every other area of human teaching, there are many different theories and methods, but in all the militaries of the world throughout history only one. The main reason I believe, is to prepare recruits for the most stress filled environment known to man war. As the environment in which the student is expected to perform rises in stress level, THE MODE OF TEACHING MUST REFLECT THIS. Student must be subjected to an appropriate degree of stress in daily training to prepare them for whatever stress level they are expected to perform in. Now there is no scenario in which jiu jitsu comes even close to the stress of war, but high level combat sports can be a environment significantly tougher than most people are used to. When students have professional aspirations, I tend to be considerably more demanding, obnoxious, critical, confrontational and stress inducing than I would normally be. The rational is exactly the same as that of a drill sergeant. If a student is to survive and flourish in a harsh, competitive environment, he must learn in a harsh environment. Of course this must be kept within reason. Sometimes I see senseis engage in behavior that goes too far. As a general rule however, I do favor a mode of teaching for those with competitive aspirations or even just a strong desire to get good at the sport that surprises many visitors with its foul mouthed, hyper critical, intolerant ways. Of course this is not a good way to operate for an average class, but among the more seasoned students with a desire to excel in the hurly burly of competitive combat sports, a little vitriol thrown into the instruction helps create minds that deal better with stress than overly nurtured students.Active observation As training begins I always try to keep an eye on the room and look for any need for intervention not interrupting the class, but usually afterwards or in subsequent classes. This is an opportunity for a coach to assess whether a given move or concept is working as intended for the students. In problematic cases the essential question is whether failure is due to inadequacies in the technique itself, or my presentation of it, or the students implementation of it. Usually it is a mix of the latter two, though sometimes the first is the culprit and changes must be made. The best way to appropriate blame is by observing how the class as a whole is handling the assignment. If there is universal failure, but the technique has been shown previously to be effective in competition, then the blame should be put on me as the coach. I need to do a better job of presenting the material. If some students are successful and others failing, it is probably a failure of student comprehension and extra time needs to be devoted to remove the confusion among those who are not performing adequately. If even the most talented students are struggling to apply it successfully despite having a clear understanding of what they are trying to achieve and how to do so, then we will break the technique down after class and see if modifications can be made to make it work, or abandon it. This constant assessment of performance and judgement of the root of FAILURE is key to forward progress, not just in jiu jitsu, but in all aspects of life. Often people shy away from addressing failure, but locating and addressing failure is probably the quickest route to improvement. The key is to see failure as an opportunity for advancement rather than an episode of embarrassment or shame. If we take the latter point of view, we all would have been shamed out of the sport as white belts! Here I check out the action in Singapore at a large seminar in Evolve jiu jitsu academy. This presents slightly different problems as the students are all strangers, but the general idea remains the same.Creating a connection and changing a mindset Normally when we think of instruction in jiu jitsu we think of our daily technical lessons that aim to improve the precision with which we apply technique. There is however, an entirely different kind of instruction that is of equally great importance and in some ways even greater importance. I am talking about INSIGHT THAT CREATES IN THE STUDENT A NEW POINT OF VIEW THAT CHANGES THE DIRECTION OF THEIR STUDY AND GIVES THEIR TECHNIQUE A SENSE OF DIRECTION. Consider an example from my sensei, Renzo Gracie. When I was a white belt, I hated bottom position and always sought to fight on top. Mr Gracie had observed me in training and one day when we talked I expressed my preference for getting to mounted position and doing everything from there. Mr Gracie said to me, John, you realize the guard is just the mounted position upside down, and walked away, leaving me fascinated and suddenly eager to try a position that I had totally avoided and which he wanted me to train. It was a simple, and in retrospect, not entirely true point but it opened my mind to a new direction in training and that is precisely what it was intended to do. Years later its effects can still be seen. A cornerstone of my coaching philosophy is that in grappling not fighting top and bottom are neutral with regards our ability to enter effectively into submissions. I never forgot the power of insight as a mode of instruction over and above technical lessons. Here I discuss approaches to sankaku, the triangle, with Nicky Ryan, a technique in which he excels. Over and above the mechanics of a given move, there must be a GUIDING PHILOSOPHY which gives the techniques direction and creates a genuine sense of self expression in the athleteLevels of intensity One of the best features of jiu jitsu as a martial arts is the degree to which it allows practitioners to adjust the intensity of the moves to the situation in which they find themselves. This allows for choice in our application of the art it can range from very mild to very severe, depending upon the context. Probably the single best way to assess the skill level of a jiu jitsu player is to look at their ability to play with the full range of intensity, from low to high against high level opponents in competitive situations. When you see someone effortlessly controlling a fully resisting opponent, that is a very clear sign of technical excellence. Winning is one thing, but HOW you win is always the deeper story of your skill level. This weekend, up and coming apprentice kohai student, Stanley Rosa, showed his rapidly improving technique through superb control. Mr Rosa is a student of my great friend, Doug Pelinkovic at RGA Bronx bxmartialarts and often trains with the squad and in addition, I teach there once a week. The Bronx bombers have been training hard. Mr Rosa traveled to Tulsa Oklahoma to compete in Sub Wars submission only event for one thousand six hundred shekels. Fighting through a round robin event, he defeated all opponents via submission. In the final he showed excellent control in the application of juji gatame the arm bar to win first place. Like all the best submission holds, juji has two aspects the controlpin aspect and the breakingsubmission aspect. THE BEST PEOPLE EXCEL AT BOTH AND UNDERSTAND THAT ANY DEFICIENCIES WITH ONE MAKE FAILURE WITH THE OTHER VERY LIKELY.Traveling man Part of the process of improvement is traveling to test your skills, just as a thousand years ago the shaolin monks had to leave the monastery upon graduation and walk the land with their skills, so too, the modern jiu jitsu player must travel to compete and deepen his learning and demonstrate his craft. Up and coming kohai apprentice student , Jason Rau, did exactly that this weekend, going all the way to Iowa for The Submission Spectrum event at 185 pounds Mr Rau normally competes at 170. Mr Rau fought five times, winning all five by submission in regulation time, one by sankaku triangle strangle and four via his rapidly improving leg lock arsenal. Here he displays a nicely controlled entry into cross ashi garami from underneath his opponent into a fine heel hook variation victory on the way to first place and and a thousand shekels for the piggy bankA great performance Robert Whittaker, the New Zealand bornAustralia based MMA fighter put in a tremendous performance against Cuban middle weight sensation, Yoel Romero to take a unanimous decision victory. The fight itself was a superb example of neutralizing a very dangerous opponents weapons and enduring injury and a strong starting adversary in order create what was essentially two fights in one evening Romero took the first two rounds with his wrestling skills and explosive leg kicking. Then rounds three through five was a completely different fight, with Mr Whittaker taking the offensive on a fading opponent, shutting down the wrestling and imposing his own game to take three rounds in a row. This was testimony to the professionalism of Mr Whittaker and his team, made all the more impressive by the fact that it was all done while carrying an apparent injury from the beginning of the match. Mr Whittaker has now dispatched the two men most people considered the two best title contenders in the division in back to back fights in decisive fashion. Along the way he has shown he can beat the best strikers, wrestlers and jiu jitsu players in the UFC. However, this win was much more than just a standout fight performance. It teaches a far deeper lesson than this. The last decade has seen the rise of super camps in MMA. Most athletes, especially those in the top tier, are based in a few dominant camps Top Team, Jacksons, AKA, Blackhouse, BlackZillians etc. These camps provide massive support and infrastructure for the athletes, training facilities, medical and financial support, media help etc etc. It is increasingly a corporate approach to training. What is remarkable about Mr Whittaker and his team is that they did it all on their own, in a nation far from the usual centers of MMA. It is an inspirational story of how dedicated, self starting, highly motivated individuals can out perform the big established brands with enough hard work and passion. What a great night for Mr Whittaker and his coaching staff, and for Australasian MMA and indeed, for anyone who believes in the power of a few good men with a goal, passion and a professional demeanorHumor in unlikely situations In combat sports sometimes the funniest things occur totally out of the blue and amongst all the anxieties, make for great memories. In the 1980s a campy martial arts movie, The Karate Kid was released. It featured a young man moving to a new town and getting bullied by a group of toughs from a the local karate school, the cobra kais. The young hero learns karate and takes on the local thugs in a tournament where he defeats several of them on the way to the final. The evil sensei of the Cobra Kai dojo recognizes the threat of the newly trained hero and tells one of his athletes to perform an illegal sweeping technique to break the heroes leg. He uttered the now infamous command to sweep the leg which has now found its way into contemporary culture as something to say anytime you want to advocate underhanded or dirty tactics to gain victory. The hero, Daniel, somehow survives the pain of the illegal technique and gets to the final against the best of the cobra Kai students, whose name was Johnny. The evil sensei again encourages the use of attacks to the now damaged leg and says, sweep the leg Johnny. Daniel again survives and goes in to win, earning the respect of his tormentors, a hot girl friend, some dope looking cars and a pat on the back from his sensei everyone leaves happy. Some thirty years later, Georges St Pierre was slated to fight what would become his last title defense at welterweight against the juggernaut KO specialist Johny Hendricks. The fight camp was a very tense affair and as the fight began, Mr StPierre hit an immediate takedown into guillotine and the crowd roared. Then the two circled and gauged each other, there was a strange quiet spell where you could clearly hear the fighters breathing, the opposite corners instructions etc. suddenly an audience member with a booming, stentorian voice shouted out, SWEEP THE LEG JOHNY!!! In the midst of all the action, I turned to Firas Zahabi and said, Dude, that was pretty fking funny, and we got back into the business of coaching. Who would ever guess that a cheesy line from a movie I saw as a teen would come back in such a way and at such a time! Double Impact Here is a remarkable case of twin turbo action two of my favorite black belts The StLeger twins, Garry gstleger and Harry harrystleger They are not just biological twins, they are both double blackbelts in Judo and BJJ. Both competed in the world championships in Judo for the United States and have incredible skills in the standing position; but when the action hits the floor, the BJJ kicks in now THATS double impact! These two tatami monsters were a huge part of one of the very best fight camps I ever participated in, when Chris Weidman prepared to take on Anderson Silva and win the UFC middleweight title. Their tremendous clinch, fence wrestling and ground skills were invaluable. Now Harry is an assistant coach at my old comrade Greg Jacksons gym in New Mexico. Garry lives in NYC and often assists me in daily teaching when my current physical problems make certain moves impossible. I have always been a strong advocate of blending standing skills tachi waza with ground skills ne waza. These two outstanding athletes are tremendous examples of this. Recently Harry returned to the big apple to share some mat time with the squad and his brother for double the fun! I always tell my students, jiu jitsu is ne waza focused, thus most of our training time is on the floor, but you should at least be competent in the standing position. Our watchword is killers on the ground and competent on the feet. These two over achievers went further and are killers in both domains!Immediacy of input We get thousands of moves shown to us in the course of a given year in jiu jitsu. In a time where there are schools on every block, numerous champion authorities teaching online, and a veritable plethora of enthusiasts happy to share what they know to anyone with ears the problem for the student is not access to information, but RETAINING information. I often find the best way to make information stick in a student is to teach it immediately after they are stumped by a given problem. Sometimes as we spar, we run into a problem and fail to overcome it. There is a feeling of frustration in that moment if the lesson is quickly taught to them in that moment an important point demonstrated I find it tends to stick in the students mind better than if I simply offer cold information unrelated to their sparring experience. There is something about immediate feedback to a frustrating problem that aids retention. This has to be used sparingly however; as general rule rule I dont like to interrupt live sparring randori. I like to see students moving continuously through sparring time as they would in a match, but occasionally if I feel the situation warrants it, I will see a situation where the student can benefit from a quick insight in response to a problem and failure I will make the point and then get them immediately back into sparring. Usually just a quick point can make a substantial difference in performance with regards that problem and, as I noted earlier, the immediacy of the point and its psychological link to a moment of frustration, tends to make it more memorable to the student. Here I call out a few details of wristband elbow position to a frustrated Garry Tonon during a time he was working on guillotine attacks with mixed results in time it became one of his best weapons.Mixing sports As much as I am an advocate of focused training, I am also a big believer in athletes participating in other sports outside of jiu jitsu and other combat sports. For example, sports that promote versatility and ease of movement, such as gymnastics, yoga, capoeira etc, can have great benefits for jiu jitsu practice. Strength sports such as Olympic and power lifting also have their own value, as do sports that develop overall fitness and coordination such as soccer and basketball among many. This is particularly true for very young athletes. Over emphasis of just one sport often leads to muscular and postural imbalances that can cause problems in the future. Developing bodies do better, I believe, with a wide variety of sports challenges that work the full range of human movementability. There is always time for extreme specialization in the future. Here, eleven year old prodigy Mikey Wilson works his jiu jitsu skills with Katya Leontyeva, with a focus on ude gatame arm locks and heel hooks for today, as part of his jiu jitsu program. Outside the jiu jitsu dojo, he also works equally hard on wrestling, capoeira, gymnastics and break dancing in addition to his scholarly and artistic pursuits. This wide range of movement training, along with excellent mental focus, makes him unusually adept at picking up skills in jiu jitsu practiceFixation Probably one of the surest ways to hinder performance is to select a given move and push hard to complete it LONG AFTER THE OPPORTUNITY FOR IT HAS PASSED. So often in a sparring session or match we develop a tunnel vision that limits our outlook to an extent where it harms performance. A MAN WITH A THOUSAND TECHNIQUES CAN BE REDUCED TO A ONE TRICK PONY IF HE SEES ONLY POSSIBILITY IN FRONT OF HIM. One of the most valuable services a coach can provide is an extra set of eyes that widen the scope of an athletes vision and alert him to other choices that can open up the action and create forward direction. The odd thing is that tunnel vision arises from a desirable origin in athletes focus. Athletes need focus to direct them to and through the application of a given technique. However, applied too long, the virtue of focus becomes the vice of tunnel vision, as the athlete stays with one move when probability of it succeeding has become unacceptably low. Here I am calling out options for Gordon Ryan on his way to a perfect victory at EBI 11 that night he did not need it, he found by himself the perfect compromise between focus and adaptation a hallmark of good jiu jitsuYou cant keep a good man down forever It extremely pleasing to see Demian Maia get one of the most well deserved title shots in UFC history against juggernaut Tyron Woodley. Mr Maia had an unusually difficult path to welterweight contention, probably due to his Grappling based fighting style which clashes somewhat with the UFC brand image. Despite numerous setbacks and disappointments, Mr Maia never resorted to the usual antics used to jump ahead of the line. Instead he focused upon one thing winning. Seven straight wins against the best people in the division, mostly by crushing submission. The UFC has been the only major MMA organization that made money and had longevity. They did that by cannily observing what makes people want to watch a pay per view. The answer for the vast majority of fans is simple drama and violence. Fighters that offer those two will always generate sales. Mr Maia is remarkable because he deliberately eschews both. He prefer bloodless checkmate victories and speaks in the most respectful manner to friend and foe alike. I have had the honor of coaching two athletes in preparation for bouts against Mr Maia, Chris Weidman and Rory MacDonald. I found the experience, from observing his subtle skills and game planningcountering against it, pre and post fight encounters etc to be among the most interesting and rewarding of my coaching career. When in NYC training with his great friend, Marcelo Garcia, he will often stop by RGA to say hello to my dear Sensei, Renzo Gracie. You simply could not hope to meet a nicer person. I have always believed that every great mans life tells a story. The message of Mr Maias journey is clear. STAY TRUE TO WHO YOU ARE AND ONE DAY YOU WILL NOT ONLY GET TO YOUR GOAL, BUT HAVE THE SATISFACTION OF KNOWING YOU GOT THERE ON YOUR OWN TERMS. DONT CHANGE YOURSELF TO PLEASE THE FRIVOLOUS LIKES AND DISLIKES OF A CROWD WHOSE AFFECTIONS CHANGE WITH THE WIND. BETTER TO BE ADMIRED BY FEWER FOR WHAT YOU REALLY ARE THAN WATCHED BY MORE FOR PRETENDING TO BE WHAT THEY WANTED YOU TO BE. Best of luck to both these great athletes. Regardless of outcome, Mr Maia will always have my unstinting admiration.Getting used to it As a general rule in day to day training, I prefer to see athletes working with training partners a tier below them in skill level. This allows them to focus more on technical development rather than physical exertion and pressure. However, it is very important that occasionally athletes get to work with people their own level or better, particularly when competition is approaching, so that they learn to operate under harsh physical duress and not panic and break when they encounter genuine physical pressure. Young Nicky Ryan nickyryanbjj , enjoying his sixteenth birthday in LA, gets some fine training in with the great Keenan Cornelius keenancornelius . It was a fine experience for the rapidly developing youngster to feel world class pressure from a different style than he is used to and one that he must learn to deal with as he enters top level competition in the future. Developing athletes must go through the trials of being the nail so that one day they can emerge as the hammer.Friends and rivals The very nature of jiu jitsu leads to intensity in personal relationships. On the one hand, it is deeply competitive even a friendly roll at the gym has a winner and a loser. In competition it is even more pronounced. There are many people vying for one first place. On the other hand, we are all in love with the same sport and have a camaraderie of shared vision and experience. This means that often we can be involved in tough competition with someone, but at the end of the day, we are all doing the same thing and part of a brotherhood. Gordon and Nicky Ryan are currently on a tour of California teaching private classes and seminars and also visiting our good friend Shawn Williams shawnwilliamsbjj academy. As part of their training, Gordon Ryan trained with two of his toughest former rivals, the great Keenan Cornelius keenancornelius and world champion Lucas Hulk Barbosa lucasbarbosajj. They all had a great time training Gordon Ryan even trained in a Gi!! 3 Its always great to see friendship replace rivalry in time even though in truth the sport requires both in order to operate. Dont forget to get an opportunity to train with the Ryan brothers if you want to see our approach to the sport from two of its best representatives gordonlovesjiujitsu nickyryanbjj I dont know how these two are going to deal with a return to sweltering, chaotic, crowded New York after their Californian sojourn They are taking quite a liking to the West Coast and enjoying developing a student base there Ne waza, tachi waza and the uniqueness of BJJ Of all the grappling arts, BJJ probably puts the least emphasis on takedown skill. This is reflected in the points system, where takedowns score only half as much as the favored pins and there is no penalty for simply sitting straight down into ground grappling ne waza. This under emphasis of standing techniques tachi waza has been a constant source of criticism over the years. As a general rule I believe that standing techniques have been underdeveloped in BJJ and that this must be addressed at some point, either as individuals by independently studying other grappling arts such as judo or wrestling or as a community by changing the way the art as a whole is practiced and taught. This however, is not the topic I wish to discuss here tonight. There is another topic that few have discussed which gets little attention in the BJJtakedowns argument, but which is of the first importance in this debate. BJJ is a ne wazacentric art. Its primary emphasis is on control on the ground. Judo and wrestling are tachiwazacentric. Their primary concern is on the takedown itself, with a strong reward system for amplitude and power on the takedown. This creates two very different concerns on the part of the person performing the takedown in each sport. In jiu jitsu, the primary interest in the takedown is in WHAT HAPPENS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE TAKEDOWN. It is no good if you perform a fine takedownthrow but finish in a stranglehold or bad position in the aftermath the value of a takedownthrow can be completely negated by a bad outcome on the ground AFTER the throw is completed. In a grappling style where the primary emphasis is on the throwtakedown, the amplitude of the throw becomes the only concern with no regard for the aftermath once the two combatants hit the mat. My point is this the issue of BJJ and takedowns is not only the issue of how to get people more proficient at them, but the secondary issue that is largely ignored HOW ARE WE TO MODIFY THEM TO MAKE THEM APPROPRIATE FOR A NE WAZACENTRIC ART? This to me is the more interesting project and the one which will lead to future innovations in the sportReflections on my students Chris Weidman I have been blessed throughout my coaching career to have many outstanding students infused with talent, drive and a tremendous work ethic. One of my favorite memories will always be the incredible series of wins that took Chris Weidman from a talented newcomer in the UFC to a run of victories that made him a contender and then ultimately, UFC middleweight champion by defeating the greatest Middleweight of all time, Anderson Silva twice. One of my favorite memories of Mr Weidman occurred when he went to San Jose California to fight Mark Munoz as part of his campaign for a title shot. The match with Mr Munoz was in a minor UFC show midweek UFC on Fuel TV on a Tuesday or Wednesday night. We arrived on Saturday to prepare. That Saturday night in Las Vegas, Anderson Silva had his second fight with Chael Sonnen one of the biggest fights in UFC history. We wanted to watch the fight so we went to a local sports bar, but it was completely crowded and we could not get a seat. Mr Weidman, his faithful friend, Gian Villante and myself had to stand outside and watch through the windows. It was so crowded that people spilled outside. No one knew who Mr Weidman was. Finally one young man walked up and asked if Mr Weidman was a fighter. He replied, yes and I want to fight Anderson Silva and beat him, pointing at the screen. As he said those words, Mr Silva crushed Mr Sonnen with a knee strike and follow up. The young man said, you dont want to fight that guy, and walked away. When I cast my mind back to that night, I am struck by how Mr Weidman was invisible to them a nobody even a fool to the one person who recognized him; but in his own mind he was full of resolve and confidence in his vision and dream. As we walked away from the crowd no one could guess that almost a year later that unrecognized nobody staring through the window and who could not even get a seat at the bar would defeat the idol that they had all come to see. NEVER LET THE CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES OF YOUR LIFE DISCOLOR OR MARR THE VISION YOU HAVE FOR YOURSELF IN THE FUTURENeiman Gracie wins again! RGA instructor and grapplingMMA standout, Neiman Gracie had the honor of fighting in Bellator NYC only the second time an MMA show has been put in in Madison Square Garden. He won brilliantly in the second round via classic stranglehold from the back against a very tough David Marfone in an action packed event. It was wonderful to see such a result the move most associated with the tradition of his family in MMA, yet embedded in a very modern and well rounded game. Mr Gracie has been trained almost from birth under his father, Marcio Stambowsky, himself one of only four blackbelts under the legendary Rolls Gracie. On addition, my sensei Renzo Gracie, his cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor and the RGA Muay Thai program directors, Joseph Sampieri and Jamie Crowder. Sensei Renzo Gracie was there to corner him to victory last night He put all his skills together for a very fine victory indeed on an action packed event here in NYC. His unbeaten MMA record is testimony to his professionalism in preparation, hard work and ability to learn so well from his coaches Nice match! In an unexpected turn of events at a local Grappling show in New Jersey, United Grapplers Association, in what was supposed to be an eight man tournament, most entrants pulled out, young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years old, went in! He faced the great world champion, Paulo Miyao in a nice match, fought under ADCC rules. Mr Ryan was able to get to the legs for submission attempts, but could not establish the control necessary to make them effective. Mr Miyao did an excellent job of establishing positional control, using the threat of back attacks to pass Mr Ryans legs and get to side and mount positions with a good controlling bodylock and score his points. The match ended in an uncontrolled ashi garami. A solid win for Mr Miyao and a great learning experience for the youngster. Mr Ryan did very well indeed, giving up a considerable amount of strength and size and a massive amount of experience for a fifteen year to even survive against such a great champion is impressive, to get some attacks in and finish the match attacking to the last is deeply impressive. As this young man grows and matures it will be a privilege to watch he becomes capable of. Great to see famous champions such as Mr Miyao in local shows and showing their skills a good day all round. Talented individuals versus a squad So often in jiu jitsu we see the emergence of extremely talented individuals who for a time dominate their division. It is natural to ask how they came to acquire their world conquering skills and try to learn from them. As impressive as the emergence of great individuals may be, much more impressive is the emergence of a talented GROUP of individuals. Some people have such special characteristics that their success may be due to them as individuals rather than the program in which they developed. When you see a gym put out a team of talent, clearly something special is happening. The Gracie Barra headquarters in Rio of the early 1990s is a great example. So many fine athletes and instructors came out of that environment that it is very clear that the program was of the very first quality. Thus when I asses the health of a given training program, I do not do so on the basis of its best individual, but on the average level of its people, particularly the emerging kohai junior students. This is particularly true when I look at the skills emphasized by a given team. Sometimes an athlete will emerge from a given school with an outstanding technique, say a juji gatame armbar. If no one else in the gym has an impressive juji, one could surmise that the athlete learned it in an idiosyncratic fashion as an individual, rather than in a SYSTEMATIC fashion as a SQUAD. THE CLEAREST EVIDENCE OF A SYSTEMS BASED APPROACH TO LEARNING AND TEACHING IS REPLICATION can many athletes across skill level, weight division, age, sex etc utilize the skills to attain victory. The emergence of a talented individual exhibiting skills can be explained by idiosyncratic elements, but not a group of people all exhibiting similar skills in that case there is most like an effective system at work imbedded in a sound training program. When I construct and implement a training program this is always the sign that I look for. Here, squad kohai Danny Hernandez, a very talented athlete training under my very good friend and team mate Doug Pelinkovic, gets success with our leg lock system in competition, showing its effectiveness for so many team members.Rite of passage Nicky Ryan attained his first adult belt today. Though he is fifteen years old, his fast approaching birthday makes him eligible for an adult purple belt. Mr Ryans ambitions include IBJJF sanctioned competition, both gi and no gi, so having a set belt rank will be important in the next few years to get him ready for ever greater challenges as he matures. His progress thus far has been extraordinary, but he has very high standards for himself and is looking to push much, much further. We are all very proud of his amazing work ethic and maturity. In attendance were his daily mentors, Garry Tonon and brother Gordon Ryan, along with our good friend and accomplice, Tom DeBlass, who has played such a fantastic role in Mr Tonons and the Ryan Brothers development. Smiles all round as this wonderful young talent gets his well deserved reward California dreaming Gordon Ryan is going to California next week for a teaching post. He will be teaching privates and seminars. This is a great chance for our Californian fans to catch up with one of the very best practitioners and teachers off our approach to the sport. Mr Ryan is known primarily as an athlete, but his teaching skills are every bit as good as his competition skills and he does an incredibly good job of showing the moves and tactics he uses with so much success on the big stage. Mr Ryan is a very innovative athlete who constantly looks for more efficient ways to get work done. If you have ever wondered how he gets his moves to work so fluidly against high level opponents, check out his teaching schedule and perhaps he can demystify some elements of his game and make them part of yours. Mr Ryan is a big fan of Southern California and is always trying to get out there as often as possible. The squad always prefers to train people over time rather than one off sessions so that we can create progress over time. As often as Mr Ryan travels to California, perhaps you can forge a connection and make training with him a regular thing? Meanwhile the rest of the squad will remain in sweltering, sweaty, smelly Manhattan in preparation for upcoming matches Here you see Mr Ryan teaching younger brother Nicky Ryan prior to competition, a job he has done superbly as evidenced by Nickys recent successesMr Crelinsten shows his mettle The main event this weekend at Global Grappling League this past weekend was Nicky Ryan vs Marvin Castelle a match Mr Ryan won rather quickly by submission. The comain event was equally decisive Ethan Crelinsten, one of our Canadian contingent, took on 10th planet standout JM Holland, and locked in a tight juji gatame arm lock for his second submission win over Mr Holland in the last month. Interestingly, this coming weekend, Mr Crelinsten will have a match with the very same Marvin Castelle who headlined against Mr Ryan, only this time it will be in Florida and under a very different rule set that allows points for pushing an opponent out bounds and other unusual elements. Both athletes have an approach which focuses upon submissions rather than wrestling skills, so I suspect the rule set will not play into the match too much. Mr Crelinsten is keeping up an extremely high work rate in local competition and getting great resultsThe return of the Wolverine We are very excited to see the return of Eddie Cummings to top level grappling competition in the near future with a tremendous match up at Grappling Industries NYC event August 19th in Manhattan against the great Paulo Miyao. The squad has faced the Miyao brothers before, When Garry Tonon took on Joao Miyao and took a hard contested win. In that encounter, however, the rule set was one unfamiliar to the Miyaos. This time it will be a rule set they know very well and have excelled in ADCC rules. It is natural for most people to see this as a match of a positional master against a submission master. Whilst it is true that one tends to win more by position and the other by submission, both are extremely talented in both domains. Mr Cummings has guard retention skills that are second to none and is also a very fine guard passer. He has been training hard and pushing his skill set and looking for new directions in training and preparation I am certain you will see a very well prepared Mr Cummings step on to the mat August 19th. Great to see two truly top level grapplers showcase their skills in NYC!Nicky Ryan takes the win! Fifteen year old prodigy Nicky Ryan took on 10th planet standout Marvin Castelle, a twenty five year old brown belt full time instructor at the main 10th planet school and won by submission in a no time limit match, using a heel hook variation for the win in around three and a half minutes. The match was held at Global Grappling League in upstate New York today. Mr Castelle had garnered something of a reputation as a leg lock expert, but Mr Ryan was not afraid to go in for his own leg lock to take the win when you grow up in a training room with Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and brother Gordon Ryan, the threat from other leg lockers often feels anemic in comparison. Here he is proactively jumping into the legs to take a fine win and another great step forward toward his goals. What great maturity from such a young man to train, prepare and then headline as the main event on a stacked local grappling event card and take such a fine win!Young guns Tomorrow squad kohai apprentices will go out to compete at Global Grappling League. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan nickyryanbjj will take on twenty five year old Marvin Castelle, an instructor at 10th Planets main school. Ethan Crelinsten ethancrelinsten will take on JM Holland another 10th Planet standout. In addition, other kohai will compete in what should be a great local tournament for the youngsters to get valuable experience and exposure on the growing submission only circuit. Seniors Garry Tonon garrytonon and Gordon Ryan gordonlovesjiujitsu will corner their understudies and give them the guidance that saw them through to so much success and which the youngsters strive to emulate. Its been a great week of training for the kohai and all are excited to put their skills to test on the stage. Wonderful to see them getting used to the idea of specialized preparation and planning to get to a goal and showing the discipline and fortitude to go in well prepared and ready for action.Jiu jitsu as warfare on an individual scale I am a proponent of what we might term the doctrine of scale the idea that individual combat shares the same themes, concerns and lessons as massed combat, all the way up to wars between nations. As such, when people ask me what kind of people I study to improve my jiu jitsu, my response is often to go beyond the sources that most people go to, contemporary champions of the sport; and make forays into military theory and history. It is my belief that there is much to be learned from the many outstanding thinkers in this area that can provide insight into your development in jiu jitsu. There are a vast number of brilliant military theorists and practitioners starting long before Sun Tzu and going all the way through to the modern age figures such as John Boyd. Two military theorists who had a big effect on my approach to jiu jitsu were the Englishmen, J. F.C Fuller and BH Liddell Hart. From Fuller I learned to emphasize the great value of technical innovation in combat. From Liddell Hart I learned to emphasize indirect methods of attack above all others along with concentration of force being more important than overall force. Interestingly, Liddell Hart appears to have been familiar with the jiu jitsuJudo notion of kuzushi breaking an opponents balance prior to attack he makes several references to it in his writing and considered it essential to successful attack. Whilst both men were brilliant in their domain, both had their flaws. Fuller appears to have leaned overtly towards Fascism in his political beliefs and got worse in this regard as he aged. In addition he seemed to have flirted with strange occultist beliefs throughout his life. Liddell Hart seems to have been involved in some degree of personal aggrandizement after WW2. Still, there is no denying their brilliance within their field and its potential value to a jiu jitsu student. In their military writings there are many gems here is one from Liddell Hart. Helplessness induces hopelessness, and history attests that loss of hope and not loss of lives is what decides the issue of war.From chaos...order Sometimes when you observe two people engaged in ground Grappling the whole enterprise just looks like a tangled mess with no direction. Unfortunately in many cases this perception is accurate. This usually occurs because neither person has a clear sense of WHERE THEY WANT TO GET TO and HOW THEY ARE GOING TO GET THERE. The first question should be easy enough to answer. Jiu jitsu clearly implores us to get to either a better position or into a submission hold or some combination of both. The real problem then, is how to get there from what is often a very confused beginning. Developing this two stage thinking where do you want to be and how you will get there, is the key to developing a sense of constant purposeful movement that characterizes superior players. Looking at this photo it is difficult to believe that a few seconds after it was taken, Garry Tonon would emerge with a devastating heel hook variation and a fine submission victory from this awkward and seemingly unpromising situation at this metamoris event. Yet this is exactly what you must train yourself to do to see possibilities where others dont, and then make a practical plan of how to get there faster than your opponent can conceive his own plans. This is where favorite moves tokuiwaza can have a very beneficial effect. In a haze of confusion we will often find direction through our must trusted moves and get to a winning position.Jiu jitsu for a lifetime So often I teach people for the purpose of short term gains in the sport an upcoming match, a need to quickly master certain techniques to overcome a given opponent or area of weakness...however, the best way to approach the sport is always with the long term mindset of jiu jitsu as a lifetime activity. It is always a special thing to meet people who have been in the sport over the course of a long distinguished life. They carry insight and perspective that is always enlightening and instructive. I have found that often they can illuminate problems in contemporary jiu jitsu by offering a viewpoint that has passed out of current vogue. Today after the big Monday afternoon class at RGA, my beloved sensei, Renzo Gracie called the class in for a special moment he awarded the coveted red and white belt to Marcio Stambowsky, a man who has lived and breathed jiu jitsu his whole life among the greatest men of the sport. He is one of only four men to receive his black belt from legendary Rolls Gracie. Even now he is a formidable presence on the mat with a beautiful game that represents many of the techniques and philosophy of his esteemed master and the other great masters of that era. His son, Neiman Gracie, teaches at RGA and fights in Bellator MMA league father and son representing the classic and Neo schools of jiu jitsu. Joining us was Reyson Gracie, uncle of Renzo and Ruran, son of Renzo. What an incredible mix of youth and experience from the first family of jiu jitsu! Listening to the conversation and stories I learned about our sport than I did from most formal instruction! What a fine example from Mr Stambowsky for everyone today about how constant maintenance of our skills can make jiu jitsu effective over a lifetime and a formative influence on a new generation.Team tightness I have a strong preference for teams that work in unison on a daily basis, forging a room of people who share a vision and a program designed to take them towards it. As months become years and years become decades, this tightness creates a group of people who know their team mates better than they know themselves. Training becomes much smoother and more efficient. When I give directions to my students they can generally follow easily just because we spend so much time working together that the moves flow as easily as our conversation. When a stranger comes in to the group, it inevitably slows things down, as we have to explain the many little details and nuances that the regular students have long since absorbed into their thoughts and actions and perform unconsciously. Once the stranger is assimilated to some degree, things speed up again. Nowhere is this tightness of shared thoughts and actions more obvious and more useful than when cornering our athletes in competition. I can often convey large amounts of information in just a word or two that would be meaningless to a stranger, but to someone from our training room, may well be of great use at a critical moment. Having a specialized vocabulary for The many moves and skills we employ is a big help. It makes conveying information much faster and also makes it difficult for an opposing team to understand what we are trying to say. Here, Gordon Ryan is on his way to winning EBI 11 as Garry Tonon and myself observe and call out options that may be of some value should the pressure of the match cause him to overlook them. As we all train together and discuss our methodology together seven days a week, all the students can corner each other with ease.Catch! With most submission holds there is a significant gap between THE INITIAL APPLICATION of the hold, and the ACTUAL FINISH. Submissions, unlike strikes, do not do all their work in an instant. Once the set ups are complete, there is an initial hold AND THEN A CRITICAL PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENT IN WHICH THE MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS OF THE HOLD IS INCREASED OVER TIME UNTIL SUBMISSION OCCURS. This critical period of time is one of the most important in the sport and often distinguishes those who merely dabble in submissions from those who truly seek to master them. So much is going on. The athlete must have a clear goal that directs his movement against strong resistance to solidify and tighten the hold. She must also be capable of determining when the process cannot be sustained and switch to another submission or positional move. It all happens very quickly and under great physical pressure, so having the various directions that usually occur in response to a given submission attempt mapped out in advance is a big help. Here, teenage prodigy, Nicky Ryan snatches a quick entry into sankaku triangle from open guard. He immediately goes all out to follow the lines of his opponents resistance, shutting down as many as he can with mechanical tightness and tactical savvy threatening other submissions etc. Focus upon this critical gap between initial application and finalization is a big feature of our training program.Great students and a common factor I was very fortunate to have many great students it is valuable to ask if they had any common factors that aided their development. Georges StPierre, Chris Weidman, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and the Ryan brothers among many others all made unusually rapid progress towards their goals. Each of those men mentioned have very different attributes and personalities, but they also had common factors which I believe made them extremely quick developers. One such quality that is rarely spoken of, but which I value greatly, WAS THEIR INCREDIBLE ABILITY TO SENSE THE POTENTIAL OF A GIVEN MOVECONCEPT WHEN THEY WERE INTRODUCED TO IT. This is extremely important in a sport where there are a vast number of moves, but limited time to learn and assimilate them. All of these athletes could see andor feel a move and make a quick assessment of whether this move would work well for them in the rule set they were working within. This is not a common thing. When we first learn moves, typically our early attempts are not particularly impressive. It is thus easy to get disheartened and quit or move on to something else. However, if an athlete CAN SEE POTENTIAL he will PERSIST and put the time and effort into mastering that skill to a point where it becomes a weapon in his hands in competition. The other danger is that an athlete will persist with a move that has little potential for them and waste time over mothsyears in a project that bears no fruit. Of course there are exceptions to this. Eddie Cummings famously hated outside ashi garami based leg lock attacks early in his development, but finally went on to make them one of his best weapons. Garry Tonon balked at the idea of investing time in developing a strong guillotine, but finally pushed through and developed devastating guillotine attacks. These cases were the exception however. Most of the time all these athletes had an uncanny ability to assess the potential of a given move and make quick assessments as to whether it was worth investing time in its development or not. This gave their training tremendous FOCUS and minimized time wastage due to pursuing fruitless endeavors.Stylistic difference Very often in training and competition you will face someone with a very different style from your own. It might be because they come from an entirely different grappling background, such as wrestling judo or sambo etc. or it might be because they had a coach with a very different jiu jitsu philosophy than yours. Whatever the reason, athletes need to keep a balance between their concern about WHAT THEIR OPPONENT IS GOING TO DO vs WHAT THEY WANT TO DO. I usually find that excessive worry about what the opponent will try to do is detrimental to performance. It is good to have a working knowledge of his game so that you dont get surprised, but your primary goal must always be to IMPOSE YOUR STRENGTHS RATHER THAN TRY ONLY TO NEGATE HIS. Here, Gordon Ryan takes on the very talented Russian wrestler, Rustam Chsiev, a man who has defeated many jiu jitsu champions with a fine blend of freestyle wrestling and grappling. In this match neither man could decisively assert their game on the other in regulation time leaving it to a tense finish in overtime where Mr Ryans submission skills won the day. Both Athletes did a good job of fighting to keep the game in their domain rather than get drawn into timidity through excessive concern about what the other fellow would do. It made for one of the most exciting EBI finals of them all and a great example to other athletes.Kohai taking titles This weekend was Sapateiro 9 the 145 pound division. Two squad apprentices kohai were sent, Jonathan JC Calestine and Ethan Crelinsten. Both men submitted all their opponents in regulation time EBI rules in effect to the final. It was notable that along the way they defeated EBI veterans, JM Holland via heel hook and Mike Davila by toe hold and ADCC trials standout, Ian Murray via heel hook showing how they are getting ever closer to the next level of competition at a very young age and with very short time in training. In the final the two team mates met each other. Every day in the gym they spar and its always a very even match so too in the final of sapateiro 9. However, this time JC was able to catch a powerful lock to the ankle and secure a great win. He walks away with another great win, two thousand shekels and the great satisfaction of a 100 submission in regulation record very difficult to achieve at this level but it is our goal every time our athletes step on to the mat. Photos by Guilliana FonsecaInformation wars I always feel that in the history of human conflict, access to information and the ability to use it to advantage, has almost always been the deciding factor in victory or defeat. Most people always attribute victory to attributes like toughness, size, experience etc. yet history shows many examples of smaller nations that possessed information on some technical innovation along with the will to use it, defeating many larger nations. So too, in jiu jitsu. I put a premium on informationknowledge over all other factors. That is not to say the other factors are unimportant, just less so than informationknowledge. This shows when the squad goes to teach to fans of our approach. We work hard to convey information in ways that students can rapidly understand and assimilate into their own game. This often involves a tricky balancing act between painting a big picture to give students a general sense of direction; along with the fine details to enable them to realize that direction. Here I am going over some of the details of our ashi garami system in Singapore as people get a good look at how we transmit an unusual degree of force into our opponents knees and ankles. Its always easier to convince people when you have students using the exact same techniques to defeat world class opponents the night before! I also got a chance to enjoy Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan teaching their own variations of our approach to a fascinated crowd. Like all my students, they teach as well as they compete only much more well mannered and spoken than me! Of course there are many factors in your jiu jitsu development, but I have always found that making knowledgeinformation the bedrock upon which all the others rest leads to the most sustained long term progress in the sport.The foundation of our approach to bottom position ground grappling kuzushi There are many ways to play effectively from underneath your opponent in grappling. Some play a game of reactive game of waiting, when their opponent makes some kind of tactical or technical error, they seize upon it and attack. Others play a game of immobilization, they wrap tightly around their opponent to hold him in place and gradually work their way into offense, variations of closed guard and rubber guard are good examples of this. Our approach is to actively seek to break our opponents balance. This action is traditionally referred to as kuzushi. Kano made it the foundation of his approach to standing grappling in Judo. We look to extend that into ground grappling from bottom position. Our primary focus is always TO GET OUR OPPONENTS CENTER OF GRAVITY BEYOND HIS BASE OF SUPPORT. Once this is done, we work of his reaction to gain either positional advantage or go directly to submission attacks. Many outstanding jiu jitsu players have used this method with great success in all weight categories. Specialized guards have been created over the years to facilitate kuzushi. If you are to make it the basis of your game, then you must train diligently in the means of creating kuzushi on a resisting opponent and learn to tie these in with the attacks of the sport. This approach to the game breeds a fast attacking style that CREATES opportunities rather than waits for them. In addition it makes for a dynamic game rather than an immobilizingstifling one. All the various approaches have their advocates and successes. In our experience we have found the kuzushi based method to be preferential given that we seek quick entries into our preferred submissions whenever possible. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of elevating his opponent up where he will be forced to base out and leave extended limbs available for attackGive in order to take A tactic that we often use in submission Grappling is that of attack by concession This involves conceding good position and allowing our opponent an apparent advantage. Normally I would frown upon such tactics certainly this is not wise for a beginner to attempt, nor against someone you believe is easily capable of exploiting that positional advantage at your cost, nor in a real fight where striking is involved. However, if you have justifiable faith in your ability to generate effective movement even in bad position against your opponent, then temporarily giving up position can be a fine means of creating opportunities to attack. Very often opponents will take risks with limb extension in dominant positions that they would never take in neutral positions, as a result, when an escape is made, those extended limbs can are often very vulnerable for a brief period. In addition, this tactic can often be useful against a very cautious or timid opponent who is simply not engaging in neutral positions. The key of course is to first be strong at pin escapes and second, to be able to seamlessly tie together your escape skills with your submission skills. Here, Garry Tonon makes use of a method of escaping mount that all my athletes excel in, the kipping escape. It is very different from conventional escapes from mount, but provides a superb platform to enter immediately into a wide array of submissions the moment you are free. Just half a second after this photo was taken, Mr Tonon was attacking his opponents legs. I remember as this occurred the crowd murmured in concern as the opponent mounted, sensing impending doom, and were shocked to see effective offense come out of such a situation.Old friends One of the best elements of martial arts study is the people we meet and befriend along the way. When Georges StPierre was scheduled to fight Carlos Condit, he went to enlist the help of Masters Yod and Lamsonkram two very distinguished Muay Thai champions. They flew all the way from Thailand to freezing cold Montreal. They spoke no English at the time and had never left their home for any length of time. Now they were in a completely fore...Rear mount and classical jiu jitsu In the classic point structure of BJJ, which was designed to illustrate to the student the positional philosophy that underlies the sport; there is no distinction between front mount and rear mount they both score the maximum of four points. This is because the classical point system is designed to work with the notion of striking from dominant position in which case both front and rear mount are extremely effective. Even in sport jiu jitsu without striking, the lapels in the front of the jacket offer tremendous strangulation potential through jiu jime the cross collar strangle almost as good as rear strangleholds. In no gi submission Grappling however where there is no striking and no lapels I COUNSEL MY STUDENTS TO FAVOR THE REAR MOUNT OVER FRONT MOUNT WHENEVER THE OPPORTUNITY PRESENTS ITSELF. We put a very heavy emphasis on getting to the back, maintaining back position and finishing from the back considerably more in fact, Than front mount position. It is my. My students relentlessly hunt the back and put a disproportionate amount of time into developing their skills in this great attacking position. Here Ethan Crelinsten, apprentice squad member kohai enters the Ultimate Mat Warriors event, run by 10th Planet standout Boogie Man Martinez. Mr Crelinsten won gold, all four matches by submission to win himself two thousand shekels and gain more invaluable competition experience and help prepare to rise to the next level of competition. Here he shows his quick transitions to the back along with his finishing skills.Pikachu checks in at the airport We are waiting for our plane at Changi International Airport in Singapore on to Dohai and then NYC. Out of nowhere Nicky Ryan reaches into his luggage and pulls out the weirdest outfit I have ever seen in my life apparently its called a onesie and he has the pikachu Pokmon variation. He put it on and sat next to a horrified squad! When I criticized in rather harsh language his choice in clothing he took an indignant air and launched into a passionate defense of onesies as a clothing option for men. Then he unleashed the line that floored us all actually I bought this for Gordon. It turns out both Ryan brothers are onesie fans!! No wonder they wont wear a gi! They are used to the snugly softness of their onesies!! Garry Tonons face tells his side of the story. I am trying to pretend I dont know Mr Ryan and trying to change my ticket to another plane. I cant believe he got through security in this outfit I guess they were just happy to see him leaving the country Fun day of seminar work here in Singapore at Evolve gym The squad showed some of our leg lock concepts and tactics to a big crowd at Evolve gym. It was wonderful to watch Garry Tonon teach in a masterful manner his own approach to leg locking an incredible reactive method that he used to defeat Shinya Aoki and numerous other champions. Young Nicky Ryan showed the link between leg and back systems that he and his brother exploit so well to gain victories in competition. The attendees put up with my foul language and horrendous sense of humor and learned very well the core principles of our ashi garami system. Looking forward to forging links to our friends here in Asia to show our approach to the sport. Now its off to the airport to return to NYC and see my dear students in the blue basement where they have doubtless been enjoying the absence of my dark and horrid presence Some Acai, some jiu jitsu discussion and then its homeward bound! Reflections on the Singapore adventure Garry Tonon won his super fight with Shinya Aoki with one of his trademark moves last night in front of a packed stadium and a very large TV audience. Going beyond that, there was much about the event that was gratifying to observe. First, it was wonderful to see a grappling match showcased on the main card of a big MMA event. It was great to see the crowd get excited to see two grapplers use their skills to put on an exciting match with a decisive finish that got as much audience reaction as the MMA fights. I TRULY BELIEVE THAT PROFESSIONAL GRAPPLING, TAUGHT AND PRACTICED THE RIGHT WAY, CAN BE EVERY BIT AS EXCITING AS AN MMA FIGHT AND DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE SKILLS THAT CAN BRING VICTORY IN MMA. I hope this is the first of many such combined MMAgrappling shows and that the divide between the sports can be narrowed. I hope that one day the athletes who represent our sport and who give so much in their pursuit of excellence can be rewarded with money and fame closer to that of their MMA brothers. I believe advances in this direction will be of great benefit to both sports. I hope that one day there can be professional grappling events on a scale not far below MMA events where athletes can showcase their skills in an exciting format that thrills crowds, advances their skill level, helps prepare them to transition more easily to MMA and compensates them for their commitment. Second, it was wonderful to see a resurgence in Asian MMA. Asia was one of the key birthplaces of our sport there is a culture of respect here for the athletes and the skills they showcase that is unique and deeply admirable. We North Americans could learn much from them in this regard. It was great to see One FC put on a tremendous show that brought back memories of PRIDE and the glory days of Asian MMA they just need more development time to grow and who knows how far they can go! Tomorrow we teach a big seminar here in Singapore where we will show some of the techniques Mr Tonon used to gain his victory to the local jiu jitsu athletes then back to NYC and the blue basement of learning to get ready for the next show!Victory in Singapore Garry Tonon won his big match with the great Shinya Aoki tonight in a sold out Singapore indoor stadium broadcast to 118 nations. Mr Aoki showed both his MMA and Judo experience. He did a fine job controlling the initial action on the fence and even took Mr Tonons back for a time, though did not threaten from there. A nice sasae footsweep saw him again take top position and use his height advantage to intelligently bodylock the hips for control. Using small movements of elbow and knees, Mr Tonon created space and inverted his body to enter his opponents legs. From there it was an quick path to submission victory as Mr Tonon used his overwhelming advantage in this area to turn the direction of the match and get a decisive win. Its been a fascinating week of preparation and an introduction to the Asian MMAgrappling scene.Three great forces at work Morning workout in Singapore two days out from showtime. The forces of nature reveal themselves in a massive downpour and thunderstorm as the squad works out. I have always said you dont understand real rainfall until you have been in Asia. Its a fine reminder that in an industry where we endlessly work towards ascendency among our our powers in physical power and strength, ultimately we are all equally weak in the face of the humbling powers of nature. The second great power is that of ROUTINE. As soon as we arrive in a new city or country we immediately establish a local routine around which we base our match preparation. It is our belief that ALL HUMAN GREATNESS TAKES BIRTH IN ROUTINES THAT ALLOW US TO DEVELOP THE SKILLS THAT WILL MAKE US STAND OUT AMONG OUR PEERS. Routines allow us to control a schedule and allocate the time required for skill development it is those skills that will create greatness. FOR EVERY MOMENT OF EXCITEMENT IN YOUR CAREER YOU WILL NEED A HUNDRED HOURS OF ROUTINE TO PREPARE YOU TO SUCCEED IN THAT CRITICAL THRILLING MOMENT IF YOU ARE TO BEAT THE BEST. A third force at work here is narrative. Stuart Cooper, an Englishman deeply involved in the world of jiu jitsu, chronicles on film the work of outstanding jiu jitsu exponents. Here he films Garry Tonons preparation at Evolve Gym and records his thoughts on this great match up with the outstanding Shinya Aoki. Such work is very important for the growth of jiu jitsu. Just as the memory of Achilles and Hector would have died if not for Homer, so the achievements and thoughts of jiu jitsu icons must be recorded if future generations are to be inspired and learn from their experience. Now its on to medical check in and media time Then the routine kicks in again tonight for second workout.Late night big city vibe Asian style Last workout of the day complete and late dinner at a Korean restaurant here in Singapore. Singapore hosts every Asian culture and what better Late night meal is there than Korean BBQ? A great night of training, plotting, game planning and general shenanigans for the squad as we investigate this fascinating city. Up early for first workout tomorrow and Mr Tonon goes through a long day of media obligations, weighthydration checks they do things a little differently here to ensure athletes do not lose vast amounts of weight prior to competition and thus compete much closer to their actual weight than they do back home, then second workout at night. We find a routine in a new environment as quickly as possible to become acclimated and efficient as strangers in a strange land can in the time available part of putting on the best possible performance at show timeCounting down Garry Tonon works through the final week of NYC preparation for his upcoming super fight with the great Shinya Aoki in Singapore on May 26. It will be a fifteen minute grappling match at an MMA event. Next week will be the final steps in contest preparation in Singapore. Mr Tonon had to make full use of his training experience as his main training partners were unavailable. Eddie Cummings had to go to Texas for a match that wound up getting cancelled. Gordon Ryan was badly injured in a freak weightlifting accident at the gym and most of the kohai are overseas. Learning to maximize the value of the partners you have around you is a big part of progress and preparation and Mr Tonon did a good job working through his drills and sparring without his usual partners and working the skills we believe will be important in this great match. Tomorrow will be last day in NYC and then the long journey to the heart of Asia for the big show!Training vs fighting A fundamental tenant of fighting is to avoid your opponents strengths whilst imposing your own. Interestingly, in training I recommend that you often do the exact opposite. In fighting and competition shiai THE OBJECT IS VICTORY. In training, the object is SKILL DEVELOPMENT DO NOT CONFUSE THEM. As such, one of the best ways to train is to identify the strengths of your various partners, AND REGULARLY EXPOSE YOURSELF TO THOSE STRENGTHS. This is a splendid way to build skills, particularly defensive skills. Here, Georges StPierre works with Nicky Ryan. Of course Mr StPierre could easily take Mr Ryan down and play a game of disengagement, but he recognizes that such a tactic would offer very little skill development. Instead, he opts to maximize training value by going against Mr Ryans formidable leg locking and guard passing skills from bottom position. When students make a clear distinction between training and competition and the different priorities of the two, rapid skill acquisition is common. Failure to make the distinction usually leads to students who have a small skill set of favorite moves which does not grow over time. Training sessions tend to become very repetitive and dull. KEEP IN MIND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN TRAINING AND COMPETITION AND YOU WILL BE REWARDED WITH GROWTH OVER TIME, no matter how frustrating it may seem in the short term. Be mindful of one of the central paradoxes of jiu jitsu training THE MORE VULNERABLE YOU MAKE YOURSELF IN THE TRAINING ROOM, THE LESS VULNERABLE YOU WILL BE IN COMPETITION.Round 2 The squad always tries to keep a busy competition schedule against the best. We are excited to announce a greatly anticipated rematch between Marcelo GarciaTeam McGregor standout, Dillon Danis and Garry Tonon at Polaris Grappling on August 19 in London, England. Mr Danis and Mr Tonon famously met before at the world championships where Mr Tonon put on a fine display culminating in a powerful heel hook for the win. Much has changed since then. Working extensively in MMA circles has greatly improved Mr Danis wrestling. His leg locks and strangles, particularly his guillotine, have also greatly improved. Perhaps most importantly, he has gone up to 200 pounds Mr Tonon walks around at 170 and cannot try to gain weight as the world championships are soon after this event. Accordingly this match will have a very different background to their first encounter. Mr Danis recently lost a very close match in EBI overtime rules to Mr Tonons team mate, Jake Shields, but even in defeat, he showed a great skill set and increased strength and athletic ability that will definitely play a role in this rematch. Once again, Mr Tonon will have to rely on his movement skills, technical precision and confidence to find victory against the bigger and stronger athlete. The squad always looks forward to our overseas adventures hoping we can get more squad standouts on this London card and send a team to show our EnglishEuropean followers our style and approach!Jiu jitsu in Singapore On May 26, Garry Tonon will take on Japanese MMA and Grappling icon, Shinya Aoki in a 15 minute submissions only match in a cage during an MMA event. This will doubtless be one of the most anticipated grappling bouts of the year as both men have a reputation for spectacular moves and the confidence to pull the trigger when they see opportunities. The next day Mr Tonon, Nicky Ryan and myself will teach a seminar at Evolve gym showcasing many of the techniques and tactics that have proven so successful for our athletes in competition. Martial arts have always had such a strong presence throughout Asia, so it is a great honor for the squad to travel deep into Asia and show some of our material. This week it will be a long one in the blue basement of learning at RGA as Mr Tonon goes through his final preparation, then its on to Singapore a long trip indeed, but the allure of a great opponent and a chance to teach in a new environment makes it all worthwhile. Looking forward to meeting friends in Singapore! A fine win for Jake Shields tonight against Marcelo GarciaTeam McGregor standout Dillon Danis at SUG 4 tonight. Mr Shields overcame the odds at one point he was a 71 underdog to take a tough victory in the EBI format overtime on fastest escape time. It is a testimony to Mr Shields tremendous work ethic that he can take on a star grappler much younger than himself in a format that he has little experience and take a victory. It was so impressive to watch over the last two months as Mr Shields came in twice a day every day to train with the squad, some of them half his age. Most athletes with Mr Shields experience and record begin to coast in training he never did every session was like a contest and he took on the difficult skills of EBI overtime, particularly escapes, and made tremendous progress, despite the fact that it was far removed from his normal game and skill set. What a fine example of a mature athlete staying focused, learning new skills, adapting over time and coming through for a tight, but well deserved victory. Stockton bitches!! No rest for the kohai The quest to rise in skill and prominence is a constant one for the apprentices of the squad. Ethan Crelinsten, squad kohai standout who just won the ADCC trials, went right back into competition yesterday at the 16 man 155 pound EBI format Global Grappling League. With 1000 on the line, many very talented local grapplers got in on the action. Mr Crelinsten emerged victorious again winning every match by submissions ranging over the whole body armlocks, strangles and leg locks. Here we see him using elements of our back system to strangle talented EBI standout and former team mate Mike Davila and get to the final. In the final he went against talented Brazilian black belt, Alexander Da Silva, who had done very well to get to the final. There he prevailed with a well applied knee bar hiza gatame. A happy Mr Crelinsten celebrates with team mates and a thousand shekels for the pot! This busy schedule of training and competition builds a reservoir of knowledge and experience that will prove invaluable later in the athletes career. Photo by outrunthereaperForeign operations Kohai apprentice squad member, part of our formidable Canadian contingent but with European ancestry Oliver Taza, has an outstanding day in competition this weekend. He won the European trials for the ADCC world Grappling championships and has secured his ticket to Finland later in the year to battle the best grapplers on the planet. He fought four times, winning three via his tokui waza favorite technique the inverted or inside heel hook. Along the way he defeated two black belts Mr Taza is only a recent brown belt, both are former European champions. Here is some video footage taken from the final sorry about the far away perspective its the best we have available where Mr Taza combines Sumi gaeshi sacrifice throw with a nice step into cross ashi garami to secure his heel hook and the win. Great work by our two Canadian standouts Mr Taza and Mr Crelinsten to qualify for the world championships and represent their nation and our approach to the sport.Ryan brothers dominate Last at night at Fight2Win Pro 34, another great event for the promotion, the squad standout Ryan brothers took center stage and stole the show with two impressive victories. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan won his match with a well applied ashi garami to heel hook in less than 30 seconds. The promoters were puzzled as to what level of belt Nicky Ryan should fight at he is too young to have an adult belt. I dont blame them for the confusion, I am his teacher and I dont know what belt to give him! In the end they went with purple belt and Nicky is now the fight to Win belt holder in his weight category. Big brother, Gordon Ryan was the main event where he took on the very talented and successful Eliot Kelly, multiple time world champion, ADCC trials champion and A man who has defeated some legends of the sport such as Xande Ribeiro. Mr Ryan however, was not to be denied. His confidence was very high coming off a very good training camp and he got his characteristic submission based game into operation. Mr Kelly showed some very skillful defenses, but the sustained pressure Mr Ryan can impose is very difficult to deal with and eventually the breakthrough came via a beautiful sankaku triangle combined with armbar juju gatame. I am very happy Mr Ryan was able to show his sankaku skills. Both Ryan brothers excel in this technique in fact they have invented their own unique versions of it that we named after them, but their success with leg locks and back attacks has overshadowed their incredible sankaku skills on the big stage. I believe this will change in the future in the gym it is their main weapon its only a matter of time until this translates into competition shiai. Mr Ryan expressed great admiration to me for his opponent, Mr Kelly, complimenting him on his defensive skills, wrestling skills and fighting spirit. Both men came out looking to win in an exciting fashion, which created a memorable match. A great night for the Ryan brothers whose diligent work, inventive approach to technique and growing confidence continue to impress me.Colorful characters This weekend , one of the most colorful characters in MMA history, Chael Sonnen, will return with his growing show, Submission Underground for the fourth time. It will be headlined by two of the most colorful and talented grapplers in the submission grappling circuit Dillon Danis and Jake Shields. Mr Danis is a founding member of the. Dream team a very talented group of grapplers working out of NYC under the tutelage of the great Marcelo Garcia. He is often associated with another great martial artist, Connor McGregor, with whom he is an assistant coach. The squad has faced Mr Danis before at the ADCC, Garry Tonon had a fine match with him. That day Mr Tonon prevailed with a very powerful heel hook variation, but since then, Mr Danis has greatly improved. He has had dominating victories over BJJ world champions, Jackson Sousa and AJ Agazarm. In those impressive victories he showed great progress on his wrestling and leg locking skills along with great confidence. He goes into the match a 71 favorite, understandable, given his recent form. However, his opponent, Jake Shields is exactly the kind of man who likes to prove Vegas oddsmakers wrong and has made a career doing it. He has trained very well with the squad. He came here with a fine positional game and has worked hard to improve his submissions skills. This should be a great match between two athletes who bring a larger than life aura with them, combined with the talent to back it up, along with the confidence and attitude to let it all shine on the big stage. Break out the popcorn and the Diet Coke, this one will be a fire cracker!High altitude action this weekend This Friday, May 12 in Colorado, the Ryan brothers step up to compete again at Fight2Win Pro 34 in super fight action. The format will be ten minutes of Action and a decision based on submission danger and positional control should it go the distance. Nicky Ryan will take on talented local purple belt Derek Alumbaugh and Gordon Ryan will headline against the extremely talented and tough Eliot Kelly. Mr Kelly has a long resume of high level success. He mixes wrestling and jiu jitsu into a winning blend that has seen him win at the highest levels in both gi and no gi competition. He is ADCC American trials winner from last year and has repeatedly won world championships in a range of belt and age categories, beating legends such as Xande Ribeiro along the way. He fights at super heavyweight Mr Ryans best weight is at welterweight, but he has worked hard to gain weight and has finally broken the 200 pounds barrier to try to narrow the size gap with some of his future rivals. Fight2Win continues to grow as a venue for developing athletes around the nation and combines fast pacing of matches throughout the event, good atmosphere, some all American razzle dazzle and high level super fights to create interest. Both Ryan brothers have trained very diligently indeed and are now working to adjust to rare mountain air of Denver. Should be a great show!Weaving jiu jitsu into life brings life to your jiu jitsu A theme I try hard to instill in my students is to take the lessons of jiu jitsu and apply them to other aspects of their lives. So much of our lives, in business, commerce, relationships, politics etc take the form of competitive and cooperative games just like jiu jitsu. It is surprising how often insight drawn from jiu jitsu can illuminate other aspects of our lives and vice versa. When this happens, jiu jitsu takes a much richer and deeper meaning for us. We see it no longer as a game or recreation, but as a way of thinking. I had the chance to express this theme in the popular TV show Billions, where one of the main protagonists uses themes learned in jiu jitsu to gain advantage in his battles against a foe. Most competition and cooperation follow the same basic structure, so we should not be surprised at overlap between jiu jitsu and other aspects of life. Often however, the themes are clearer in jiu jitsu and learned there first and applied to life later. Here, Paul Giamatti takes a Kimura from a position that people naive in ground grappling might consider inferior, but takes a win through tactics and technique and sees a deeper lesson that will inspire and energize his character in more important ways...Kohai making waves in Texas It was another great weekend for the squad kohai apprentices. Jonathan Calestine and Ethan Crelinsten entered the Onnit invitational 4 event in Texas yesterday and both submitted all their opponents, including EBI standouts Ricky Lule and Sheridan Moran, along with an IBJJF brown belt no gi world champion, mostly with variations of heel hooks and toe holds. Mr Calestine has been improving greatly of late, with the characteristic long training time and strict focus upon refinement of techniques and tactics that the squad expects. Both of our athletes went all the way to the final where finally the two team mates had to take each other on. In the gym they are very evenly matched. On this occasion Mr Calestine prevailed with riding time advantage on OT to take a narrow victory. The mantra of our kohai is always onward and upward thats the spirit that takes us all from apprentice to master. Great to see these two outstanding young athletes taking that spirit and weaving it into the fabric of their lives and goals.Excited to see Gordon Ryan back in action in two different capacities next week. He competes in the Fight2Win promotion more on that soon and then teaches a seminar at Musclepharm gym. The interplay between competing and coaching is a fascinating one in jiu jitsu. I am a believer in the idea that teaching always helps development of the teacher as much as the student. The level of my own game rose dramatically when I started teaching full time. Mr Ryan, like all my best students, is a very fine teacher. He has many improvements and advancements of the philosophy that our team utilizes. For our friends in Colorado this is a great chance to learn from a passionate student of the game who has a great deal of truly interesting knowledge to offer that can kickstart a jump in your level and perhaps change the way you think about the sport. If you can get there dont miss it! Spillover I am a big believer in the notion of spillover, where changes in one area can create changes others. One of the biggest problems beginning students face is learning to overcome the natural instinct to wrestle mostly with their arms and shoulders and learn to wrestle predominantly with their legs and hips. One of the very best means of doing this is to strongly emphasize the use of sankaku triangle in their daily training. Learning sankaku requires them to use their legs with dexterity and precision. The attributes required for success with sankaku cross over into so many other skills in the sport that soon I notice increased use, effectiveness and confidence in the students with regards their leg work in the sport. As such I constantly work sankaku skills into their training at every opportunity, knowing that it will create growth in areas they had not associated with it. All my top students excel in sankaku interestingly, our leg and back attacks have been so successful that few have seen how much we emphasize it, but that is bound to change in the future. Here, fifteen year old kohai juniorapprentice standout Nicky Ryan shows off his very impressive sankaku skills, a move that he strongly emphasizes and favors.When the hard work is done Nothing brings people together like shared adversity. Hard training and shared goals make some of the strongest friendships and make the punishing routine of championship training tolerable. If shared adversity is the best way to help build team unity, story telling after training is a close second! When you have a cast of characters like Jake Shields, Georges StPierre and the squad together you know there will be no shortage of crazy stories to tell after class to bring a smile and laughter to everyones face! The martial arts never had a shortage of crazy characters and events, so story time after training is always a highlight of the day. I always encourage this kind of thing its a great way to cement the camaraderie they will build a training program that forges elite athletes and forward progress for all. Training cannot be a joyless slogging match if it is to be sustained over time there must be a release and sense of good times. Every gym has there their coaches and athletes who make training time intense and beneficial, but just as valuable are those characters who make it fun just to be there I am lucky enough to be surrounded by people who are both!The why versus the how A big part of my teaching method is to seek as often as possible to explain the why of a given move over and above the how. Usually jiu jitsu is taught in a framework of how to do things. That is fine and absolutely necessary. Without the knowledge of how to perform the various tasks of the sport, there can be no progress. However, I find students react well to being told in addition WHY we do things as we do. Doing so provides a CONTEXT and FRAMEWORK within which techniques can be ordered and understood. This makes it easier for students to recall the information later, and crucially, gives them a clear view of the big picture the instructor is trying to convey. Just a few words at the outset of a training session creates a context for the moves and techniques we will work on and creates a real sense of purpose for the entire training session. Remember moves have not only a TECHNICAL importance, but a TACTICAL importance also. This tactical value is best conveyed by explaining clearly WHY things are done as they are. Getting students to think this way creates students who can be creative and independent, rather than a group of people trained only to follow instructions and who will struggle to create their own game or improvise in sparring. Here, we briefly go over the rationale behind parts of our back defense system then its on to the heart of the workout drilling and sparring!The man in the mirror Have you ever sparred with someone whose game was almost identical to your own? We spend so much time developing our own unique style of jiu jitsu what happens when we run into someone whose game is almost a carbon copy of ours? It is actually a fantastic learning experience, albeit sometimes a frustrating one! It gives direct insight into the strengths and weakness of our own game, particularly in the area of our vulnerabilities to attack. In all my coaching experience I have never seen such closely matched grappling games as those between two former rivals, Georges StPierre and Jake Shields. Their styles are so closely matched that if they concealed their faces and wore identical clothing when they sparred, it would be a struggle to tell them apart! The whole thing looks like a computer chess program playing itself! For both athletes it represents much more than just a tough sparring session its a great way to look deeply at themselves and their game in the continual quest for improvement. Here both athletes relax after another tough session in preparation for their upcoming eventsThe many faces of jiu jitsu Teaching the Monday afternoon class at RGA was an opportunity to reflect on the many faces of jiu jitsu. Georges StPierre came in for some hard training in preparation for his title challenge late this year against the great Micheal Bisping. Across from him was Jake Shields, getting ready for a grappling match under EBI rules against Dillon Danis at the SUG event in two weeks. With Mr StPierre was Garry Tonon, preparing for his bout with Shinya Aoki in Singapore in one month a thirty minute sub only affair. Three different athletes preparing for three very different eventsrule systems. Yet the fundamentals of jiu jitsu apply to all. I love to coach all the different faces of jiu jitsu and often find that improvement in one area has benefits in others. Here, Messrs Shields, Tonon and StPierre do positional work, guard passing and back control as they test their skills against each other in the gym, but always with their eyes on upcoming challenges on the big stageCoping with loss All competitive athletes reaching upwards will have to learn to deal with losing. It does not matter whether its on the big stage, in the gym, at the onset of your program or at your peak it happens to everyone no exceptions. I am often asked by people how they should deal with loss. There are two main problems here. The first is important in the immediate aftermath of a loss. Here the main problem is EMOTIONAL the problem is not why it happened, but THAT It happened. As time passes, the emotional phase gets replaced by the REFLECTIVE phase the athlete begins to reflect upon WHY the loss happened. Then we must analyze ourselves deeply and distinguish between a faulty training program and a good training program that the athlete failed to adhere to. That is a big topic too big for an Instagram post even for me! With regards the emotional phase I always say the same thing YOU FOUGHT BRAVELY AND WITH FINE TECHNIQUE, GIVING EVERYTHING YOU HAD, BOTH IN PREPARATION AND THE BOUT ITSELF. THERE IS NOTHING MORE YOU CAN ASK OF YOURSELF AS A MAN, NOR ANYTHING MORE THE AUDIENCE CAN ASK OF YOU AS AN ATHLETE NOW, LETS GO FORWARD TOGETHER.Traveling with jiu jitsu I always tell my students when you learn jiu jitsu, you never walk alone , where you go, it goes with you. Kohai standout Matthew Tesla has a deep love of the Scandinavian countries and often travels there. This presents him opportunities to show our approach to the growing jiu jitsu community of these great nations. Recently Mr Tesla entered a local tournament in Sweden featuring two divisions at 88kgs and 99kgs. He entered both despite being only 77 kgs himself. He won both divisions eight matches in total, all via submission in the manner we prefer. Here is a fine standing entry to ashi garami followed by a nicely applied heel hook. Just as the martial arts monks of the old days walked the earth and took their skills with them to help those who needed it, so too, the modern jiu jitsu athlete must take his skills with him or her and help students wherever he visits if the sport is to grow and prosper.The iron law of posture FOR EVERY PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, THERE IS A POSTURE THAT MAXIMIZES YOUR ABILITY TO PERFORM THAT ACTIVITY WITH THE LEAST EFFORT AND MAXIMAL EFFICIENCY. In jiu jitsu and indeed, all efficient physical activity, EVERYTHING BEGINS WITH POSTURE. I assure you, ANY DEFICIENCIES IN POSTURE WILL COST YOU IN PHYSICAL EFFORT as that cost increases, your performance will deteriorate through fatigue and the chances of your opponent successfully attacking will rise. If you are to make progress in the sport, you must make a deep study of the main scenarios you find yourself in and research the various postures that will form the foundation of success in those positions. The problem is that jiu jitsu is an extremely dynamic game in just a short time there can be a vast number of different positions and scenarios and you must, if you are to maximize your performance, be able to switch seamlessly from one posture to another in response. THE INTERFACE BETWEEN POSTURE AND MOVEMENT PRESENTS A CHALLENGE IN LEARNING THAT WILL OUTLAST YOUR LIFETIME it is oceanic in its scope and complexity BUT IT IS THE ONE WHO NAVIGATES THESE DEEP WATERS BEST WHO WILL PREVAIL IN JIU JITSU. In the early stages of development in my students, I PUT FAR GREATER EMPHASIS ON POSTURAL INTEGRITY THAN INDIVIDUAL MOVES. A single move will always be of very finite value, but a posturecentric mindset will give birth to an infinity of well executed moves and create excellence far quicker than any given move. Here, ten year old Mikey Wilson and fifteen year old Nicky Ryan work their postural drills from seated butterfly guard, finding exactly how a given posture can improve or detract from their goals in that position one in which they both already excel through this kind of training.First do no harm Students of medicine are often instilled with modern versions of the Hippocratic oath, which state that the basis of medical treatment is to first, do no additional harm to the patient on top of what he or she is initially suffering from. The same idea, with a little modification, is critical to success in fighting and jiu jitsu. In all combat sports first DO NO HARM TO YOURSELF FROM WHICH YOU CANNOT RECOVER AND GO ON FIGHTING. Fatigue and injuries are all part of competition, but CATASTROPHIC injury is a whole different thing. In this case the fight is over and no recovery is possible. Most accidental catastrophic injuries are the result of an athlete trying to avoid an undesirable outcome to a scrambletakedownthrow where uncontrolled moving body weight is involved. I always urge students to take the safe route of falling to their backs in a safe fashion in these cases even if it means taking a position of disadvantage for a time or conceding points or in Judo and some forms of wrestling the match. The risks are tough for athletes to weigh they want to maximize their chance of victory and are natural risk takers and they know that most of the time, injury will not be the result. The problem is that when injuries DO occur under these circumstances, they are horrific and fight ending. I prefer a safety first approach where athletes always defer to safe falling and then working out of whatever position they find themselves on the ground rather than subject themselves to massive physical forces to avoid a fall. Here a famous clash between Shogun Rua and Mark Coleman shows what happens when immensely powerful athletes crash to the floor in extended positions. Mr Rua knew that falling underneath Mr Coleman was undesirable and took the understandable risk of posting out an arm to prevent the takedown. However, the power of Mr Colemans takedown completely broke the extended arm and the fight was immediately over. Pandemonium broke out in the ensuing confusion, but the result was clear. The original philosophy of the fathers of Brazilian jiu jitsu was survival first victory second. In cases like this, their wisdom is apparent.Big ambitions start small Very often I will be asked how athletes got to the high level of competition they currently work at. What many people are not aware of IS THE SMALL AND HUMBLE NATURE OF THE BEGINNINGS OF MOST GREAT ATHLETES. It is natural for them to make this mistake. Athletes are only noticed when they get to a certain level. All the myriad small, local trials and competitions they battled through to get to that level are unknown to the general public. This is the most natural and effective way for emerging athletes to work. START WITH SMALL, LOCAL CHALLENGES AND PROGRESSIVELY WORK YOUR WAY UP. So often I see talented athletes try to skip steps in the order of progression and end up with problems. People know the squad mostly through their success in high profile professional grappling events. Few are aware of just how many low level competitions against unknown locals they fought through prior to making it to the big stages. This was a very unglamorous but very necessary step in their road to success. The experience gained at the lower levels is of critical importance when fighting at the higher levels. So many times the squad would travel on their own dollar to obscure events in the tristate region to take on unknown opponents all the while gaining competition experience and confidence that would one day provide the foundation to much greater goals. Many emerging athletes are in a rush to shorten this important start, or worse, bypass it altogether. Dont do your time gain your knowledge and experience and THEN move on. This is true also for non competitive jiu jitsu players. Make your goals in the gym PROGRESSIVE. Start with small goals and THOROUGHLY CONQUER THEM before moving on. In my experience, smooth progression in goals gains better long term results than giant leaps. Here a very young looking squad I think Gordon Ryan is eighteen here relaxes after matching victories in local tournament in New Jersey, one of a vast number that they entered around this time. It was at these local shows they laid the foundations of the game they took to the big stageSeminar Squad style Today I went to teach our approach to jiu jitsu at the dojo of my close friend and Renzo Gracie team mate, Magno Gama in Astoria, Queens, New York. Mr Gama is one of Mr Gracies original NYC black belts. He comes from the famous classes of the 1990s and came up with me under Mr Gracie, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. He was one of my favorite training partners and experimenters in the early days of the development of my leg lock system. He runs a great dojo in Queens New York where he teaches his talented students with passion and skill. Today I was ably assisted by Mr Eddie Cummings who wowed the crowd with some beautiful movements into leg attacks and triangle sankaku attacks. Mr Gama is an inspiration to his students. He came to America as a young man, found jiu jitsu, learned from one of its greatest teachers, took the great risk of opening up his school in one of the most competitive cities in the world, and through his talent and knowledge, created a body of dedicated students who impressed me on the mat today with their capacity to learn new skills. It was wonderful to see Mr Cummings demonstrate his mastery of sankaku so often people think he only does leg locks yet I watch him train every day and his triangle attacks are as good as anyone I have seen. Often students tell me that they cannot do triangle attacks because their legs are too short. Whenever I hear this, I use Mr Cummings as an example of an athlete with shorter legs who excelled in its use. Congratulations to Mr Gama on his incredible success with his school and the example of following a dream and through planning, hard work and patience making the dream a reality Orwell, war and jiu jitsu The great English writer, George Orwell, once defined warfare he fought in the Spanish Civil war as ninety five percent complete mundane boredom and five percent pure terror and fear. Those extremes are equally represented in jiu jitsu though with TENSION and RELAXATION replacing boredom and terror. In sparring and competition, the majority of any given match should be fought in a state of relative physical calm and relaxation so as to conserve energy and create efficient movement. However, when the opportunity presents itself for a major advance or total victory there must be a flip of the switch and total physical commitment to the move with big power outlays as long as it takes to get the job done or there is a possibility of follow up attacks should it fail. If it does fail, the switch must be turned off and a return to relaxed state must be made. This constant interchange between long periods of relative relaxation and short periods of maximal effort is a big part of jiu jitsu mastery. Learning to balance them is a great factor in determining your efficiency. Learning the physical skills of the sport is one thing but putting them in the context of efficient pacing and tension levels is quite another. Here, Garry Tonon is seen in a moment of maximum tension as he applies a match winning heel hook on Zack Maxwell at a Metamoris event. The power of isometric tension and bodily extension is clearly evident here.Appearance and reality One of the best aspects of a life in the martial arts is the characters who surround us. A notable feature of many of these characters is the degree to which they appear quite harmless to the average person, but are absolute killers in reality. Most people put a great value on appearance as the basis of fighting ability, but if our time on the mat teaches us one thing it is that appearances can be very deceiving! Sometimes appearances ARE accurate. Ryan Gracie looked like he could defeat an entire football team singlehandedly and could. However, his brother Renzo, my sensei, looks like a friendly fellow of average build who most people would overlook as a threat prior to fighting yet he was every bit as deadly. I always remember the story of my student Eddie Cummings first trip to tristar gym in Montreal. Mr Cummings had been winning many local tournaments and was now in demand for seminars. I encouraged him to go to tristar home of Georges StPierre, where many MMA fighters work out. On the day of the seminar, Mr Cummings arrived and saw the promotional poster in the wall. It featured a photo of him ripping a mans leg off and his nickname WOLVERINE SEMINAR was used. Many people had come and now Mr Cummings went to the front desk and asked to go in to get changed into rashguard and shorts. The person behind the desk was used to MMA fighters with powerful physiques and Mohawks he said ok, itll be 100 dollars to train, you can get changed inside. Mr Cummings, being a man of polite disposition replied, Um...I am Eddie Cummings. Like I said, its a 100. Ah...Im the guy who is teaching the seminar. The man replied, Youre the wolverine? To which a cringing Eddie Cummings has to reply Yes I am the wolverine. Seriously. Yes! I AM THE WOLVERINE! There was a stunned silence, some skeptical looks and then Mr Cummings went out on to the mats and taught the class once again how appearances do not always give an accurate portrayal of combative ability Finding a match One of the challenges in jiu jitsu is finding training partners with whom you have a good physical match and feel that you can move well together to learn and perfect the movement skills that will create progress in the sport. Imagine you entered a dojo where every single person was a massively muscular and strong three hundred and fifty pounds of athletic power . You are an average sized man. Learning would be a very difficult thing. In live sparring everyone would crush you and you would have a hard time practicing and perfecting the moves in such an environment even avoiding injury would be a challenge. This is more or less the situation that most females and young preteens and teenagers often find themselves in. Their partners are so much bigger and stronger that they either dont apply strength at all out of politeness and concern which makes for rather hollow training or they go too rough and overwhelm the smaller student and crush their confidence, learning curve or body. One of the best matches to get around this problem which is particularly useful in a training room with low numbers of females, is to match young male preteens and teenagers with adult woman. This cuts the size and strength discrepancy considerably and makes for much more dynamic, realistic and challenging sparring for both parties. This method has often been used in Japan, where the female Olympic womens team often trains against a local boys high school team as preparation. Of course there are times when this is not necessary some women have no problem whatsoever going with adult men in regular class and get their best results this way. Nonetheless, this matching of young, smaller males with adult females is often a useful training match to create good progress in many female athletes and young aspiring male athletes. It cures the common problem of size discrepancies creating sparring conditions that are either artificially soft or too rough and suppressive. Here, ten year old Mikey Wilson gets a great workout with Katya at RGA both athletes get a good sense of unrestrained movement as they practice their strangling skills through a range of positions.What a performance! There were quite a few outstanding performances among the many athletes at the recent west coast ADCC trials in California. One of the standouts was that of fifteen year old Nicky Ryan who competed brilliantly against very tough adult competition. Mr Ryan won every match he entered by submission except that against his team mate, Ethan Crelinsten, which he narrowly lost on points. Then he came back and win the last match for bronze medal by submission. It was not just the fact that he was submitting people it was the manner in which he did it excellent smooth entries, combination attacks into tight locks that showed early mastery of the game of control leading to submission. He he uses elements of our sankaku triangle system to get an impressive win. Sankaku is one of Mr Ryans favorite finishes and you can see here he excels at it.Champion attitude It was a breakthrough weekend for Ethan Crelinsten, one of the squads Canadian contingent he won gold at the West Coast ADCC trials and a ticket to the World Championships later this year with a tremendous performance in what may have been the largest trials event in ADCC history. Winning is impressive in itself, but the nature of the victories made it a truly standout performance he won every match by submission save for his bout with team mate Nicky Ryan. I always enjoy teaching our Canadian students. They make big sacrifices to travel so far to train with us. They remind me of my early coaching days when a young Georges StPierre would travel all the way to NYC to build his dream. The kind of dedication it takes was much in evidence today Ethan Crelinsten came back to the gym for two hard grappling workouts just one day after winning the biggest event of His life. This is exactly the attitude I like to see. Most people are satisfied with any form of success and stop champions see an initial success as a stepping stone to greater success in the future and immediately get back to workStepping up to the plate There was a fascinating event yesterday at the ADCC west coast trials yesterday. Braulio Estima was scheduled to match the great Leandro Lo in a super fight of 20 minutes under ADCC rules. Mr Lo is arguably the number one jiu jitsu player in the world today, certainly top three. He is a five time world champion and has in the last twelve months won a huge array of medals and beaten a whos who of the jiu jitsu world. He is known for his extremely impressive guard passing skills and sweeps from bottom. In recent years he has, through an extraordinary strength and size building program, gone all the way up to heavyweight divisions and continues his gold medal success. Mr Estima injured himself during warm ups for the bout. The promoter looked for a last ditch replacement Gordon Ryan has spent the day coaching and cornering the junior squad members I had stayed on the East Coast to corner Eddie Cummings in Philadelphia on Friday. With only ten minutes preparation, Mr Ryan immediately took the match despite the size and strength disadvantage. The match was an interesting one. Mr Ryan had not prepared at all for ADCC rules so just went all out for attacks. Mr Lo was forced to play a defensive tactical game that saw him set an ADCC record for the most stalling penalties in a bout four. He did secure two takedowns to go ahead on points. Mr Ryan made the tactical error of countering the takedowns with Submissions if he had just fought the takedowns and ignored the submissions he may way have won on stalling penalties but that is not our way. More importantly he showed he can go with the best people and have no fear on the ground just needs more tactical awareness. This is amazing given that he has trained less than half the years of Mr Lo, is smaller and weaker, had zero preparation and is only twenty one years old. We are so proud of his progress and cant wait to begin training again for the next big event.The kohai step up at American ADCC trials An extremely impressive day for the squad kohai juniors at the west coast ADCC trials today. Our Canadian squad members had a very fine day indeed with Ethan Crelinsten winning gold at 66kg and a ticket to the world championships in Finland. Oliver Taza got to the semi finals. Nicky Ryan put in another incredible performance as this fifteen year old prodigy submitted his opponents all the way to semi finals where he lost narrowly on points to team mate Mr Crelinsten who went on to get gold. He finished with a bronze medal more importantly he finished with the realization that at such a young age he can easily mix it up with the adults at national level and get to the top Matthew Tesla submitted his opponents before dropping a match on points to team mate Oliver Taza. We are so proud of these young men and their achievements and more importantly, the preparation and lifestyle they instill in themselves to make such achievements possible.Winning vs winning with style Winning is the fundamental goal of athletes in competition nonetheless the squad has always been proud of not just winning, but winning in a particular way hunting ruthlessly for the submission. Our athletes will either get it or die trying. Eddie Cummings came into challenge for the Fight to Win Pro 145 pound belt against title holder Samir Chantre. He constantly looked to engage but he and the audience were frustrated by a distinct lack of engagement from his opponent. That lead to an easy unanimous decision Win for Mr Cummings and the 145 pound belt but still, for us and, I suspect, the audience, it had an unsatisfactory feeling to it. The great majority of the ten minute match was spent with Mr Cummings chasing his opponent to the boundary of the mat and trying to force any form of grappling engagement but to no avail. In the end he won because he was the only one attempting to engage. The good news is that he has the belt and his jiu jitsu has risen in level after excellent preparation unfortunately there were no real opportunities to show that tonight but I am confident that with new belt and title in hand he will soon get opportunities in the future Heading back to NYC from Philadelphia now. Happy to see Mr Cummings back on stage and winning new titles and looking forward to future matches that give greater opportunity to show our style to the audience.Active patience vs passive patience Beginning students are often told to be patient in the sport of jiu jitsu it takes time to be successful. There is obviously a large measure of truth to this. Nonetheless, when I coach I emphasize the difference between what I term ACTIVE PATIENCE vs PASSIVE PATIENCE. It is absolutely true that the skills of any complex activity take time to develop. Skills are born in the same state we are weak, vulnerable and unlikely to survive without nurture and outside help. In time they develop strength and maturity. Just as a weak and helpless baby can one day grow into an Achilles or Hector; so to, SKILLS THAT ARE WEAK, FEEBLE AND UNPROMISING TODAY, CAN, OVER TIME AND TRAINING, MATURE INTO UNSTOPPABLE TOKUIWAZA favorite moves THAT CAN WIN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS. We must be careful however, to avoid thinking that since time is required to develop skill, then we should simply sit back and let time run and watch our skills accumulate. This PASSIVE approach to patience is the enemy of progress. It is essentially a form of lazy complacence where one assumes that by simply showing up and going through the same routines, progress will be made. Patience itself is not a virtue ACTIVE PATIENCE the notion of actively working towards well defined goals with a specific plan whilst recognizing that time will be required to get those goals, is the virtue athletes need. Active patience is the acceptance that skills take time to develop, combined with the recognition that those skills wont develop themselves. They will only grow through intelligent planning towards a specific goal. Garry Tonon is an excellent example. When he first began studying with me, he had no effective strangles from in front of his opponent. I immediately set him to work on developing a strong high elbow guillotine. For months he struggled. At the six month mark he despaired of ever having a strong guillotine. Then finally he started having breakthroughs in the gym against lower belts. Soon it became a trusted weapon. He used it brilliantly on the big stage against the much larger and stronger Kit Dale to win a match that gained him widespread attentionFighting the big men Some of the most impressive wins in the short history of the squad came in their many outings against bigger and stronger opponents in open weight divisions or super fights. There is no clearly sign of the worth of a training program in jiu jitsu than the production of athletes who can take on high level opponents who have a big size and strength advantage and consistently win. In my experience THE TWO BEST MEANS TO SUCCESSFULLY ATTACK BIGGER, STRONGER OPPONENTS IS TO ATTACK THE LEGS AND BACK. Whilst I encourage my students to train to attack the whole body, these stand out in my opinion as best in allowing a smaller athlete to take advantage of the innate weaknesses of the human body to a greater degree than any others. A very fine example of this attitude was on display when squad member, Garry Tonon took on heavyweight world champion Luiz Panza a man known for impressive physical strength which, in conjunction with good technique, allows him to exert tremendous breaking pressure with Achilles lock variations. The clash took place under IBJJF rules at the no gi world championships, so heel hooks, one of our signature moves, were illegal. Mr Tonon immediately went into a battle for the feet, taking on Mr Panza at his speciality the Achilles lock. A deadlock occurred, so Mr Tonon slipped behind his bigger opponent and took the back. Once there, he was able to take advantage of the fact that the human body is well adapted to deal with threats from the front, but much less so to deal with threats from the rear. Very quickly he was able to slip in a well applied stranglehold and take a fine victory. This was an important match for Mr Tonons development. He had always been a good scrambler to the back, but learning to UNIFY weapons leg attacks and back attacks greatly increases their effectiveness. REMEMBER ALWAYS THAT THE HUMAN BODY IS FULL OF ASYMMETRIES AS SUCH SOME AREAS WILL BE WEAKER OR MORE VULNERABLE THAN OTHERS. If you wish to defeat a stronger opponent, knowledge of these asymmetrical elements and how they relate to the techniques and tactics of the sport is the key to success.When Tom DeBlass was a Blue Belt he won a NAGA and I told him if you want to be really good you need to need to go win a Pan Ams or Worlds... at first he seemed offended and thought I was belittling his recent and biggest accomplishment at the time.Teaching here Teaching there Just wrapped up a weekend teaching to the fine folks of Sudbury, Canada along with my great friend and mentor, Ricardo Almeida. It was all organized by Renzo Gracie Ottawa stalwart, Pat Cooligan, who has done an incredible job of taking our Senseis philosophy and techniques and introducing them across Ontario and beyond. Now I am racing through airports and back in NYC! A big week of training coming up starting first thing Monday morning as Eddie Cummings goes back on stage to take on three time world champion Samir Chantre next Saturday in Fight to Win Pro 31. Nicky Ryan goes west to California with teammates Matthew Tesla and Jason Rau, to attempt to become the youngest athlete ever fifteen to qualify for the world championships at the American ADCC trials. Then its uptown to the Bronx academy to check out progress of the Bombers as they continue to impress me with their development. Its always a special feeling returning to NYC from travel I have loved here 25 years and its never lost its charm, pace and excitement for me but even that feeling pales compared with the excitement of returning to train the troops in the dojo as they work hard towards their dreams and aspirations.Another bout another belt Gordon Ryan won the 205 pound division belt at Fight to Win 30 last night in a very tightly contested match against Lucas Barbosa last night New Jersey. It was not the decisive result that our team always strives for. Mr Barbosa fought with an intelligent tactical strategy of snatching at two submissions along with some late attempts to pass. Neither the pass or the submissions were close. Mr Ryan looked to engage from bottom. He came close to nice reversal from bottom. The judges appeared to conclude that this was the only move of the match that came close to completion and so scored it in Mr Ryans favor. Any time a match is that close there will always be controversy as to the result usually the opinions are split according to team affiliation, personal like or dislike or ones general beliefs about the nature of the sport. There are several things that I believe all side will agree on. First, the two athletes are very evenly matched. Second, the match would have been much more satisfying if it was twenty minutes long rather than ten. I know Mr Ryan would be very enthusiastic about a rematch. Perhaps it could be done as a first defense of the belt with 20 minutes duration. Or if The organization is reluctant to opt for a longer match, at another venue without a belt. I felt that perhaps sacrificing just one of the many preliminary matches to create a longer main event would be a good idea. Well done to both athletes for a tight match. As always we are very proud of Mr Ryans performance and his preparation. Here, Mr Ryan warms up for the event with Garry Tonon and Tom Deblass. Now the squad will prepare for ADCC trials in California and fight to win 31 featuring Eddie Cummings vs the great Shamir Chantre next weekend in Philadelphia.Meeting up with Senpai When I was a beginner student under my Sensei Renzo Gracie, our senpai big brothers where Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All three were world champions in there respective areas. All three were highly successful in jiu jitsu and MMA. All three were amazing teachers who inspired us every day we trained. Here I am in Sudbury, Canada teaching next to Mr Almeida at the NOMAD martial arts convention. It is magical to see the same looks of wonder on the faces of the students here as we had in NYC all those years ago Here is he teaching a superb class on the essential principles of guard passing. I never forgot the power of role models in the classroom to bring out the best in the class overall. That is why I try so hard to create a group of outstanding students who I know will create a level of excitement and interest that will make the level of the ENTIRE ROOM rise.Exciting days ahead Great week of training with the squad. Gordon Ryan has been peaking well for his superfight against world no gi champion Lucas HulkBarbosa this Saturday night in New Jersey at Fight to Win pro 30. Once again Mr Ryan, a welterweight, will test himself against the big men at light heavy weight. Then April 15 in Philadelphia, the return of Eddie Cummings on his bout against three time world champion Shamir Chantre at Fight to Win Pro 31. I really believe Mr Cummings game has attained a new level of development and I am very excited to see him competing again. Across country in California, fifteen year old Nicky Ryan will battle at the American ADCC trials in an attempt to become the youngest person ever to qualify for the world championships. With him will be outstanding kohai student, Matthew Tesla as he attempts to qualify for ADCC at 170 pounds. Behind it all is Garry Tonon, working hard in preparation for his grappling superfight against Shinya Aoki in what will be one of the highest paid, most watched and most anticipated grappling matches in history going down in Singapore on May 26. All great events, all great goals for the squad but as always we are all mindful of the fact that these lofty goals are only attainable by the most mundane means hard, intelligently directed training in the dojo. The greatest goals are aspired to from the humblest and most everyday beginningsOvercoming limitations With some recent problems with my left knee, even demonstrating jiu jitsu is problematic for me now. Last night I taught a seminar at the dojo of my good friend and teammate, Carl Massaro. Through the capable help of our mutual student, Frank Rosenthal, we were able to give a good representation of our squads ashi garami game. It was very pleasing to see the room quickly pick up the main concepts and techniques and begin applying them. It gives me confidence that whatever happens in the future, I can still be of use to my beloved students and the sport. It amazed me to see relative beginners to the leg locking game quickly slipping into position and applying the locks correctly despite my current inability to show them physically myself. Thanks to Carl Massaro and his students for a lovely night of training and learning in New Jersey Reflections on my students Gordon Ryan stages of skepticism and learning In the early days of the squad, Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon would come in every day to train and compete almost every weekend. Mr Tonon told me about a talented teenage student he had named Gordon Ryan. He said he would try to bring Mr Ryan in to begin training with us. Sure enough, a few days later, a tall young man, jumped out on to the mats in the morning class and introduced himself. Mr Tonon immediately announced to myself and Mr Cummings, whilst we were going over some ashi garami movements, that Mr Ryan was deeply skeptical about the value of leg locks and fully believed all leg locks were a useless waste of time and simply did not work on him. Mr Ryan smiled confidently and announced he had never been leg locked by anyone and did not consider them a threat. Of course when drilling was over, a rather offended Mr Cummings immediately went to spar with Mr Ryan and proceeded to leg lock him from one side of the academy to the other! At the end of the class, a rather chastened Mr Ryan agreed that leg locks did indeed work and he would begin studying them immediately. Over the next few months he had great success at entering into leg locks, but struggled to actually finish them. As time passed, a new form of skepticism emerged in Mr Ryan he came to believe that leg locks worked for other people, but not for him! I immediately showed him some variations in grip that greatly tightened his locks and immediately he started getting good results. A few days later, Mr Cummings returned from a short journey and asked to roll with Mr Ryan. In a stunning reversal, Mr Ryan successfully applied two beautiful heel hooks in one round of sparring shocking both Mr Cummings and himself. For the first time he came to believe not only that heel hooks work, but that they could work for him against the best in the business. In my experience, THE STRONGEST BELIEFS WE HOLD ARE THOSE WHERE WE BEGAN WITH TOTAL SKEPTICISM BUT WERE PROVEN WRONG IN SOME MEMORABLE AND TANGIBLE WAY UNTIL WE BECAME BELIEVERS DESPITE OURSELVES . THOSE are the beliefs we will rely upon in the stress and fear of competitionDetails vs General movement Very often I get students come to me asking for details of a given move the more details I give, the happier they get. This is a natural and good thing. However, I strongly believe that fixation on details can have detrimental effects in some instances. The moves of jiu jitsu are not all the same in overall character. Some of the moves are very STATIC in nature i.e. There is relatively little movement. For example, rear mount is a relatively static position, most of the control and finishes from here are small movements. In cases of static positions, details are paramount and very useful. Other movesscenarios are much more DYNAMIC with large and fast movements. For example, a drop seoi nage throw. In the case of very dynamic movements, details are still very important, BUT THE STUDENT MUST FIRST LEARN THE GENERAL DYNAMIC MOVEMENT BEFORE THE DETAILS IF HE OR SHE IS TO BE ABLE TO USE IT EFFECTIVELY AGAINST RESISTANCE THE DETAILS WILL COME LATER. Wherever the overall quality of the movement is just as important as the details for success BEGIN WITH THE OVERALL MOVEMENT AS IT WILL BE USED IN SPARRING AND COMPETITION you can always go back to details later. If you begin the details, students will have a lot of theoretical knowledge but lack the movement skills to actually apply it. Here I am coaching ten year old squad prodigy Mikey Wilson details of our back attack system. Due to the fact that this is mostly a static position, the emphasis is on small details of placement and positioning and tactics.Interpretations Here is an old photograph probably taken around 2000 at Renzo Gracies old academy. It is a good representation of one of the central features of jiu jitsu multiplicity of views. Mr Gracie, myself and three of his most distinguished black belts, Matt Serra, Shawn Williams and Robert Constance are watching action unfold in front of us. There are five pairs of eyes watching one event. You can be quite sure that each of us is seeing a very different picture from the man next to him. Sensei is probably seeing an incredibly quick and efficient entry into an arm in guillotine, Mr Serra is probably scheming a way to clear the arm and take a high elbow guillotine. Mr Williams is probably looking an a means of sitting back to closed guard and trapping an arm in a way that sets up many of his favorite attacks and Mr Constance is probably seeing the opportunity for a turn over into a pulverizing pin. I am probably looking for an entrance to either legs or back. One event five interpretations. All of them were very effective. Everyone agrees that there are many incorrect ways to move and act in jiu jitsu BUT DO NOT EXTRAPOLATE FROM THIS THAT THERE IS ONLY ONE RIGHT WAY. On the contrary, for almost any given scenario in the sport, there are a multitude of effective methods. Which one you choose is largely determined by your personality and body type, though sometimes your teaching history can be a factor also. One of the great privileges of training under Mr Gracie was the freedom he gave us in choosing our styles that is why you see so much variation among his students. Use effectiveness in sparring and competition as your primary guide. As you grow in experience you will be able to feel and ultimately just look at a move and make good assessments as to its mechanical and tactical value. Until then, if it works well in sparring against good people, thats a solid sign that you are on the right track. Variation is a leading source of progress in jiu jitsu. Sometimes it may lead you temporarily astray, but dont worry, recovery is simple and progress will begin anew. PS Thank you to all my Facebook friends with their kind birthday wishes. I hope this next year, despite my current troubles, I can help my students push forward to their goals they are making incredible gains as we speak, and by so doing, inspire you all to reach yours. Thank you all, John DanaherThree the hard way The full squad is back in action in truly great competition action against three of the best grapplers in the world in the near future. Gordon Ryan starts it off with a very tough match up against IBJJF no gi world champion Lucas Hulk Barbosa for the 205 pound title at Fight to Win Pro 30 in New Jersey on April 8th. Mr Ryans last matches were at his actual weight 170 pounds welterweight, but he wants to test himself as he so often does, against the big men at light heavyweight. Mr Barbossa recently won gold at Five Grappling Super League, surpassing great world champions like Leandro Lo and Tarsis Humpreys with a mix of great technique and crushing physical power that showed why even the strongest men in the sport call him hulk. Then Eddie Cummings returns to action in a truly fascinating battle against one of the best leg lockers in IBJJF competition three time world no gi champion, Samir Chantre, a brilliant tactician on the mats in Philadelphia on April 15. After this Garry Tonon will take on the great MMA grappler Shinya Aoki at ONE Championship Dynasty of Heroes in Singapore on May 26. Mr Aoki is a truly brilliant grappler with an amazing competition record in MMA He is a master of entering submissions from standing, often with spectacular flying variations. This will be a great match between two of the most dynamic grapplers on the planet. I am always excited to see my students compete, but now more so than ever. The reason is because all three senpai senior students are really starting to develop their own unique technical innovations that go beyond my teachings and into an independent and very exciting repertoire of moves and tactics that is thrilling for me as a coach to observe. I am certain 2017 will be a year where these young men rise to a new level of development. Though my body is currently having some issue and problems, my mind has never been so excited by these technical developments that these three outstanding technicians of the science of control and submission are developing. I have been watching in the gym soon the world will watch on stage against three truly impressive opponents!Varying intensity Sometimes people hear about the frequency with which my students train and ask how they are not over trained to the point of injury and breakdown. The reason is because we know how to vary the intensity of workouts according to the context in which the workout is performed. If every workout is at maximum intensity, the injury and burn out rate would be unacceptably high. Intensity must be varied as part of a program leading to a specific goal, rather than as a constant hammering towards a general idea of getting better at jiu jitsu. Typically, if there is going to be a very tough morning workout, it will be followed by a relatively soft evening workout. This ability to SEE TODAYS WORKOUT IN THE CONTEXT OF A WEEKS WORK TOWARDS A GIVEN GOAL AND SCALE IT UP OR DOWN DEPENDING ON THAT CONTEXT IS A HUGE PART OF DEVELOPING THE LONGEVITY NEEDED TO MASTER THE COMPLEX SKILLS OF THE SPORT OVER TIME. Last night was a perfect example. I went to Long Island to join Chris Weidman and his two primary trainers, Ray Longo and Matt Serra for some fine tuning of grapple boxing skills the interface of striking and grappling skills on the ground in MMA in preparation for Mr Weidmans bout against the very tough and talented Gegard Mousasi at UFC 210. Mr Weidman had already had a very tough sparring workout earlier in the day and has only a week left in another very tough training camp. Thus the second workout consisted of light technical and tactical drills perfect for a second workout that will improve performance without causing physical problems for the athlete. It was a pleasure to see once again the incredible grace and power of this great middleweight as he whipped through the drills with the same vigor and skill I saw so many times in his lead up to winning the middleweight title. I demand that my athletes workout every day but I do not demand they workout HARD every day. Learning to pace your workouts over time, scaling back when necessary, is the key to long term development that can garner great results over time.Reflections on my students The master of distance Georges StPierre More than any other athlete I worked with, Georges StPierre was a master of the subtleties of controlling and exploiting the distance between himself and his opponent. This mastery of distance management is an absolutely critical part of MMA. In the vast majority of professional fights, more time is spent in this part of the game than any other. When people talk about the development of Mr StPierres game, they often make reference to his many coaches and the influence these people had on him. Interestingly, the whole skill of distance control and covering distance to the takedown, WAS A SKILL THAT MR STPIERRE MOSTLY TAUGHT HIMSELF. As a teenager under the sometimes unorthodox tutelage of Kristof Midoux, Mr StPierre was constantly put in sparring situations where he had to box his way to a takedown on much older, more experienced opponents. As time passed, trial and error, experimentation and eclecticism in drawing in disparate skills from various combat arts produced an uncanny ability to strike into takedowns. Sometimes during fight camp after dinner or during some free time Mr StPierre will ask me to take a fighting stance and he will practice his repertoire of feints, deceptions and misdirections that enable him to get to his opponents legs for the takedown. I have done this with him for well over a decade. Yet to this day, he invariably misdirects me and easily gets to my legs leaving me feeling like a fool as once again I am deceived by the same tricks Thus was born this great athletes best weapon he had many influences but his primary weapon, the one which more than any other was the source of his success, was his own invention. It was a peculiar blend of his early days in sport karate, his wrestling training, fencing tactics and most of all, his adaptation to the demands of takedown sparring in his early years. Here he works with MMA standout David Branch on the theory of distance, both men are about to return to the UFC later in the year where once again they will be able to show the importance of this critical skillEvery major move has its own character All the major moves of the sport of jiu jitsu have their own unique character their good points and bad points which are a reflection of their mechanical features. As students, it is exceedingly important we try to increase the depth of our understanding of the character of all the moves we intend to make a big part of our game so that we apply them in the appropriate context. When we look at Kimura ude garami, we see it is among the most complex and interesting of the major moves of the sport. Like many of the main submission holds, it can function as both a means of submission and a means of control through grip. It often functions in jiu jitsu in much the same way as the knight functions in a chessboard a means of unorthodox entry into tight situations that resist normal methods and which can open up many other attacks from other pieces. Here, Shy Ace, among the best of my students in the specialized use of our Kimura system, uses a fine rolling entry to open up a defensive opponent and bring his submission game into operation.Reflections on my students the birth of the wolverine Most great deeds have inauspicious beginnings. When Eddie Cummings first entered my morning class I saw him as a squirmy fellow armed with nothing more than a mediocre high elbow guillotine. One morning I came in and my regular Uke demonstration partner was absent. I chose Mr Cummings as a replacement and he proved very good. Afterwards he asked intelligent questions and we talked. I learned he was a graduate student in physics a problem solver. As weeks and months passed I noted how he never missed classes and was rapidly learning. He expressed interest in more leg lock material. I started showing him more details of my approach to lower body submissions. Then he and Ottavia Bourdain decided to take leg lock study to a new level and do private classes every day almost always in leg locks. An interesting part of this period is that Mr Cummings was initially VERY set against the outside ashi garami position that is one of the signature moves of our leg lock system and for which he would become famous! He thought it was totally wrong headed and would never work! I still tease him about that to this day! In time I managed to convince him of it effectiveness and he made incredible progress in application skills and theoretical understanding. As he began competing he quickly accumulated a vast number of submission wins, usually via leg lock. His defining moment in those early days however, a series of matches never recorded. Mr Cummings was invited by a friend of a friend to compete is an underground open weight grappling event in the basement of a gym somewhere in Brooklyn where he was obviously the smallest competitor. That night he fought around twelve men, winning everything by submission fighting on a tiny mat on a grimy concrete floor in front of a crowd of maniacs gambling on the outcomes. As the smallest and nerdiest competitor, everyone bet against him. When he won, he was offered the princely sum of twenty rumpled one dollar bills! When people today see Mr Cummings win big events like EBI and take 20,000, they dont realize that it all began with crazy bouts for less than 2 a matchIt all begins in the training room The squad was thrilled to watch team mate Garry Tonon put on another matchoftheyearcandidate performance last night in Oklahoma but each member has their own upcoming goals so after a brief discussion, it was noses to the grindstone and hard training time. A specialized triangle sankaku session followed by some very tough sparring. Eddie Cummings, Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan, Matthew Tesla, Frankie Rosenthal, Ottavia Bourdain and Jake Shields show the wear of a hard session with top competitors while I sit there and pretend I was part of it I am always fascinated by the contrast between the the big shows and the humble and tough conditions that make success in the big shows possible. The big shows may be the FACE of the sport BUT THE TRAINING ROOM IS THE SOUL OF THE SPORT. In thousands of small, obscure gyms across the globe are tens of thousands of dreams and ambitions from those origins a few will emerge with the skills and attributes to make their dreams become real.Flawless Victory Garry Tonon defeated the outstanding grappler Justin Rader in Oklahoma last night in a thrilling display of brilliant attacks versus resolute defense. Mr Tonon had trained extremely well prior to the belt and went in with great confidence as always he showed every bit of it onstage on a match filled with spectacular movement all pushing in the direction of submission. Ultimately it went to a decision as a stranglehold was being applied with seconds left on the clock. There was never any doubt which way the decision would go and Mr Tonon had successfully defended his welterweight no gi belt. Fight to Win put on another fine event and the squad is proud to help out with a display of jiu jitsu that was both crowd pleasing, yet a fine display of the a full range of the techniques of our sport applied at a very high level against one of its toughest competitors. For those in Oklahoma dont forget that Mr Tonon will be teaching a seminar showcasing many of the very techniques he wowed the crowd with last night! 12pm at Oklahoma Martial arts check his Instagram for details! He is as good a teacher as he is a competitor and his show at the seminar will be every bit as good as the show he put on last night The whole squad now has amazing bouts coming up in the near future details coming out soon! We are all looking forward to Mr Tonons return as he, Gordon Ryan and Eddie Cummings, along with all the kohai, resume training for big upcoming events that will require them to push to a new level of development Back in the saddle Propped up by some cortisone I came back to limited teaching duties today. It was great to see youngest squad member Mikey Wilson back on the mats. He and Nicky Ryan worked on elements of our back attack system, an area that Mr Ryan excels in. Joining us was the formidable Jake Shields, who continues to impress us with his development here with the squad. I got a chance to teach our approach and philosophy of back control and attack, and also display my superior taste in walking canes There is more to my style than just rash guards! It felt great to teach even if recent problems with my body made the physical side of teaching impossible today there is so much about our game that is mentalphilosophical that I felt that some valuable input could be made regardless. There was much excited talk after training about Garry Tonons match tonight at Fight to Win in Oklahoma tonight. Mr Tonon has trained extremely well and is excited to put our approach to the game to another test against the very talented and tough Justin Rader. Keep your eyes on that show it should be a fine one indeed!A word of thanks to you all I just wanted to say thank you so much for the kindness of so many people who reached out after I told you all about my current situation. There are simply too many to thank individually, but it was incredibly heartwarming to see you response after a rather difficult day. I am giving myself a time frame of around six months to try alternative therapies to full knee replacement. I have my own reasons to be cautiously optimistic about an improvement in the condition of my knee within that timeframe. If there is no sign of improvement I will go ahead and replace the knee and go from there. Once again thank you all so much for your very generous support. I went back to the gym today to teach with a knee full of cortisone to help. It was good for me to see my students and work to convey our methods and approaches, even if I cant do it physically myself. Thank you all so much John DanaherNew challenges Those of you who know me better know that my body has some rather severe problems that began long before jiu jitsu. When I was in in my early teens I had a series of severe Knee tears that were diagnosed as MCL tears, but which more advanced doctors here in the US have told me were almost certainly ACL tears no MRIs in those days This culminated in a final tear at age 17 that left me with a very unstable knee. An operation to go in and tighten ...Entering into the unknown Those moments when an athlete faces an opponent for the first time are always an entrance into the unknown. There is a danger in this. We all fear the unknown and our imagination can work upon us in ways that make it all terrifying. It is natural to wonder if the opponent has skills, techniques, knowledge, strength or tactics that we dont. That fear can have disastrous effects on performance. As fear increases, we become increasingly conservative in our choice of technique to use. We limit ourselves to only our must trusted techniques and hesitate when opportunity arises. Learning to deal with and overcome this fear of the unknown is what separates the great performers in the gym from the great performers on the stage. Interestingly the presence or lack of presence of fear is not an indicator of whether the athlete will perform on the stage. I have seen athletes who felt no fear perform poorly and others who are terrified every time they fight perform brilliantly. Each must find their own way around those moments of entering the unknown. I have my own opinions about this problem and often use them with my athletes. It is far too long for an Instagram post but one day I hope to write or speak about it, for in all honesty, it is the last critical obstacle that the athlete must learn to master if he or she is to maximize their performance in competitionDefending whats yours Garry Tonon defeated the very tough Dustin Akbari to win the Fight To Win welterweight belt. Now he must defend it against three time world championship ADCC veteran Justin Rader. Mr Rader has built a fine grappling career around excellent wrestling, superb Submission defense, a very nasty guillotine and great tactical sense. Mr Tonon will have to travel to Mr Raders home territory in Oklahoma City to defend his title. Friday night the two American standouts will clash in a ten minute submission only match. Should it go the distance, a decision based on control and submission attempts will be made. Mr Tonon has trained with his usual enthusiasm and completeness. Recent improvements in his positional game, particularly in the subtleties of limb positioning, are something I look forward to seeing in his upcoming matches. Looking forward to overseeing these last few days of training and then the big show Friday night. Fight to Win continues to impress with great shows and excellent match ups this match between two great American welterweights in the American heartland should be a real show! Fight to Win 28Reflections on my Sensei The little things reveal the big things Often I am asked to tell stories about the many adventures of my sensei, Renzo Gracie. He has an action packed life that could easily make a top rated reality show. Yet when people ask me to tell a story that illustrates his character, I tell a story that has very little drama and action, yet says much about his character and his philosophy. Back in the mid 1990s, Mr Gracie and I had finished a late training session prior to an upcoming professional fight in Japan. We were in his car looking for a place to eat. A few days prior I had read in the newspapers about a spate of of murders of NYC taxi drivers. In response, the taxi union had installed a special orange light on the back of NYC cabs which they could discreetly turn on if they felt threatened in order to alert policemen driving past them. As Renzo drove, I saw a cab in front of us with the panic light activated. I told Renzo what I had read before I could even finish, he gunned the engine and in a flash raced ahead of the cab and turned in front of it to stop it at the curb like some crazy cop show episode. Before I could even get out of the car, Mr Gracie was at the drivers window. I got to the rear door on the other side and opened it. Inside was a terrified driver and in the back seat, an extremely good looking and glamorous woman in a very short skirt they thought we were thugs rather than rescuing heroes! Very quickly it became apparent there was no danger either to anyone or from anyone and the driver had simply accidentally turned on the device. The four of us laughed and bade each other well and we got back in the car and drove off. Years later I reminded Renzo of the incident he did not even remember it there was so little action it did not even register in his memory among all the drama he has been a part of. Yet to me it illustrates much. Mr Gracie always told me, MARTIAL ARTS WERE NOT CREATED TO MAKE THE STRONG STRONGER, BUT TO GIVE THE WEAK A HELPING HAND IN A PREDATORY AND UNKIND WORLD. Many people speak this message, but I was always very proud to know my sensei LIVED it.Upcoming action Gordon Ryan, having just won EBI 11, will soon be back in action. At EBI 11 he fought at his actual weight 170 pounds. Normally he cannot compete at that weight, as team mate Garry Tonon usually competes there. As he result, most of his competition outings have been well above his real weight. Once again he will face a bigger and stronger foe in the form of Lucas Hulk Barbossa, an outstanding competitor from team Atos, who has won world championships in both gi and no gi competition. Mr Barbossa has recently been competing at light heavyweight taking the five grappling championship title over other jiu jitsu standouts like Leandro Lo and Tarsis Humphreys to show he is competing at the very highest levels. It will be a short match of eight minutes of submission only followed by a judges decision based on submission attempts and control. Mr Ryan is training diligently as always and constantly experimenting and refining his techniques he will need to if he is to prevail against such a powerful and talented foe. Great to see Fight to Win grappling organization putting on such great shows and high level match ups.Making a statement Its one thing to win a tournament its quite another to predetermine HOW you will win the tournament. Two days before EBI 11, Gordon Ryan told me he would not use any joint lock submissions, but instead, limit himself to strangleholds with the arms no sankakutriangles using the legs as the means of victory. Oftentimes people complain that our squad only wins via leg lock because we have an advantage in that department and that we are thus a team of one trick ponies. In fact, anyone familiar with my teachings will know I actually have a preference for strangleholds over all forms of joint lock, including leg locks. A huge part of our training is spent in refining our back and front headlock systems to get into strangleholds, yet most commentators only speak of our leg locks. I was initially worried about this limitation in general I prefer to use HANDICAPPING the practice of limiting your submissions to a few chosen ones and not allowing yourself any others as a method of TRAINING rather than something to do in competition. Mr Ryan, however, had trained very diligently and his strangles were very sharp indeed so I felt confident he could get his plan to work. Handicapping is one of our most commonly used training methodologies, it was odd, but extremely impressive to watch it being used in high level competition. Here, Gary Tonon and I call out the sequences of our back attack system to Mr Ryan in the finals as he closes in on the stranglehold but there is no need he knows them so well it is like clockwork as opponents are progressively tied up and rendered defensively ineffective.Keeping it fun often people seem to assume that a gym putting out champions is probably a stern and strict environment where people follow very formal behavioral rules. In fact I prefer an environment where the training is heavy, but the atmosphere is light. I find the room has better training longevity when people ENJOY the atmosphere rather than ENDURE it. As such, visitors are often surprised when they hear us calling out off color jokes and insults to each other as training begins. When training is over, its story and stand up routine time. Humor is the means by which students bond and get through tough tests and the inevitable disappointments of a highly competitive and difficult game where many play, but only one can win. Here, Georges StPierre takes some serious abuse from myself and Garry Tonon, Im going to guess it has something to do with his choice of workout apparel In which case it is well deserved Finding that balance between work and play is important for the health of any training program.Mr Tonon goes forth Squad standout Garry Tonon will be teaching a big no gi seminar in Oklahoma on 032517 at Oklahoma Martial Martial Arts Academy. Mr Tonon comes across as playful, but when its time to teach, he is dead serious about getting performance increases. He has a superb knowledge of technique and tactics and the ability to pass that on to others while creating a warm and fun atmosphere as he does it. Of all my students, Mr Tonon is foremost in exploiting and controlling the interface between standing grappling tachiwaza and ground Grappling ne waza a critical part of our coaching program. In addition, He is the best at creating scrambles and controlling their direction towards our favorite finishes. Often people talk to me about Mr Tonon and describe him as a intuitive grappler who just has an innate ability to get to winning positions they are invariably shocked when they see him teach and see that there is a highly practiced method to what he does and that others can be taught to do it as well. If you are in Oklahoma and have a chance to get to the seminar do it! You will learn the precise methodology of one of best grapplers on the planet. Mr Tonon is an extremely innovative student who constantly adjusts and improves upon the material I show him to arrive at a fascinating game that is very much his own. As with all my senior students, I often feel I learn as much from him as he does from me. If you want to see some of the most innovative and cutting edge grappling technique get to Mr Tonons seminar. Perspective from the past In mid October 1812, Napoleon Bonaparte began his retreat from Moscow in an unusually severe Russian winter. For three months his men endured freezing, deathly temperatures, constant attack, starvation and disorientation all whilst dressed in summer clothing. When his men finally made it back to friendly territory four fifths of them were dead or missing. Whenever I wonder if snow or cold should interrupt training, I think of their story and realize that nothing in our soft comfortable lives will ever approach what they went through and that the things we complain about or use as excuses seem feeble indeed from this perspective. Whether it be Napoleons retreat, Washington at Valley Forge, the Soviet army in the Battle of Moscow or any other of the myriad examples of humans prevailing in conditions so harsh that one can only feel shame for complaining about our minor problems, this historical perspective keeps us honest in an age where so many look for the weakest excuse to avoid work or training. History teaches us very clearly that we can endure far more we usually tolerate. Snow in NYC? Three champions had no difficulty in getting to the gym to hone their skills. Georges StPierre, Jake Shields and Matthew Tesla relax after a session working back attack sequences. Snow day for most? Not for champions...Two sides of my students Most of you know my students through their efforts in competition shiai. There is however, a while other side to them that you may not be aware of their ability to teach to others what they do in competition. I have always believed that the ability to teach the sport well often has a beneficial effect upon your own performance. This is not always the case, I have known some outstanding competitors who were not gifted teachers and vice versa, but as a general rule there is a lot of truth in it. I find that clarity and succinctness of expression in the technical and tactical elements of the game helps not only our ability to get others to understand what we do, BUT OURSELVES AS WELL. As such, our own internal dialogue when we try to overcome and solve problems is quicker and more efficient. In addition to performance enhancement, getting my students into teaching the sport lets them see beyond mere competition and into the deeper social aspects of jiu jitsu, particularly the theme of mutual benefit that Jigoro Kano made the foundation of his approach to grappling. I often involve my senior students in the teaching process. Many times I ask them to teach a move back to me that I had shown them previously. Other times I make them demonstrate a move to the class while I assist. When my body has physical issues and I cannot physically demonstrate a move, I will have them demonstrate whilst I narrate the salient features. As a result, all of my senior students Senpai are excellent teachers. Some of my favorite times to watch them teach is immediately after a big competition where they have employed some aspect of our game, and then watch them teach it to a group at a seminar shortly afterwards. Invariably the audience is shocked at the level of detail involved and their ability to explain those details in ways that increase performance. Here Gordon Ryan shows details of our back attack system at Shawn Williams academy in LA, just a week after EBI 11 where he used it so successfully to take gold.The squad dominates in Florida The two squad members who went to Sapeteiro 7 grappling tournament at 175 pounds beat everyone to both get to the finals where they had to face each other! Matthew Tesla, who has only started competing recently won the event with another outstanding performance. Jason Rau defeated everyone to make his own way to the final on the opposite bracket. In the final Mr Tesla gained victory over his team mate via heel hook variation. The two squad athletes used a combination of leg attack, back attack and front headlock systems to quickly accrue submission wins over their respective opponents under EBI style rules. Probably the most significant match of the day was between EBI 11 standout semi finalist Craig Jones and Mr Tesla. Mr Teslas victory clearly shows he is operating at a high level and will look to make appearances at other professional shows. Sapeteiro continues to provide an excellent venue for athletes developing their submission skills and building their resume. Kohai students Mr Tesla and Mr Rau have worked very hard to increase their prowess and it is wonderful to see the fruits of their labor on the stage.Reflections on combat jiu jitsu EBI 11 featured a show within a show a combat jiu jitsu format fought in between the regular event bouts. It allowed palm strikes and slaps on the ground in addition to the usual full array of submission attacks. Could this be a viable format for future shows? Lets begin the discussion by pointing out exactly what CJJ was intended to do, since there seems to be some confusion here. It was NOT intended to answer the question as to whether jiu jitsu works in a fight. MMA has already answered this question and answered it much better than any CJJ tournament ever will. What it WAS designed to do was to create grappling matches where athletes could not stall excessively and clam up to avoid the submissions game or make use of contrived positions in ground grappling that have no relevance to real fighting. The idea was to use the Palm strikes and slaps to open opponents up and create movement that would promote the use of submissions. This is a fine goal. We have only one four man tournament as evidence not enough for a definite opinion, but enough for some initial thoughts. First, the format was fun and popular. The in house crowd liked it and I think its fair to say the average fan can understand and appreciate a simple slap to the face much more readily than an intricate hand fighting sequence to a stranglehold. One the other hand I have some reservations. The slaps did NOT create more submission attempts or more movement than the regular rule set, indeed, the slaps could be used as a substitute for real action submission rather than as a catalyst to it. The highest submission rate of the night by far was Gordon Ryan in the regular event who didnt need slaps to create movement and submission opportunities just good technique and a mindset that orients him in that direction. My main concern is that elite grappling athletes will stay away from ebi if it becomes a CJJ format. I cant imagine any bjj world champions entering a CJJ competition, yet ebi needs them if it is to be taken seriously as a promotion. As such I believe the best use of CJJ is as a fun and entertaining show within a show not a main event flograpplingThe value of rematches One of the best indicators of the effectiveness of a given training program comes from rematches. They provide invaluable information because comparisons in performance can be made relative to an opponent the comparisons are not always perfect, as other factors might influence the respective outcomes, but they are far better than most methods of assessing progress. For these reasons I always pay particular attention to rematches. I was always very proud of the fact that Georges StPierre never lost a rematch in his career that was a good indicator of a training program that constantly took him forward in performance levels. A fascinating rematch occurred at EBI 11 when Gordon Ryan took on the very tough and capable Vagner Rocha. The two had fought to a long draw around six months ago. Mr Ryan had done most of the attacking but was unable to finish his many attacks. In response we worked a lot on using leg attacks to create reversals into top position. Mr Ryan is extremely adept at creating top pressure combined with finely measured leg pummeling to free his legs and work to superior positions the one he favors most is the back. This time he was not to be denied. Using some of the more basic elements of our back attack system he broke through and got the stranglehold that eluded him previously. This was a good sign of his continuing progress and that constant additions and refinements of tactics and techniques can make what seemed impossible yesterday, relatively simple today. allinphoto banevisSquad style seminar in LA Featuring Gordon Ryan Fresh off his third EBI title this weekend, Gordon Ryan will be teaching a seminar this Saturday at my good friend and team mate, Shawn Williams dojo this Saturday March 11. I am very excited about this its a great opportunity for our Californian fans to see up close some NYC style jiu jitsu. Of all my students, Mr Ryan has the deepest knowledge of my back attack system. A common misunderstanding of our system is that it is merely a refinement of already existing systems. Mr Ryan will have no problems dispelling that misunderstanding with his deep knowledge of this critical aspect of our game. Mr Ryan, like all my senior students is very innovative and independent. He has developed many additional additional elements, not only of back attacks, but throughout his game, that go beyond my teachings and are his own invention many of them are incredibly effective. One of my proudest days as a coach occurred when Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon taught some moves at a charity seminar in front of myself and My sensei, Renzo Gracie. Mr Gracie turned to me and said admiringly , these guys teach like college professors. Mr Ryan excels like all my students in leg attacks, kimura, front headlock, trianglesankaku and armbar Juji gatame. Whatever he chooses to teach, I promise you, you will learn and profit from. Hoping our Californian fans enjoy the seminar as much as the ebi show! You wont find a better teacher or a better host school in which to learn. Two teams a word of thanks Squad Senpai Gordon Ryan put on a superb show Sunday night, showcasing his strangulation skills. It was a fine reflection of his individual progress and his team work with other squad members in preparation for the event. Such stand out performances are great for the sport. They inspire young developing athletes and give them a strong technical role model to follow. It is easy to focus all the attention on the athlete and his support team. There was however, a second team at the event on Sunday night, a team that does not get the spotlight, but whose work is every bit as important as the stars onstage the EBI production team. These dedicated men and women operate in the background and always do their best to create a smooth running and efficient operation. Believe me, its not easy. There are so many intangibles at a live sports event that it always seems miraculous to me that they get it done as well as they do. Were it not for the great work done by these people in building the infrastructure for the show and running it under the pressure of live performance NONE OF OUR HARD WORK, TRAINING INNOVATIONS, PHILOSOPHY AND SKILLS WOULD EVER SEE THE LIGHT OF DAY AND WOULD REMAIN UNKNOWN IN A BASEMENT IN NYC. On behalf of the squad, to the entire ebi production staff, from team leaders Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila, all the way through the many hard working individuals carrying out crucial but thankless tasks that make it all happen thank you Thanks for a well run, innovative show that has let Grappling athletes have an exciting and well run event that can allow them to showcase the art we all love and put so much time into.LA to NYC There is always a surreal feeling about going from LA to coach an EBI show Sunday night, then red eye home to New York City to teach at Renzo Gracie Academy Monday morning and then on to The Bronx to teach at night. Its a marathon, but an instructive one. It shows very clearly the two faces of our sport. The core of it will always be the private face of the sport the unheralded grind in the basement where the skills and attributes necessary for success are forged. The public face is that of competition shiai, where those hard won skills and attributes can be rewarded with accolades and recognition attained. The glamor is in that public face, but the heart and soul of the sport is in the private face thats why even though its tiring, I love that red eye flight home to see the crew and get ready for the next challenge. Back to the hustle and bustle of freezing cold NYC, subway uptown, then on to the Bronx to work on those skills and attributes Gordon Ryan wins EBI 11 Gordon Ryan won every match by submission tonight in LA to take his third EBI title his first at his actual body weight of 170 pounds. He focused almost entirely on strangleholds, utilizing some of the more basic elements our back attack system and front headlock system to win the maximum possible prize money of twenty thousand dollars. It was his best training camp in a long time no longer plagued by a lower abdominal problem that had made the previous few camps very tough, he took out a very tough Vagner Rocha with a superbly applied stranglehold in the finals. Team mate Oliver Taza braves a severe knee injury suffered in his last week of training and lost a close match in overtime via riding time, but impressed me with his heart and composure under very tough circumstances he will rest and then come back to show off his skills in the future. Thanks again to the staff of EBI who always do such a fine job of putting on an exciting production. Mr Eddie Bravo, Viktor Davila and his crew did it again filling a new venue and creating a really exciting event and atmosphere. There was a very exciting debut for the combat jiu jitsu tonight i will discuss that soon. Thank you all for your support from the squad! Hope you enjoyed the show! My original competing Grappling student, Eddie Cummings, will be teaching a seminar at Musclepharm headquarters in Denver Colorado. Mr Cummings has spent the most time of all my competing students in private classes with me. He has an unparalleled knowledge of my leg lock system. Unfortunately his incredible success with leg locks in top level level competition has blinded most people to his skills in upper body submissions. In this sense he is something of a victim of his own success! He also has a very strong positional game with excellent guard retention and passing skills. Mr Cummings, like all my best students, is an extremely inventive fellow who has gone beyond my teachings and has many very effective variations of his favorite skills and positions that are uniquely his own. On top of all this, his background in academia makes him a truly fine teacher he can really take his knowledge and make it accessible to you. If you can make it to Denver Colorado, take the time to learn from this man you will get a deep insight into the squads philosophy, tactics and methods. New York City style in Denver you will love it! Rising to the top As a coach I always love to watch the most essential dynamic of a healthy training room the work done by junior students kohai to rise to senior status Senpai. Watching the growth of the juniors is always uplifting to me as a coach and is the best feedback I get as to the relative health of the training program I run. A notable addition to the ranks of the kohai is a young student of my great friend and teammate Matt Serra, Jason Rau. He came to us with a strong positional game and has taken to our methods very well indeed. Keep your eye on the progress of this talented young man. Next week he will compete in a tournament that has helped launch so many of our kohai to the next level Sapeteiro 7. It will feature a sixteen man tournament featuring many outstanding grapplers, some of whom are in this weekends EBI event. It will be at a weight of 175 pounds and the athletes will duke it out for two thousand shekels in what should be a thrilling experience for the competitors and the fans. Im looking forward to a display of skills from Mr Rau blending old school positional skill with squad style submission work working out with him are fellow kohai Matthew Tesla and Frankie Rosenthal along with MMA legend Jake Shields. Here they work in their Juji gatame armlock drills before getting into sparringFireworks There is no bigger show than the UFC and this weekends UFC looks like it will be a great event. Two of my favorite divisions, welterweight and lightweight will get some much needed clarity and closure after recent disorder. The majority draw in the first match between Tyron Woodley and Steven Thompson prevented Demian Maia from getting his much deserved title shot, but hopefully now we shall get a positive result and the welterweight division can move forward. Georges StPierre always told me Mr Thompson was the best standing striker he ever saw or worked with, but Mr Woodley did extremely well with him in the standing position in the first fight. Both men can hit well from extreme distances, covering vast amounts of ground to land blows one with crushing one punch KO power, the other with stunning accuracy and timing. The bout I am most interested in is at light weight. I have always been extremely impressed by Khabib Nurmamogedov. His takedown and ground control skills are of the highest level. Several people I know in the industry whose word I trust have told me numerous stories of Mr Nurmamogedov dominating very highly ranked athletes in weight divisions above his own. He has a smothering control that makes his opponents look powerless in comparison. On the other hand, his opponent, Tony Ferguson has a fascinating style based around scrambles and devastating attacks as he directs those scrambles in ways that few opponents can keep up with. One fighter is a master of control the other is a master of chaos this is going to be very interesting indeed!The Return UFC President Mr Dana White publicly announced today what has been negotiated back and forth over the last few months between his company and Georges StPierre a return to the octagon that would involve something new and extraordinarily challenging. That new challenge will be a rise in weight class against the new middleweight champion, Micheal Bisping. Mr Bisping won a sensational match via knockout over Luke Rockhold to add to a hard fought win over the greatest middleweight of all time, Anderson Silva and a subsequent win over middleweight legend Dan Henderson. Mr Bisping started his career as a light heavyweight, but dropped down to become a huge middle weight. In contrast, Mr StPierre is by contemporary standards an average size welterweight with a walk around weight of 192 pounds his entire career. Interestingly his win over Dan Henderson made Mr Bisping the athlete with the most wins in UFC history overtaking Mr StPierre in this distinction though Mr StPierre has far fewer losses. Going up weight divisions is always a tricky affair as the danger of injury in training with bigger partners goes up and the penalty for making mistakes in a match is higher, but Mr StPierre is determined to push forward into the challenge and take this new phase of his career in this interesting new direction. He has been doing well in his grappling training and is still in great shape despite three years away from professional fighting two great champions, both beginning their careers at roughly the same time, both outspoken proponents of better testing for PEDs in MMA, both holding at some time the record for wins in the octagon, one much bigger than the other this should be interesting! Recently I was asked to appear in a scene in the TV show Billions. The scene required us to show a beginner in jiu jitsu in a first introductory lesson. The writers asked me if there was a move that represented well the general nature of the sport to a wide audience, most of whom know nothing about it. My answer was a confident yes Juji jime the cross collar strangle performed from the mounted position. My reasoning was this the classical approach to jiu jitsu involves taking an opponent to the floor where he is more easily controlled, then working past his legs, through a hierarchy of pins culminating in the mount or rear mount. From there, applying a submission hold to end the fight. I chose Juji jime because beginning jiu jitsu should always be in a gi, both for practical and cultural historical reasons, and of course Juji jime requires a jacket. Moreover, strangleholds represent the notion of a bloodless and relatively painless victory one of the key features of jiu jitsu. Even a naive viewer would be able to recognize the value of the mounted position, the effectiveness of a stranglehold and the virtue of victory without the need for bludgeoning a foe to bloody defeat. On a deeper level to those who DO study the art, I chose Juji jime because it represents something very different the notion of PROGRESSIVE BASICS. Juji jime was taught to us all in our very first beginner classes yet we will all be using it until our last days in the sport refining it, perfecting it, learning all of its subtleties and nuances. THE BEST TECHNIQUES IN OUR SPORT TAKE A FEW MOMENTS TO LEARN, BUT A LIFETIME TO PERFECT. This notion of path from beginner to expert is perfectly represented by Juji jime from mount the tokui waza favorite technique of the great Roger Gracie. In his hands it was anything but a beginners move it was an unstoppable engine of destruction that he used repeatedly at world championship level and taught the jiu jitsu world the value of building upon the beginners foundation in the sport and over time, making it the most advanced move of them all.Teammates and Countrymen It was a fine weekend for the Canadian section of the squad! Kohai teammates Oliver Taza and Ethan Crelinsten have been doing what all kohai junior students must seek to do build up their skills to a point where they become Senpai seniors. Mr Crelinsten has been training and competing brilliantly at local level as part of his climb to the top. He is developing well along the lines we exhibit to demonstrate control leading to submission across the entire body, with equal facility from top or bottom position. Today he was able to win every match in regulation time by submission at the Radius Invitational in Connecticut. Normally Mr Crelinsten competes at 135 pounds but today he entered at 155 to test his mettle against bigger and stronger opponents. He took on and defeated local standouts Ian Murray, Zach Masslany and Jon Battle to win the eight man tournament and take home one thousand shekels! He did it by working utilizing advanced elements of our back attack system that he has been working very hard upon and developing impressive prowess. It is always great to see the marriage of ambition and work ethic and tinder it rewarded with success. Well done to our Canadian athletes who travel so far to work on the skills that take them ever closer to their goals.Building to a peak A critical part of contest success is the notion of progression to a peak performance on given date of competition. This of course, is the basis behind the idea of a camp in preparation for a bout. Often a very valuable part of this notion of peaking is the use of preparatory bouts before the main event to help prepare you for what you consider may be problematic elements in the main upcoming event. Outstanding kohai student Oliver Taza is making his EBI debut on March 5th. As one of the smaller welterweights he wanted to prepare himself for the physical intensity of top level grappling a part of the game that often surprises debutants. Accordingly he entered a superfight this weekend against bigger and stronger UFC Middle weight Caio Magalhaes if Mr Taza did MMA it would be at lightweight. Mr Magalhaes is a blackbelt in jiu jitsu from the great Nova Uniao team and grappling was his MMA foundation. In a very tough physical match, fought inside a cage, Mr Taza worked his way to an excellent submission win via heel hook variation after twelve minutes of hard fought action. An excellent result in itself but all the more so as preparation for the main event and the physicality to be expected there.One selfie four UFC fighters UFC standout Rafael Sapo Natal takes the selfie of the year at the afternoon class as the squad prepares for upcoming events. Mr Natal is joined by UFC brothers past and present, Jake Shields, who has just moved to NYC to train full time with the squad, David Branch, two division WSOF champion who has just signed with the UFC and begins his run to to the top at 185 pounds , and squad OG, Georges StPierre, on the comeback trail. Great afternoon of training in the blue basement so much ambition, so much potential. These are men who know that ambition, passion, drive, discipline guided by a sensible plan, can create greatness in the gym and build the confidence to take it from the gym to the world stage and do something truly great. Where else can you find a random scene like this on an average Thursday afternoon? onlyatrenzos Drilling for perfection An interesting feature of our sport is that when moves are performed well, there is a feeling of fitting in correctly that is unmistakable. Even relatively inexperienced students can feel a well performed move locking into place. So too, imperfections are obvious to perceive as your partner can wriggle free easily by exploiting whatever mechanical imperfections you have made. When drilling, STUDENTS MUST BE MINDFUL OF ACTIVELY SEEKING TO FIND THAT PERFECT FIT IN WHERE THE GEOMETRY OF THEIR BODY FITS EFFECTIVELY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF THEIR WORKOUT PARTNERS BODY IN A WAY THAT CREATES THE TIGHTNESS OF FIT THAT ENSURES SUCCESS. That is why I dont have my students drill for numbers of repetitions or for time. When numbers or time are the goal they will focus on that rather than on mechanical form. When I see mechanical form is at a satisfactory level I move them on to something else I am not guided by time or numbers. Here Georges StPierre works on his front triangle omote sankaku on a standing opponent a situation that requires particularly close attention to correct mechanical form if it is to succeedLoneliness in a crowded room Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza take some time out to reflect on what they must get done in an early morning training session for EBI 11 The first EBI of 2017, the first EBI for Mr Taza, the first welterweight EBI for Mr Ryan and the first time two squad members have allowed to compete in the same EBI event since EBI 6. The juxtaposition between jiu jitsu as a sport trained as a team, but fought as individuals, is a strong one. These two battle every day, as do all members of the squad keeping a spirit of camaraderie and mutual benefit is the key to preventing it becoming a free for all with team cohesion falling to a degree where the entire training program degenerates. Each athlete has different skills and attributes I coach a very recognizable general approach to the game, but I also recognize the importance of self expression and individuality if an athlete is to maximize his potential. In a room where everyone follows and believes the same general philosophy, it is crucial to keep that sense of how you are going to do things your way and find a balance between shared beliefs and individuality. Hence I like to see my athletes in those lonely moments of self reflection before and after training. Those quiet moments have a way of leading to the buzz and roar of the crowd at showtimeThree the hard way If you are to accomplish anything great in life, be prepared to work hard over time with a sound plan. Outstanding kohai students Oliver Taza and Stanley Rosa both have ambitions. Mr Taza will compete soon in the upcoming welterweight EBI alongside Gordon Ryan. Every Monday he trains three classes with me in addition to the rest of the week. The first two at RGA in midtown Manhattan and the last at night all the way up in the Bronx at my student and friend, Doug Pelinkovics Dojo. Up at 6am for the first class and getting home at 11pm to get ready for the next days training. Many people have ambition, but only a few have the discipline, patience and work ethic to make those ambitions reality. It helps a lot to have equally ambitious and hard working partners. Here Mr Taza works with one of his best training partners, Stanley Rosa, as I push them through front headlock drills and then into sparring. I always like to see dojo friendships build between like minded athletes the road to the top is a long one but easier when walked in good company.Theory and practice As a general rule I like to start my athletes training sessions with a clear sense of what we are trying to accomplish What are the skills we are trying to develop and how they are important to our approach to the game? Only then do we get into the physical practice. I generally find the athletes do a much better job of practicing a given move if they have a clear understanding of how that move relates to their overall game and the mechanical features that make it work. As we go to drill a given move I will first outline the main points I want them to emphasize as they work, common errors to avoid and the context in which to apply such a move relative to our game as a whole. In this way you can avoid aimless drilling sessions where the move is done for repetitions and the emphasis degenerates into filling quota numbers rather than mechanical understanding. The former merely fills time, only the latter improves performance. Here I work exactly this kind of practice session with young athlete Mikey Wilson. Though only ten years of age, he carries himself with adult maturity so I teach him as an adult. He works our back attack system with fifteen year old Nicky Ryan, who excels in this position. By the time the session finishes he has far more than a set of repetitions he has a solid theoretical understanding of the position and the physical skills to implement that knowledge and teach it to others.Comeback Founding member of the squad, Georges StPierre will be returning to UFC competition. Mr StPierre has always privately expressed interest in a return to professional fighting to his coaches. His original reason for retirement was most due to the virtually uncontrolled use of PEDs in MMA competition. The UFC has, through its partnership with USADA, made considerable progress in this area. While not perfect, the situation is definitely better than three years ago. After some hiccups in negotiating a return, a deal has been signed and Mr StPierre will begin moving forward towards competition. Returning to top level competition is never an easy thing in any sport. as the old saying goes, time is a cruel thief who robs us of our former selves. The skills of MMA are highly perishable and getting them back after three years of inactivity and two major knee operations is a difficult task indeed made more so by the speed at which the sport itself changes and evolves. However, if there is one person to do it, it is Mr StPierre. He will take on the challenge with his usual drive and perfectionism. It is not yet settled who his first opponent shall be, nor the time it shall be fought, but as soon as Mr StPierre is ready, training and preparation will begin in earnest. It will be interesting watching the younger squad members work in grappling with Mr StPierre, and then Mr StPierre with them in MMA. I am sure there will be some memorable training sessions!Me and John Danaher one of my best creations... He began Jiujitsu at 27 years old, and with his great determination and love for the art has prove me right, since theres no better reward to a teacher than the excellence achieved by his students...You only live once, but if you do it right, once is more than enough.... Since they say that your whole life will pass before your eyes as the final curtains are ready to close.. Im just making sure that it will be worth to watch every second of it... Just bring me the popcorn while I have the unique privilege to visit all my great memories. Be ready my brother.. we are just half way there, still a lot things to do, arms to break, necks to choke, tales to tell.. and hearts to steal with this amazing art, we just have to let all be Jiujitsu... the rest will be easy.. ; Eu e meu aluno John Danaher uma das minhas melhores criaes... Comeou Jiujitsu aos 27 anos de idade, e com grande determinao e amor pela arte me provou estar certo.. J que no existe maior recompensa para um professor do que testemunhar a excelncia alcanada por seus alunos... S se vive uma vez, mas se voc fizer isso certo, uma vez mais do que suficiente... E j que dizem que toda a sua vida vai passar diante dos seus olhos quando a cortina estiver prestes a fechar, eu s estou me certificando de que vai valer a pena assistir cada segundo... S me tragam a pipoca enquanto eu tiver o privilgio nico de visitar minhas fantsticas memrias. Esteja pronto meu irmo... Ns s estamos na metade do caminho, ainda muitas coisas esto por vir, braos a quebrar, pescoos a apertar, e contos a se espalhar.. e claro muitos coraes a roubar com essa arte fantstica.. Ns s temos que permitir que tudo seja Jiujitsu... O resto vai ser fcil. ;New look, old lesson The Renzo Gracie Academy has a new look with some very nice mural photo displays of Sensei Gracie up on display! Here we are clowning about in front of a large rendition of my favorite photo of Sensei taken in the aftermath of his submission win over the great Pat Militich, one of five UFC champions he defeated in the course of his career. Interestingly, Sensei used his tokuiWaze favorite move the arm in guillotine strangle to win that night. In training for the match he badly damaged a nerve in the shoulder and neck on his strong side and so could not perform his favorite move. Mid match he maneuvered his body to the other side and performed the guillotine on his weak side. Such was the depth of his technical knowledge of the technique, he was able to secure and finish the move even without the physicality he normally was able to apply to it. This kind of physical adaptability through knowledge is critical in a sport where circumstances often demand that we work outside our comfort zones. If you only have a PHYSICAL understanding of a given move, you will find it difficult to coach yourself through its application on your weaker side in an emergency. All those years of teaching the mechanical aspects of the guillotine came through that night as Mr Gracie patiently worked his way through the move and gained one of his greatest victories.Smooth Operator The most important gauge of how well you are progressing in jiu jitsu will always be your performance in sparring and contests against a wide range of opponents. Some athletes can have a rough and tumble style and be very effective with it. There is a lot to be said however, for a smooth, aesthetically pleasing style provided it is effective of course. Indeed, I would go further and say that aesthetics can be linked to performance. Smoothness is suggestive of EFFICIENCY which is a huge factor in performance. I always encourage my athletes to work with aesthetics in mind. I find that pride in the aesthetics of their work creates a mindset where they constantly look for efficiency in movement a mindset that will greatly benefit their long term development in the sport. Here, outstanding kohai student, Oliver Taza shows fine form with a very efficient drop into ashi garami followed by heel hook variation. His relaxed demeanor makes for a smooth entry into the move that does not convey his intentions to his opponent in this very short match at a recent local grappling event. Mr Taza is preparing for his EBI debut in less than a month and used this contest as part of his preparation for the big show.Expanding the visibility of jiu jitsu When my sensei Renzo Gracie first arrived in the United States, jiu jitsu was barely known to anyone outside of martial arts. Even within martial arts it was widely disparaged as a valueless street fighting style. In time this has changed. This change came mostly from exposure in MMA and recognition over time of its effectiveness and the skill required to master it. The result is that today, most young people have not only heard of jiu jitsu, they have a decent understanding of what it is and even some of the basic techniques. One area where jiu jitsu has not really made much progress is popular entertainment. In a way this is a good thing as jiu jitsu always had its main appeal in real world effectiveness. Nonetheless it is undeniable that the visibility of various martial arts has been increased in the past through the entertainment industry. A strange thing about the times we live in is that WE HAVE GONE THROUGH THE GREATEST REVOLUTION IN MODERN MARTIAL ARTS HISTORY IN THE LAST TWENTY YEARS AND CHANGED THE WAY THE PUBLIC THINKS OF REAL FIGHTING YET FIGHT CHOREOGRAPHY IN THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY HAS NOT REFLECTED THIS AT ALL. This is somewhat disappointing. Perhaps what jiu jitsu and MMA needs is some sufficiently skilled and charismatic person to capture the publics imagination and get Hollywood to follow the great changes that have been made. In the meantime jiu jitsu practitioners need to do their best to increase the exposure of our beloved sport wherever they can. Through the help of my student and friend, David Levien I was given an opportunity to appear on the popular TV show Billions. Jiu Jitsu will figure in the series in much the same way it does in our lives as a source of inspiration in areas outside the sport itself as lessons in life and strategy as much as a martial art. For the first scene we chose what I take to be the classical essence of the sport positional domination into submission via Juji jime cross collar strangle, a move that is very representative of the art. Then a discussion of the primacy of defense as a prelude to attack. The cast and crew of the show were very impressive in their professionalism and enthusiasm. Sensei Renzo Gracie arranged filming at his lavish Brooklyn school. It was a fascinating break from my usual schedule of harshly realistic contest preparation for athletes, but a very rewarding and enjoyable one. Normally when the squad talks about an upcoming show, it is some grappling or MMA event, not this time! Nonetheless we hope you enjoy the show! Senpai returns to inspire the room Its always a pleasure to see old friends return to the training room. They bring knowledge and experience and something more the ability to inspire via example. None more so than the most senior Senpai student of them all Georges StPierre. Mr StPierre came in to train the morning class the class he used to come to years ago in preparation for his first world title run. Today he drilled and mixed with a new generation of athletes in a different sport submission grappling but the presence of a man who reached so far and who wants to reach further still adds an electricity to the training room that always warms my cold heart. That path from the gym to the big stage is one that every professional athlete must trod. None spent more time on that trail than Mr StPierre and none went further. What a great example to the kohai juniors as they make their own way towards their respective goals.Back in Black Nicky Ryan had a great weekend winning first place honors in the Global Grappling League submission only event in Ithaca NY yesterday. Mr Ryan traveled upstate with Team mate Oliver Taza. Mr Ryan competed in the eight man elimination 145 pound division. He won his first two matches with a stranglehold and Achilles lock before taking on the very talented Junny Ocasio, fighting out of Unity gym in NYC. Mr Ryan won a thrilling decision in overtime on riding time advantage to take first place. As always its a pleasure to see the kohai junior students going out and performing so well in local tournaments as they make the improvements to get to their goals. Mr Ryan has been training very well and continues to amaze me with his development for such a young man just fifteen and competing in adult divisions and doing so well. Jiu jitsu and human spirit Some of the best experiences I have had through jiu jitsu have nothing to do with competition or titles, but instead work at the level of social work and human advancement. A dear student of mine, Claude Levy, often travels to Africa for work and family. When a true jiu jitsu student travels, jiu jitsu travels with him! Mr Levy often teaches friends and impromptu classes with locals in the kingly art. The amazing thing about jiu jitsu is that as soon as people feel it, they immediately take note of its value even if they have no prior experience. Getting jiu jitsu out into the world is always a good thing. Who knows a spark can light a fire and a fire can become a blaze and a blaze become an inferno. Who is to say where the next great champion will come from? Is it not possible that casual exposure to a new art could not set in motion events that could create something truly significant? That is why I love to see students carry jiu jitsu wherever they go. Mr Levy teaches to games keepers who often use grappling technique to restrain poachers who threaten endangered African wildlife a cause that is particularly dear to my heart. Every serious jiu jitsu student has a teacher inside of them somewhere the learning experience is so intense that we love to reenact it as teacher. Whilst competition may be the means of gaining distinction in jiu jitsu There will always be more pleasure in jiu jitsu as a means of bringing people together than any competition.Anticipation The higher you go in the sport, the more you will seek to NARROW YOUR OPPONENTS OPTIONS INTO A FEW EASILY ANTICIPATED OPTIONS THAT YOU CAN NULLIFY BEFORE THEY CAN BE EMPLOYED. This is the path of the jiu jitsu expert. At the onset of a match, things can go in any direction. Your task is take events in a direction you desire and to gradually limit your opponents options until the only option left is to tap in defeat or face the consequences. Thus GAINING THE INITIATIVE AND THEN FROM THERE, PROGRESSIVELY LIMITING YOUR OPPONENTS CHOICES UNTIL HE HAS NO CHOICE is the mark of superior jiu jitsu. Nowhere is this methodology more clearly seen than in the case of submission holds. For any given submission hold, there are a few main avenues of escape. It is never enough to merely apply the hold on a skilled opponent YOU MUST GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND APPLY THE HOLD IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU BLOCK THE ANTICIPATED COUNTERS BEFORE THEY OCCUR. You must study the counters to your favorite submissions and look for ways to stop those common counters whilst still applying the original hold. Here, Garry Tonon locks on a tight triangle stranglehold sankaku jime and immediately goes the extra distance to nullify the standard counters to triangles. This power of anticipation is made possible by imposing your moves and thus limiting your opponents options for movement. This cycle of imposition and anticipation is at the heart of good jiu jitsu.Beginners class Usually I teach the advanced classes at RGA in NYC. Sometimes however, I get asked to substitute in a beginners class when another instructor is sick or out of town. I always jump on the opportunity when it arises. There is something magical about a beginners class. It immediately returns you to the most important aspects of the sport and brings back the feelings of wonder you had when you first began in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. When teaching advanced students, my main focus is to get them TO IMPOSE THEIR GAME UPON THEIR OPPONENT. Beginners however, lack the skills to do this, and so here my main focus will always be PREVENTING AN OPPONENT FROM IMPOSING HIS GAME UPON YOU. Interestingly, the lessons of the beginner class have primacy for in all truth, YOU WILL NEVER IMPOSE YOUR GAME UPON ANYONE IF YOU CANNOT FIRST PREVENT THEM FROM IMPOSING THEIR GAME UPON YOU. Those early days in the sport, as frustrating as they often are, we we get pinned and controlled and have no idea how to get out, are the essential part of a journey that perhaps one day will see you able to impose your will upon whoever is in front of you.Little school big dreams Bronx NYC So often people tell me they need to get to a bigger and better school to realize their dreams. Or they see some new equipment, different gis, mats, exercise equipment etc etc. In fact the single most important factor in determining how far you go in jiu jitsu or any other endeavor is PASSION. Only if you are sufficiently passionate about what you do will you put in the requisite training time, research, auxiliary work, and overcome the inevitable disappointments and heartbreak needed to excel. No amount of fancy exercise equipment, world class instruction and training partners will ever make up for a lack of underlying passion. Passion is the soil in which the other elements needed for progress towards your goals are nourished, take root and grow towards the sky. I am often astounded by the high level of visitors to RGA in NYC who train in small local gyms and yet display skills out of proportion to their pedigree. Their passion for the sport made them take the extra steps and despite seeming disadvantages, they made great progress. Always remember that my teacher Renzo Gracie spent more than half of his time in the USA teaching out of rented kung fu studios, racquet ball courts, drug rehab buildings, exercise gyms and any other place that would have us, before he settled into our current location. IN THAT TIME HE PRODUCED THREE JIU JITSUGRAPPLING WORLD CHAMPIONS AND NUMEROUS HIGH LEVEL BLACKBELTS WHILST FIGHTING PROFESSIONALLY AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS. In all honesty I tell you WHAT LIES INSIDE THE DOOR OF WHATEVER GYM YOU TRAIN IN IS NOT NEARLY AS IMPORTANT AS THE ATTITUDE INSIDE YOU THAT YOU BRING TO THAT DOOR AND ENTER WITH. Every Monday night I love to go up to the Bronx to see my dear friend, Doug Pelinkovic and help teach at his local school. The Bronx has a very different vibe from Manhattan where I work and live. In that small gym there is passion and dreams. Sometimes my students from Manhattan come up to get a third workout in for the day here kohai standouts Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza share the mats with Stanley Rosa and the Bronx crew to work on the skills that can elevate them closer to their goals.Kohai on the march Matthew Tesla, kohai junior brown belt squad member, continues to make his push towards senior status. Yesterday at Grappling Industries NYC event he entered the open weight division featuring 25 athletes up to blackbelt, despite weighing only 175 pounds. He won 4 of his 5 matches via submission to win gold and an all expenses paid trip to Grappling Industries 2018 World Championships event in California Mr Tesla has been working very diligently in the gym on his skills. This has created a newfound confidence that was apparent in his strong run to the medal podium. Here he latches on to the leg of his black belt opponent with a fine ashi garami and controls the action from entry to finish. So often students ask me about developing confidence. I always say that confidence follows naturally from ability. If you develop the skills confidence will follow. Some will get that confidence earlier, some later, but if the ability is there, one day it will come, and when it does, great things happen.Tapping part 2 Garry Tonon got caught in a very nice triangle one week ago by a very talented athlete Antonio Carlos Jr and fought hard to get out but tapped when he could not. Mr Carlos Jr was caught in a triangle variation the week before by Gordon Ryan and tapped. A week after that Mr Tonon was ready to fight again and this time win. You can see that in a world of high volume matches, professionals will tap so that they can continue with their careers uninterrupted and go on to success just a short time later. If you fight at a high level, you will get caught, no matter how good you are. Better to tap and resume training immediately so that you can avoid the errors that got you in trouble and move on to a higher level of performance. Of course there can be factors that change this and make you very reluctant to tap, but in standard grappling competition this is the sensible approach and the one I always encourage my athletes to take. Here Garry Tonon enjoys the fruits of victory, a week after a loss, an hour after a win, ready to enjoy himself that night and train hard the next day in preparation for another bout in a few weeks. cashchickschampionshipsTapping Part 1 The decision to tap out due to strangle or joint lock is a deeply personal one. I always encourage my athletes to tap immediately to avoid injury. My reasoning is that if you have been put in a finishing position the mistakes have already been made, once you believe those mistakes cannot be undone tap as this allows you to immediately begin training so that those mistakes can be avoided in a rematch. When the athlete refuses to tap to a joint lock there will be a considerable period of time where training is impossible and there may be damage that never fully recovers both of which will make the rematch more difficult. I understand that in MMA things can be different as there is a generally higher intensity level and athletes fight much less often. In grappling, athletes can compete every week for months in some cases. Getting badly injured can cause considerable interruption to the athletes yearly competition schedule, so I think its generally the smart option to tap as soon as damage becomes probable. Sometimes there are other factors, prize money, prestige, honor or animosity that can make an athlete refuse to tap. A good example occurred when AJ Agazarm refused to tap to a very tight knee bar attempt from Garry Tonon last night. The variation employed by Mr Tonon is particularly strong and the effects of it, and Mr Agazarms decision not to tap, can be readily seen in the immediate aftermath. There is much to commend in bravery and a spirit of resistance, but this must also be balanced with a sense of professionalism in a sport where the athlete may have to perform many times a year and train year round. Hats off to both men for a fine and dramatic show of technique against mental toughness.A win for the G in a Gi Last night in California, Garry Tonon defeated AJ Agazarm in a hastily arranged match after both competitors had their initial opponents pull out at the last minute. The match was notable for being in a gi Mr Agazarm insisted on this knowing that Mr Tonon has not trained in one for years and that it would prevent him using one of his favorite weapons the heel hook. In the end it made no difference Mr Tonon took the fight to Mr Agazarm utilizing other elements of his submission arsenal, especially his kimura and knee bar, to put Mr Agazarm under extreme pressure and win a unanimous decision victory. The two have a history and do not enjoy each others company, so the match had an intensity that the crowd enjoyed. As he does so often, Mr Tonon took on a challenge at an apparent disadvantage and prevailed in an entertaining and memorable way showing that technical sophistication and entertainment dont have to be opposites. Well done to Fight2Win for their production and getting the most out of a show beset by last minute withdrawals. I wonder if wearing the gi again made Mr Tonon a little nostalgic...Changes Its been a strange week or two for the squad. At the Sapeteiro 6 event won by Gordon Ryan we had at least four of the main competitors pull out on short notice. Then the next week at SUG 3 Garry Tonon was offered three different opponents in a week due to pull outs, Gordon Ryan was offered two. Now this week at Fight2Win again there are numerous pull outs. Gabriel Arges, the very talented world champion has had to pull out of a much anticipated match with Garry Tonon due to late training injury. Gordon Ryan had defeated Mr Arges via heel hook in the past, but Mr Arges has won many matches over opponents of the highest level since then it would have been a great match. Jeff Monson had to pull out of his match with ADCC gold and silver medalist Joao Assis. For a moment it appeared that Gordon Ryan would come in on 24 hours notice to take on Mr Assis in what would have been a fascinating battle, but Mr Assis declined, understandably citing a need for additional training time to face Mr Ryan. Then Bill Cooper pulled out of his match with AJ Agazarm. In the end we are left with a rather strange match up Garry Tonon vs AJ Agazarm IN A GI!! This should be interesting. Mr Agazarm has spent a significant amount of time training with our team, but that was always no gi. Mr Tonon never had a problem with him in that context, but Mr Tonon has not trained seriously in a gi in a very long time. Add to this that Mr Agazarm has a rather low opinion of Mr Tonons skills, whilst Mr Tonon has an even lower opinion of Mr Agazarms skills and will be cornered by our dear friend Jake Shields, who has an even lower opinion of both Mr Agazarms skills and character and cheered on by Mr Ryan who has the lowest opinion of Mr Agazarm of them all This one may turn into a dog fight! Mostly we like matches that appeal to us because of technical and tactical elements on display encased in the sportsmanship of jiu jitsu every now and then we just like to see two people that dont like each other go at it I have a feeling this match will be the latter type I cant wait to see if Garry remembers how to tie a belt properly Degree of difficulty Simply winning is not the goal of great grapplers. If victory is all you seek, just fight weak opponents. In this way you will always be victorious AND NO ONE WILL CARE. The real goal is winning against great opponents. That is what gets peoples attention. We are judged not just by winning, but by the degree of difficulty associated with winning. No grappling athlete does more to find challenging matches than Garry Tonon. Due to the fact that so few athletes his own size will match him, he almost always has to fight extremely talented opponents many weight classes above him. This Friday on California at Fight to Win Pro is no exception. Mr Tonon will take on the extremely talented Gabriel Arges, world champion in both gi and no gi jiu jitsu. Mr Arges has an extremely impressive game, including some of the best leg locking skills in IBJJF competition. He has submitted current ADCC world champion Claudio Calasans with a superb knee bar at the world championships. He normally competes at 194 pounds so as always it seems, he will have a considerable weight advantage over Mr Tonon, whose normal weight category is 155, along with a significant height advantage. Due to the fact that he fought just last week in Portland, Mr Tonon could not return to NYC to train in preparation for this match, but has been preparing with friends in California. The format of the match is an interesting one ten minutes of sub only followed by referees decision based upon submission attempts and positional control. I will fly out to California tomorrow to corner him. It is great to see the many grappling shows getting stronger. The west coast is definitely leading the way here with several strong organizations, beach offering different and very interesting formats for the athletes to showcase their skills.Variation A common strand of thinking that I observe in coaches and athletes is the idea that there is a correct way of performing a given move and any deviation from that is a step in the wrong direction. This kind of sentiment works well in a beginners class where you are trying to give students a firm foundation upon which to take their first steps, but as you progress higher in the sport, there comes a realization that there is almost always more than one correct way of performing that move. Much more important than the move itself is the set of MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES that underly the move. BEGINNERS TRY TO STAY TRUE TO THE MOVE AS IT WAS SHOWN TO THEM, BUT EXPERTS TRY TO STAY TRUE TO THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES BEHIND THE MOVE AND WORK FROM THERE. This allows them considerable leeway in their actual performance of any given move so that fascinating variations and improvisations can occur, but which still work in accordance with the essential mechanical foundations upon which the move is based. This sometimes has amusing consequences you will see a beginner claiming a world champion is performing a move incorrectly because he is using a variation different from the one he was shown, but in truth, that champion is operating in accordance with the same over arching principles. Here kohai brown belt student, Stanley Rosa, an outstanding young instructor of Bronx Martial Art academy under my good friend Doug Pelinkovic, performs a fascinating variation of kimura into a powerful submission win over outstanding Pedro Sauer black belt David Porter at a recent grappling show. Unorthodox leg and hip positioning does not prevent him staying true to the critical features of a strong kimura attack as you can see from the impressive power he generates in very little time.Reflections on my sensei Innovation in jiu jitsu My sensei, Renzo Gracie had a very broad repertoire of technique and always sought to add new moves to his arsenal. Like all jiu jitsu players however, he had his tokuiwaza favorite moves that he would call upon in critical situations. There is no question that the move he is best known for is his arm in guillotine. It allowed him to prevail in two of the most defining moments of his career against the much larger Sanae Kikuta in a 52 minute battle in Japan, and against the great Pat Militich. When I consider my senseis version of the versatile guillotine strangle, I am always deeply impressed by its mechanical perfection and the smoothness and subtlety of his set ups. I believe the development of Mr Gracies arm in guillotine can teach us much about the nature of innovation in an art where almost everything has been done by people before us. When Mr Gracie arrived in the US in 1995, he rarely used any form of guillotine and certainly did not have any arm in guillotine so clearly it was not something he learned in Brazil with the rest of his jiu jitsu. Nor was he the first person to employ the arm in guillotine the first time I saw it done was by Oleg Taktarov in UFC 6 in his first match with Steve Beneteau, and I am sure there are probably examples before that which I am not aware of. Nonetheless, in the mid 1990s, the arm in guillotine was rarely seen and certainly not a standard technique in the sport. As his professional career developed and more of his training time was spent in no gi training, Mr Gracie played with many ways to grip opponents in ways that allowed submissions and sweeps from bottom position. One of his favorites became the front headlock position. As he played with it he had some initial success from that position and thus began his investigation into the arm in guillotine. As months became years he built a game around the position, entries, control and finishes, that covered every possible reaction an opponent could make. MOST INNOVATION IN JIU JITSU IS NOT BEING THE FIRST, BUT IN ADVANCING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE IN WAYS THAT IMPROVE PERFORMANCENice work Mr Sonnen Chael Sonnen is doing a good job with his fledgling grappling show and tonight put on an entertaining show that featured some very nice grappling action showcasing the area between MMA and grappling using EBI rules format to create fast paced matches with plenty of action. Squad members Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan were there. Mr Ryan took on Kentucky leg locking specialist Joe Baize. He told me prior to the match he would limit himself to guillotines and jujisankaku armbartriangle finishes. That is a very challenging way to enter a match but he did it with a nicely applied juji out of sankaku control. Mr Tonon fought a tough match against his much larger opponent, Antonio Carlos Jr. All credit to Mr Carlos Jr. He hit a splendid flying sankaku and finished it in excellent fashion to win a fine victory. Sometimes fighting at the highest levels can be a topsy turvy experience just last week, Gordon Ryan defeated Mr Carlos Jr via sankaku a different variation at Sapeteiro 6. When very talented athletes fight, just one little error or miscalculation can determine the result and so there can be total shifts in victories and losses within a week, as happened here thats what makes the sport so interesting! Now the squad must go into training for more matches next weekend in California Walking the walk Our team often talks about taking on bigger, stronger opponents to prove the efficacy of our methods. No one does this better than Garry Tonon. His opponent, IBJJF world champion and UFC standout, Antonio Carlos Jr, a man who has defeated Bernardo Faria, Leandro Lo and Romulo Barral on multiple occasions, including by submission, weighed in for tonights event in Portland Mat 230 pounds. Garry Tonon weighed in heavier than usual 170 pounds. This will be the biggest weight difference he has had to contend with since he fought Buchecha in ADCC when he had just been awarded his black belt. Adding to the difficulty is a big height advantage to Mr Carlos Jr. People can say whatever they want about Mr Tonon, but they can never criticize his willingness to back up his words with action and showcase the art against bigger opponents. In this last week he was matched against three men for tonights event Hector Lombard, Chael Sonnon and Mr Carlos Jr each one far bigger and stronger and than him and each one bigger than the one before him. The first two had to pull out, leaving the biggest and best qualified. No one his own size would accept the match, but Mr Tonon as always accepted whoever he was offered. He and Gordon Ryan have trained very well now its on to the stage this time a cage and under the lightsTo the winner go the spoils Kohai student Jonathan JC Calestine put on his best competition display yet today, winning the 145 pound division of The Finishers Tournament 3 a popular local event. It included outstanding local grapplers such as JM Holland, Mike Davila and John Battle, but JC was able to get past them all to win the first place honors. JC has always looked good in the gym Eddie Cummings often insists that I match him with JC as often as possible when he is preparing for big events as he believes JC is the most difficult among the Kohai to finish. Today he was able to let his gym skills shine on the stage and gain victory with many more to follow I am sure. Great work JC and great work by the shows organizers for drawing such strong local talent into an event that provides ideal training for those looking to gain the kind of experience they will need to rise to the top.Theres no business like show business Tomorrow night in Portland Oregon, MMAs greatest showman, Chael Sonnen will run the show at Submission Underground but the squad will look to be the ones putting on the show Garry Tonon takes on Brazilian jiu jitsu and MMA standout, Antonio Carlos Jr a powerful athlete far bigger and stronger than himself who has beaten some of the biggest names in IBJJf competition and who brings a very exciting set of submission skills. Gordon Ryan takes on Kentucky Leg lock specialist Joe Baize, who had a sterling performance at EBI 8. Rules will be standard EBI, but with a shortened time limit of only eight minutes. It will be interesting to see how this affects the work rate and pacing of the matches. Mr Sonnen is doing a fine job of integrating the area between MMA and grappling in his shows and has a natural sense of how to get peoples attention in ways that will grow the sport. Our team is interested to see how the use of a cage will affect the matches. This is the first time the squad has had to grapple in a cage. Both our opponents have extensive MMA experience and thus expertise in cage work that will definitely makes things interesting. A core element of our style is that great jiu jitsu must have an aesthetic element to it in addition to its effectiveness. Our team loves to put on a show. Of course the result will always be paramount, but we train to create a dynamic game that always pushes towards submission this makes the squad natural showmen. In amateur sports the only thing of value is the result this gives it an admirable purity. The idea of a professional sport a sport that people see as ENTERTAINMENT, a medium of entertainment that people pay to watch, requires that the athlete do more than win he must win a fashion that MAKES PEOPLE WANT TO WATCH. This is a difficult requirement, but one which every professional athlete must work on. Each must find their own way. Ours will always be based around dynamic movement leading to control and the ruthless pursuit of submission above all.It appears that Jeff Monson has pulled out of the submission underground event and will no longer be facing Gordon Ryan in what would have been a fascinating battle of experience, size, strength and submission defense vs agility and submission offense. The organizers of Submission Underground have substituted leg locking specialist Joe Baize as substitute. Mr Baize competed at EBI 8 which Mr Ryan won but they never met as they were on opposite sides of the brackets. I remember Mr Baize putting on a very good performance. He was probably the smallest man in the tournament yet won his first match well by submission leg lock and did very well against the much larger and stronger Felipe Fogolin, almost catching his legs on multiple occasions before getting tired and caught in a stranglehold. Nonetheless I was impressed by his skills, calmness under pressure and willingness to mix it up with bigger athletes. The nature of the match now is very different it will be a match centered around submission skills where leg submissions are the specialty of both athletes. Both men know what it takes to get to the legs and finish on the legs. Its been a frustrating week for the squad running through multiple opponents pulling out of match ups at the last minute we are proud of our record of professionalism of showing up come what may. Now it seems we have two dangerous opponents who play the submission game very well and are ready to play ball Sunday night in Portland.Seminal moments I am a huge believer in the notion of SEMINAL MOMENTS in the development of athletes and even recreational jiu jitsu players. These are critical episodes where a student has built up physical skills over time and then in one opportunity, SUDDENLY AND DRAMATICALLY MANIFESTS THOSE SKILLS IN A MEMORABLE AND DYNAMIC FASHION. These moments are huge for your development. They represent the interface between physical skills and mental attributes such as confidence. Once such an episode occurs, you will believe in your ability to replicate this skill and jump to a new level of performance but UNTIL such a moment, something inside you will always hold you back a little when the opportunity comes. These moments need not be public in fact they most often occur in the gym, seen by no one except you and your training partner but their effect can be dramatic. These seminal moments cannot be forced. You must work to create the base level of skill that makes them possible but only some subliminal flash inside of you can make them happen. Where in the past you hesitated, one day something inside clicks and you let all your guns fire and then you will never look back. As a coach I can help build up the skills to make it possible, but only you can snatch that moment and make it yours. This is why these seminal moments are so important to your development. They represent your independence from a teacher. They are a coming of age in some aspect of the sport. At the recent Sapeteiro 6 event, kohai student Matthew Tesla had such a moment. Taking on 10th Planet icon black belt Boogyman Martinez, the recent brown belt, who has always shown immense promise in the gym, but who always held back in competition, suddenly had his moment. No second guessing, no hesitation, no doubts just the mindless realization that he could do this on his terms in his way fire! Look for these seminal moments in your training you cant force them, but you can put yourself in a position where if the opportunity is there, you can take it when ready treasure and relish those moments they are yours and yours alone.Smaller man vs bigger man part 2 This weekend squad Senpai senior students Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon will take on much bigger opponents. Mr Ryan will take on the hulking two time world champion and five time world medalist Jeff Monson. Initially Mr Tonon was to face off against the very powerful Hector Lombard, but Mr Lombard had to pull out due to a scheduling conflict. Then Mr Chael Sonnen showed his usual fearlessness and stepped in on short notice but had to pull out when Bellator fight company expressed disapproval of the bout. Mr Sonnen did a fine job of finding a new opponent. UFC standout Antonio Carlos Jr. will face Mr Tonon. Mr Carlos Jr has a very impressive background in jiu jitsu he was a double world champion at brown belt and since then has recorded multiple victories over jiu jitsu icons such as Leandro Lo, Romulo Barral, and Bernardo Faria. He represented great teams in both jiu jitsu and MMA Checkmat and ATT. Clearly his skills are of the highest level to defeat such great opponents. He is a real physical specimen well over two hundred very athletic pounds and tall. This should afford him a big physical advantage in both regulation time and overtime. As always, the squad will have to rely on skill and tactics to prevail. Unfortunately the matches are very short just eight minutes so there is no way to use time as a weapon to tire the bigger opponents in this tournament. However, both Mr Tonon and Mr Ryan have trained extremely well in preparation despite some physical problems and they are eager to put on a show against these very talented strongmen they face in this new competition venue. Submission underground is doing a fine job of working the interface between grappling and MMA and brings the showmanship of Mr Chael Sonnen along with the rule system of Mr Eddie Bravo to create an exciting venue for athletes from both sports to showcase their skills.Smaller man vs bigger man part 1 This weekend at Submission underground grappling event run by former UFC superstar Chael Sonnen, Gordon Ryan will take on one of the most decorated ADDC world championship veterans of all time in an EBI style format. Jeff Monson is a two time ADCC gold medalist, two time silver medalist and one time bronze medalist. He has defeated many jiu jitsu icons in ADCC competition with a unique blend of wrestling, counter jiu jitsu and raw physical strength that is extremely difficult to overcome. Mr Ryan is coming off a fine victory this weekend in Florida at Sapeteiro 6 and is already back in the gym preparing for this titanic match up. He will have only eight minutes of regulation time to try to break though against his much larger and stronger rival who has survived the submission arsenals of past jiu jitsu greats for much longer periods and emerged victorious. This will be a fascinating match of a young master of submission offense and a vastly bigger and more experienced master of submission defense under very tight time constraint. Mr Ryan has been battling through a mysterious lower abdominal and hip pain for months now, but has shown real dedication and truly admiral fortitude in training and continuing to grow and develop throughout this adversity. This fascinating match up will provide a truly stern test of his contest preparation.Shiai Intensity Most athletes feel a very different intensity level when they enter competition shiai in comparison with daily sparring in the gym. This is perfectly natural and in some cases it has benefits. As a general rule however, I seek to reduce the overall difference between competition intensity and gym intensity as much as possible. I like to see athletes compete in a relaxed demeanor rather than an extremely intense one there are exceptions obviously so that the bridge between the gym and the stage is a narrow one to cross. Developing this relaxed shiai demeanor takes time but when it comes, I find the common problem of lowered performance on stage is greatly reduced. There is however, one area of the sport where this general approach does not apply the use of finishing holdssubmissions. These must be applied with greater intensity in shiai than in the gym due to much greater levels of resistance found in competition than usual circumstances. This does not mean recklessness or unsporting behavior it simply means that submissions have to be locked tighter than usual and with greater focus and power along with a stronger drive to completion than would be appropriate in a gym setting among friends and teammates. There simply has to be a stronger threat of potential damage if the opponent is to tap in submission if that potential is not there, competitive opponents will simply not surrender. Dealing with these two aspects of intensity, lowering overall shiai intensity closer to gym levels; whilst at the same time raising submission intensity levels is a big part of contest preparation for our athletes. Here kohai brown belt Matthew Tesla shows great competition submission intensity as he finishes one of 10th planets best black belts, Boogyman Martinez via heel hook during an outstanding run to the final of Sapeteiro 6 grappling invitational this weekend. His reconciliation of overall intensity levels and submission intensity levels was very impressive for a developing student.The kohai shine in Texas Fast rising squad kohai little brothers Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza took center stage at the Texas Jiu Jitsu Kumite professional grappling tournament yesterday. Both won their respective weight divisions all by submission under EBI rules. Both hail from Canada but train with the squad and have done a fine job of absorbing our methods and philosophy. They have a special place in my heart as they make the same trip from Montreal to train with us in NYC that Georges StPierre Made as a young man to become champion I believe they will do likewise one day in grappling. They spend at least two weeks of every month in NYC and make real sacrifices to get to their goals. Mr Crelinsten has made astonishing progress in technical depth and his repertoire of submissions is already impressive. Mr Taza brings a quiet intensity to both training and competition and has an artistry to his dangerous submission game that is a pleasure to behold. Keep your eye on these youngsters they have the ambition and the work ethic to go all the way to the top. Good to see them displaying their medals and counting their shekels as reward for their hard work! A fantastic first day for the squad in 2017 with Gordon Ryan winning Sapeteiro 6, Mathew Tesla taking second in a brilliant debut performance, Shy Ace winning his superfight at the same event by submission, Mr Taza and Mr Crelinsten wining In Texas and other kohai putting on great performances at the same event. Renzo and I are so proud of you and all the students at RGA who help you prepare Strong start The squad entered the professional grappling competition circuit in fine form today. Gordon Ryan won the Sapitiero 6 Grappling Invitational and took 10,000 first prize. Up and coming kohai student Matthew Tesla put on a great display in his first big competition, submitting everyone on his side of the bracket including 10th planet stand out Boogyman Martinez to get to the finals against team mate Mr Ryan. Mr Tesla used his superb ashi garami based leg locking skills to finish everyone he faced Mr Ryan used exclusively upper body attacks to showcase his submission versatility and take the big prize. We have other kohai students competing in Texas will update as facts come in. I am especially proud of this result as it represents a real breakthrough for Mr Tesla to get into top level pro sub grappling and shine. Mr Ryan has battled heroically through a mystery illness that has plagued him for months and showed incredible discipline to train through it and prevail. Great to see a strong start to 2017 big plans, big ambitions and the discipline to make them real.Those who give, shall receive Very often I see students fight for every inch of ground in a match. The moment contact is made there is a furious fight for grips and every part of the match is tightly contested. Often this is a sound approach but it is important to understand that it is not the only way to engage your opponent. Too often this approach leads to a result where the two athletes never get to finishing positions because they never get past the battle for initial grips and positions. Very often you will get better results by giving something to your opponent. The key is TO CONTROL HOW MUCH YOU GIVE AND THE AFTERMATH. If you give an opening to a talented opponent without a plan, he will quickly take advantage and score on you. However, if you do so with a sound plan and the skills to enact it, your opponent will often be caught as he moves into what he perceived as an advantage. So for example, you can let an elbow drift surreptitiously away from your torso to draw your opponent into an underhook, all the while waiting for this occur so that your preplanned attack off the overhook can come into play. Jiu jitsu is absolutely full of possibilities for this kind of approach. We all have a good idea of what is desirable for both athletes as we spar, so often the act of giving will provide the perfect set up on an over extended opponent as the trap is sprung. This approach requires subterfuge and subtlety along with the skills to recover if your gambit fails and to score if it succeeds all this is good for your development. Ultimately our sport REQUIRES FREE MOVEMENT AND EXTENSION OF THE LIMBS IF FINISHES ARE TO OCCUR. If neither player will engage past initial grips this is unlikely to occur hence the occasional need to offer INCENTIVES TO MOVEMENT AND EXTENSION THAT CAN CREATE THE CONDITIONS NEEDED FOR VICTORY. Here Garry Tonon offers both partial back exposure and a partial ashi garami entanglement as a means of getting into his opponents hips and legs and into a potentially winning position with the least effort and energy expenditure.Last day of training This weekend will see the sixth installment of the growing Sapateiro Invitational grappling event. They use a slightly modified EBI format to put on excellent submission only events. Sapateiro 6 is notable for the incredible amount of talent they have brought in there are three EBI finalists, an ADCC champion, several ADCC competitors it is probably fair to say it has a more stacked field than any single EBI event! Gordon Ryan has battled through a mystery illness this camp that has still not been resolved after nearly four months, but has trained without fail with the resolve and discipline of a true stoic. He will take with him his understudy, Matthew Tesla. Mr Tesla has been training at a very high level and gave a very strong performance at the recent ADCC trials. This will be his first big show the first of many I am sure for he has a wealth of talent to show off. Building athletes to a peak is always an exciting process thanks goes to the organizers of Sapeteiro 6 for creating a venue and a thrilling line up for these talented athletes to showcase their individual skills and the appeal of the sport in general. Beautiful blade Here is a new custom Bowie knife made by young prodigy blade artist Dan Altavilla for me. The Bowie knife comes in so many variations this one is designed to be equally adept in both cut and thrust. It has been differentially heat treated in the Japanese style and thus represents the exciting possibilities that open up when different cultures merge and enjoin their best elements with each other to produce something new and great. This sentiment of taking the best from disparate sources is a big theme in my teaching and is beautifully done here by Mr Altavilla. I love to buy high end production blades, but customs are always my favorite, as they carry an individuality of expression that separates the artist from the worker. One day I shall write about my strange hobby and why I truly believe that blade craft provides the perfect metaphor for training in the empty handed martial arts and can provide much insight to the jiu jitsu student. Mr Altavillas work is among my favorite knife artists this handsome specimen is like a great jiu jitsu player deadly functionality mixed with beauty and refinement.Students and teachers Some of my happiest coaching memories come from watching my students teach. I have always been insistent on the idea that my students have a deep understanding of the underlying principles and concepts that underly our approach to the game and that they be capable of explaining them well to others. As a result, my students can in almost every case, do a fine job of teaching our methods and philosophy to students of all levels and backgrounds. In particular Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan have a complete and deep knowledge of my approach to jiu jitsu. Indeed, I would go further and say that these three have developed an independence and originality of thought that has taken them beyond my teachings and into their own distinctive style. I have taught seminars with all three and am constantly amazed by the maturity and depths of their views and their skill at conveying it to others. All three take immense pride in their knowledge and constantly work to refine and improve it. It is no exaggeration to say they are light years ahead of where I was after a similar time spent in training. This bodes well for the future as they have so much more time to develop their skills and knowledge. All three teach seminars between competitions. I can attest to how much learning material they offer when they teach. This weekend in Florida, Mr Ryan will be teaching elements of our style if you have the chance to go dont miss it! Mr Cummings and Mr Tonon are also often available and can be reached easily through social media to arrange seminars etc so that you can learn more about their method and philosophy. Competition makes our sport thrilling in the present, but only teaching creates the framework for the health and growth of the sport into the future.Ambition and patience There are two great mental attributes that I see in most great jiu jitsu students, and indeed, in almost every enterprise that humans engage in obviously there are many others, but I want to focus on these two today as they form a relation that is critical to our long term success or failure. These are AMBITION and PATIENCE. In order to achieve anything of consequence in the world, a person must have ambition, for it is ambition that provides the inner drive that initiates our physical actions over time. Seen in this light, ambition appears to be a fine thing there is however, a problem. In our attempts to fulfill our ambition we constantly run into road blocks. Competition with other people who have similar ambitions, the sheer difficulty of the tasks we need to complete to realize those ambitions factors like these lead to frustration as we so often fail in our ambitions. It is exactly then that we must make use of a second, complimentary mental attribute patience. Patience is the recognition that achievement and the skills that bring achievement take time to develop. AMBITION STARTS EVERY ENTERPRISE BUT ONLY ITS INTERACTION WITH PATIENCE SUSTAINS EVERY ENTERPRISE AND TAKES IT THROUGH TO COMPLETION. It is critical to understand that one without the other is of little value. Powerful ambition quickly leads to frustration and disappointment when it runs into the reality of competition. We see this all the time with the high attrition rate in jiu jitsu. Too much patience creates overly contented people with little drive who are happy enough with what they already and who dont push hard enough to create the changes need to improve in the time available. We see this all the time in jiu jitsu with people who train for long stretches of time but who make little technical progress. Somewhere in the middle is the solution. Where that point in the middle is, will depend upon your goals, your life situation, what you believe personal happiness to consist of etc. but find it you must if you are to gain the longevity and drive in a sport that requires both for excellence.Theres no place like Renzos Monday afternoon Martin Luthor King day in NYC. The squad is preparing for upcoming events. Submission Underground Event run by MMA legend Chael Sonnen will feature Garry Tonon against MMA super star Hector Lombard, who has world championship level judo skills and a huge size and strength advantage over Mr Tonon. Gordon Ryan will take on Jeff Monson, the former ADCC grappling world champion, again at a big size and strength disadvantage. It will be a classic match up of strength vs mobility for both of our athletes. Filming the athletes in training and conducting interviews afterwards, the Submission Underground crew had a busy day at RGA. Its great to see MMA superstars promoting and competing in these events and using the star power of the MMA game to help grow the grappling game and give our athletes a venue to show our philosophy and methods in the sport. Thank you to Mr Sonnen and the SUG team from RGA and the squad. The rule set will feature shortened EBI matches of eight minutes and then into overtime. Our training has to reflect the higher work rate required by the time constraints leading to some spectacular matches on the gym floor today! Some of the practice matches could easily have been used as pay per view material!! With over seventy five people in the class it made for an exciting days training...The Artists medium Every art uses a medium through which the artist may achieve self expression. The degree to which he or she succeeds or fails is largely bound up with his or her depth of understanding of that medium. If a painter has only a poor knowledge of paint, color, tone, intensity, perspective, brushwork and canvas; it is unlikely that deep self expression will arise from shallow knowledge of the very medium that makes that expression possible. In the empty handed martial arts, the HUMAN BODY is the medium through which the artist must express himself. Like any other artist, the deeper the knowledge of the medium, the better will be the opportunity for impressive self expression. Not only is knowledge of the working of the human body important here, but so to is your ability to maximize your use of the human body. If you are limited in your ability to move your body, this will always make self expression through the body more difficult. Thus the constant need to maintain and improve the dexterity, strength and overall health of your body to the greatest degree possible. This the martial artist shares in common with all those artists who express themselves through the body gymnasts, dancers, athletes of every type. With all other artists they share the need for a medium and for the deep study of that medium if their work is to be impressive. Their only difference from these other artists is the direction they choose to express themselves but like all their brethren, the best among them study and cherish the medium with which they work.Legs and learning Probably the single most common question I am asked is this how can I speed my progress in jiu jitsu? When this is asked as a general question rather than as a question from a specific athlete my answer is always the same LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH YOUR LEGS. We humans do almost all of our complex motor tasks with our hands and arms, yet the strongest part of our bodies by far are our legs and hips. Those who try to grapple predominantly with their upper body will never defeat anyone larger than themselves and quickly fall to exhaustion. The beginning jiu jitsu student must make the transition to using his or her legs as dexterously as most people use their hands and arms if he is to excel. In every class I teach, THOSE WHO LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH THEIR FEET, LEGS AND HIPS, QUICKLY OVERTAKE AND DOMINATE THOSE WHO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH THEIR HANDS, ARMS AND SHOULDERS. An excellent example of a fast learner in BJJ is the great BJ Penn. He made a lightning quick ascent up the ranks to become the first American to win a world championship and then went on to a legendary career in MMA. A notable feature of Mr Penns game was his extraordinary leg dexterity and control. He used this to great effect in every aspect of the game guard work, back control and passing. He was one of the few athletes I have seen whose foot and leg dexterity closely matched that in most peoples hands and arms. This made him much more than a quick learner. It also helped him greatly when fighting larger opponents, as a smaller mans legs are stronger than a bigger mans arms. His example is an excellent one to all aspiring to rise in the sport TRAIN AND EMPHASIZE THE DEXTERITY AND CONTROL OF YOUR LEGS, HIPS AND FEET, FOR THIS IS A KEY ELEMENT IN YOUR RATE OF PROGRESSION.Watching vs Observing When we think of training in jiu jitsu, we typically think in physical terms drilling, sparring, movement and strength training etc. These are undoubtedly the most important forms of training. Nonetheless I believe that real supplemental progress in your game can be made by observing jiu jitsu as a spectator provided you approach it in the correct fashion. One of the most impressive examples of this occurred a few years ago when the great Mendes brothers visited our academy. They were in NYC as part of their seminar tour program and stopped by to teach some private classes. As they finished, the famous Monday afternoon class at RGA began. Rafa Mendes came on to the mats to observe the big class. He had to go on to teach afterwards, so he could not participate, but sat alongside me as I taught and coached. When the sparring began I noted his intense gaze as he followed the movements of the many advanced students grappling in front of him. He was not merely WATCHING the matches as most do entertained by the action as a spectator and seeing nothing more than who wins and who loses. He was truly OBSERVING the class he appeared to be considering second by second what he would be doing if he were in any of the matches that were unfolding in front of him. Unlike most, he was an ACTIVE OBSERVER rather than a PASSIVE OBSERVER. I was deeply impressed by his powers of focus and concentration as his eyes followed the action and looked into exactly the areas most relevant to deciding the outcome of each match as his mind raced for solutions and answers for whatever problems he saw. This was clearly a man who could learn and grow merely by observing and use observation as a useful supplement to his physical training. What for most people would be an hour of entertainment watching athletes battle each other, was for him a MENTAL WORKOUT that doubtless he could carry with profit into his next PHYSICAL workout. It was an impressive display of the kind of mental acuity and focus that champions carry in addition to their physical skills and attributes.Pioneers As an instructor, my path was relatively easy. I started under one of the best known and most knowledgeable teachers in one of the biggest and best academys in the world. A much tougher task is taken on by those instructors who have to go into territory where jiu jitsu is undeveloped and build a following and student base in an area where there is little or no background in jiu jitsu. My teacher Renzo Gracie was a pioneer. When he came to NYC in the mid 1990s there was virtually no jiu jitsu culture here at all. Students began at absolutely no understanding of ground grappling a simple triangle was considered a very advanced move by us. In beginners class we had to have it explained to us that bottom guard position was not the same as bottom mount position. Poor Renzo had to go from Gracie Barra in Rio De Janeiro, training with the best black belts in the world, to teaching a bunch of stiff, uncoordinated, woefully ignorant klutzes who did not know the difference between an underhook and an overhook. The fact that Sensei was able to create so many champions from such poor raw material under such conditions is testimony not only to his teaching skill but also his patience! Nowadays there is no need for this pioneering work in America the sport has matured here. However, in many parts of the world, the sport is still in its infancy. RGA has affiliates around the world who travel vast distances to learn the sport and our approach to it and carry this knowledge back to the jiu jitsu frontiers. Kurdt George, from Renzo Gracie Cape Town, South Africa has done incredible work building the sport in his nation and training with the squad to stay current with our developments. Today Sensei gave him a well deserved black belt for his achievements one pioneer to another both men doing a stellar job of growing our beloved sport and ensuring future growth. Well done Kurdt George! And a big hello to South African jiu jitsu from NYC, from Renzo and the squad in the blue basement! Insight and direction I am a big believer in the value of having a primary coach in your developmental years one person who creates a strong fundamental game and an overall approach to the sport with progress over time. I am also a big believer in the value of occasional alternative points of view to add new insight and perspective that can make you investigate new areas of the sport. As a beginning student I was very fortunate to have the best of both. My primary coach was of course, Renzo Gracie. As you know, he is a he is a jiu jitsu icon running one of the biggest academies in the world in one of the worlds premier cities so we had many extremely distinguished guests over the years. Many of these outstanding individuals had an impact upon me and my approach to the game. I would be doing you all a disservice if I did not talk about them in future posts so that you can learn from their insights as I did. Most importantly, we can look at different modes of teaching. Our daily teaching from our primary coaches is usually technical in nature. The value of visitors is not so much technical they typically are not there long enough to make significant technical contributions to any more than small parts of your game their real value is in the NEW PERSPECTIVE they offer and how this can make you think and progress in new directions LONG AFTER THE VISITOR IS GONE. When I was a blue belt, the great Dean Lister visited our academy. If I remember correctly, he was a brown belt at the time, doing well at local tournaments, but not yet the 2X ADCC champion he would later become. Mr Lister had very powerful Achilles locks and knee bars at that time he had not yet fully developed the heel hook game he later used so successfully. When speaking to us he spoke of the usefulness of leg attacks in his game. At that time this was VERY unorthodox. He said something like, upper body or lower body a tap is a tap and a tap is a win. That one sentence stuck with me and as I rode the NYC subway home that night my mind was racing with possibilities. From that day I began the study of lower body submissions and a whole new door opened.Reflections on my sensei There was a blizzard of snow today in NYC. When I Made my way down to the academy I was wondering how many people would show up for training. When I arrived, Sensei was on the mat teaching a packed class He had driven in all the way from Holmdel NJ in the blizzard to make sure whoever came in got a memorable workout and that they got! Mr Gracie taught a fascinating kimura variation often utilized by his student, Matt Serra, along with some modifications he had made. It was a beautiful demonstration of teaching skill. Anyone can teach their own game BUT IT TAKES REAL INSIGHT AND KNOWLEDGE TO TEACH ANOTHER MANS GAME AND ILLUMINATE ITS SUBTLETIES AND NUANCES. Mr Gracie has a warmth and charisma that makes a class more than technical lesson, but also a joy to the soul. Afterwards he and judo superstar Travis Stevens stayed to help the squad through a days training for upcoming tournaments. I came down to the academy wondering if anyone would be there it ended being one of the most enjoyable training days I can remember. As I make my home through the blizzard I cannot help but think of how fortunate I am to have had this man as my teacher more than twenty years ago and how the same knowledge and personality can lift and inspire a new generation of students today.Recognize It was great to see some of the achievements of the squad recognized at the flograppling 2016 grappling awards. They were nominated for five awards and won two. Gordon Ryan was voted best upset of the year for his win via submission over the great Keenan Cornelius. Garry Tonon won the award for no gi match of the year for his epic encounter with the great Leg locking maestro Rousimar Palhares. Interestingly, Mr Tonon was nominated twice for match of the year for two separate bouts a real distinction. The two bouts were very different from one another due to their very different rule structure. Mr Tonons was a blaze of action, featuring high lifts and slams, plenty of action both on the ground and standing, many submission attempts and quick positional work to back attacks. Mr Ryans was a calm, measured chess match with long periods of calm interspersed with powerful positional attacks by Mr Cornelius and submission attacks by Mr Ryan. Both matches were thrilling to coach, by in very different ways. I love the purity of submission only with no time limit, but realize that they are unlikely to happen often for business reasons. The shorter matches with criteria for wins are much more spectator friendly for the average fan. Still, I was proud to see the squad put on such fine displays in varying formats against such dangerous opponents and get recognition for the hard work I see them put in day after day in the gym. Interestingly however, public recognition must always be preceded by private recognition. It is in the dojo that success is first experienced. It is the recognition by your training partners of your progress, a technique well performed, a sparring session showing improvements, an approving nod from your coach, which first tell you that your hard work is paying off and that which once seemed impossible for you is becoming normal. In this process of recognition is born the beginnings of confidence and self belief, and with time, discipline and with continued cycles of action, achievement and recognition can come something great and remarkable recognition can go from friends and coaches to recognition from the sport itselfBasic and advanced One of my favorite coaching memories of 2016 was Garry Tonons spectacular submission win over world champion Gilbert Durinho Burns in England at Polaris grappling. Mr Burns was a formidable opponent, considerably heavier and stronger than Mr Tonon and with tremendous takedown and positional skills. After a sharp exchange of skills, Mr Tonon was able to utilize a rolling entry into one of our favorite ashi garami variations and secure a brilliant victory by way of heel hook. The video captures the action well. Most people are impressed by the fluidity and confidence with which Mr Tonon entered and completed this rarely seen and seemingly spectacular entry from standing position down to the floor. In truth however, the move is founded upon the most basic movement in the sport a simple forward roll that we all learned on our first day as a means of falling safely to the mats. This says much about our sport. The most complex and advanced moves all rest upon the most basic as their foundation. That Mr Tonon is so proficient in these types of entry is no accident. He is truly a master of ukemi waza rolling and falling technique. Every day he uses it as his warm up. I must have seen him perform it many thousands of times yet to this day he impresses me with the ease and fluidity with which he performs these essential basic skills before class. It is this daily drilling and perfection of this simple skill that makes it so easy for him to perform much more advanced variations at the big shows. THE SKILLS OF JIU JITSU ARE STRONGLY SEQUENTIAL THERE IS NO MASTERY OF ADVANCED MOVES WITHOUT PRIOR MASTERY OF BASIC ONES. So often I see students rush through ukemi rolling drills to get to what they think is interesting yet the very thing they are rushing towards is impossible to do well without those basic skills they are brushing aside. Take pride in your basic skills and your mastery of them they will make your journey to advanced skills far easier.Reflections on my Sensei The most important lesson Mr Gracie ever taught me Anyone involved in the kingly art of jiu jitsu can understand that their Sensei delves out countless important and valuable lessons, especially in the early stages of development where every day of training seems to offer huge new insights and ways of looking at things. As time passes however, the value of the lessons changes from straightforward technical and tactical advice and starts to move into the strategic and life defining areas. When I was a white belt and training in Mr Gracies dojo, the senior students were of a very high level. I developed a reputation as a white belt that was difficult to finish, so many of the seniors enjoyed training with me as a solid test of their finishing skills or a tough warm up before serious training with the other seniors. This kind of training gave me a solid defense, but not much else. I fell into a mindset of thinking that success consisted in holding out for a respectable time. That mindset is acceptable for a beginner, but it cannot sustain development over time. One night I was feeling rather proud of myself having lasted a long round with a senior when Mr Gracie sat next to me and, expressed strong disappointment in my game. He said, John the way you play you will never be anything more than an ANNOYANCE to your opponent. You must change and become a THREAT to your opponent. When you do this you will see a total change, not only in your game but in the game that your opponent brings to you. A moments reflection revealed the truth of his words. From that day forward I changed my whole approach to the game. I began a detailed study of the main submissions of the sport and the necessary preconditions to make them possible. In a short time I started experiencing offensive success for the first time and the game became so much more rewarding and interesting. This seemingly simple lesson became the guiding direction for my jiu jitsu study and my teaching philosophy. Defense will always be the basis of jiu jitsu, but it must be supplemented by a positive attacking spirit to prevent it degenerating into a negative game.First class at Renzo Gracie Academy 2017 So good to get 2017 off to a strong start at our Monday 12pm class as the squad gets back into competition mode. Sensei Renzo came to say hello Over 80 people in an afternoon class? Where else but Renzos? It was wonderful to see Sensei so proud of the improvements he made to his school the new fuji mats are superb and proving very popular with our students, especially Eddie Cummings, grinning like a maniac as he works some elements of our back controlsubmission system on the comfort of Fuji smooth series tatame Whoever new that ushiro sankaku rear triangle!could be so photogenic? So great seeing all our dedicated and hard working students back in the dojo looking forward to many more great workouts together through the year and taking the skills out into top level competition for another year of success Reflections on the nature of our sport We work in a sport where if a single submission hold is applied perfectly the match is over. Yet if that same submission is applied 99 perfectly but the opponent escapes, it counts for nothing. A failed submission hold, no matter how close, is no more effective than a missed punch in a boxing match this point does not apply to a well applied submission hold that is effective, but the opponent opts not to tap and is damaged but continues to fight in these cases, it had a positive effect insofar as the opponent will be damaged and easier to defeat with subsequent attacks. This creates a demand upon us to have a very deep knowledge of a few match winning moves where we have total confidence in our ability to pull them off against even the strongest resistance, rather than superficial knowledge of many moves. As we saw, superficial knowledge of a move only allows us to INITIATE a move, but only deep knowledge allows us to COMPLETE a move AND IT IS ONLY COMPLETED MOVES THAT WIN MATCHES. You will succeed or fail based not upon how many moves you can initiate, BUT HOW MANY YOU CAN COMPLETE AGAINST RESISTANCE. The surest way to be able to overcome resistance is to have deeper knowledge around a complex of moves and counters in a specific domain than your opponent does. Your training should reflect this fundamental fact about our sport. Here, Eddie Cummings shows his extraordinarily deep knowledge of the ashi garami position as he locks in a terrifyingly tight heel hook variation during his outstanding run to the finals of EBI 10. Note that these reflections pertain to the specific case of submissions in other areas of the sport broad knowledge even superficial knowledge is necessary for success. Photo by Michael PlasterSpeed vs relative speed Are you faster than Usain Bolt? This is a question that every single human on earth would currently have to give a negative answer to provided we qualified the question with the usual unspoken assumptions the race will be a fair one, on a standard athletic track, over 100200 meters etc etc. what if we started adding some seemingly strange conditions to the race? Perhaps Mr Bolt has to run with a fifty pound weight vest strapped to his torso that would definitely allow many good athletes to defeat him. What if he had a two foot rope tying his legs together? Then many people could defeat him. What if the rope were shortened so that his ankles were locked together? Then almost any healthy young person could probably defeat him. What if his left foot was handcuffed to his right hand? In that case I believe even I, with a crippled leg and a hip replacement, could probably defeat him on a good day at least . The point is that EVEN THE BEST ATHLETICISM IN THE WORLD CAN BE OVERCOME IF WE SUFFICIENTLY HANDICAP OUR OPPONENT. Jiu jitsu is essentially a means of doing exactly that. JIU JITSU IS AN ELABORATE MEANS OF HANDICAPPING AN OPPONENT IN WAYS THAT STRONGLY UNDERMINE AND DEGRADE THEIR ATHLETIC POTENTIAL RESULTING IN AN UNFAIR ADVANTAGE IN OUR FAVOR WHICH CAN BE EXPLOITED TO GAIN VICTORY. In this way, bigger, stronger, faster people can, if the discrepancy in grappling technique is sufficiently In our favor, be controlled and defeated. Skills that dont seem overly impressive to beginners subtle skills of control and positioning that prevent your opponent from freely utilizing his or her strength, Speed etc are in fact, the very heart of the sport. The detailed study of WHAT CAN A MAKE STRONG MAN WEAK, A FAST MAN SLOW AND A HEAVY MAN LIGHT, is the basis of our sport and can make for a lifetime of study.Foundationalism When I taught philosophy courses at Columbia university, we often talked about the doctrine of Foundationalism as it applies to human knowledge. When it comes to a sophisticated theory of human knowledge, I am not a foundationalist; but when it comes to jiu jitsu, I am. Just as no builder would ever think of beginning the construction of a new house by working on the roof and attic, but instead digs deep in the earth to lay down secure and strong foundations upon which he sequentially builds the house from the bottom up, with each layer providing a strong support for the layer above it so too, we must build our jiu jitsu in a similar vein. Just as any failure in the foundations of a house will immediately imply weakness in every other part of the house, so too, weakness in the foundational aspects of our jiu jitsu can never be covered up by fancy flourishes in the other areas of our game. Often students come to me asking to learn aspects of our style that they see in competition. I always tell them the same thing. It is far easier for me to teach my leg lock system or any other part of our approach to the game to a person well versed in the traditional foundations of the sport than it is to someone who wants to skip steps and jump straight into it. There is a lot to be said for a sequential approach to learning jiu jitsu where the foundational skills of CONTROLLING MOVEMENT both my own and my opponents comes first and the more esoteric elements come second. Here, the squads youngest member, ten year old Mikey Wilson, learns the foundational elements of control to Kuzushi through the x guardashi garami complex as a precursor to the submissions game from the same positions.Big plans for new year at Renzo Gracie Academy Sensei Renzo Gracie has done an incredible job of bringing in the expertise of Judo superstar Jimmy Pedro and Fuji mat company to install new mats at RGA NYC!! Over the Christmas break our staff and team Fuji have been hard at work installing the mats and painting to give the academy what must be the best footing for grappling I have ever seen! The new mats look and feel incredible! I had the honor of teaching the first class on the new surface in our small room it felt like I was teaching in a new gym! The squad came in full force and were joined by child prodigy Mikey Wilson and MMA superstar Jake Shields who fights this Saturday in WSOF. He looked great on the mats today doing his submission work with squad members. The professionalism and production of team Fuji is impressive to behold. The blue basement has been transformed to a very eye pleasing blue and grey Sensei once told me that the best investment a man can make is in himself. That is exactly what he is doing now he is investing in his dojo in a way that is transforming it daily Looking forward to a new year of training, goal setting and achievements at our new headquarters Huge thanks to Sensei, Mr Jimmy Pedro, Team Fuji, RGA staff and our loyal students who come in every day to train around the temporary inconvenience of construction and change to come in an improve their skills The academy has never looked better!The story of the sniper Part of the pleasure of teaching at a major academy in NYC is the breadth of people who pass through for instruction in the kingly art of jiu jitsu They come from all walks of life and every corner of the globe. One who left an impression upon me that struck me as useful to students of jiu jitsu was an American sniper who had returned home from active duty. After training we talked about his work. I have always had an interest in weaponry and we talked about his craft and compared it with his interest in jiu jitsu. At one point he turned to me and said, John, my world is a world of uncertainty. I cant guarantee that I will get into a good position to hit my target. I might get seen before I get there. My target may not be in the place I anticipated. The course of battle might interrupt my plans in some way I never even foresaw. But I do have one certainty. IF YOU GET ME TO A SECURE HIDEOUT WITHIN ONE THOUSAND METERS OF MY TARGET, it does not matter whether its day or night, rain or sunshine, warm or snow THAT MAN IS A DEAD MAN THAT MUCH IS CERTAIN. We were silent for a moment as we reflected upon his words then we both smiled as we recognized at the same time THAT EXACTLY THE SAME SENTIMENT IS TRUE IN JIU JITSU. Fights are uncertain affairs, we cant guarantee that we will get into a good position to lock in a good submission hold, we might get knocked out before we get there, we may struggle to get the opponent to the ground and keep him there. But IF we get him in a well locked breaking or strangulation position OUR MECHANICS OUGHT TO BE SO WELL TRAINED AND REHEARSED, that like the sniper, we do not see failure as a a possibility. All jiu jitsu athletes can benefit from this mindset. Research and rehearse your finishing mechanics to a point where you know that if the opportunity to lock in a tight submission should arise in the whirling chaos of a fight the fight is yours. We cant be confident about everything in combat but that is something that every jiu jitsu fighter worth his salt must know and believeKnowledge and wisdom From an early age I have always been impressed by the classics of Asian literature. None impresses me more than the work of Lao Tsu, in particular To attain knowledge, add things every day; to attain wisdom, remove things every day. There is so much in this that pertains to our improvement in jiu jitsu. It begins with his crucial distinction between knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge is a RESOURCE. It concerns facts and ideas that we seek to accumulate through study, research and investigation. Wisdom is very different. It is an ABILITY. The ability to discern the RELATIVE VALUE of these various items of knowledge and judge which ones are more important and are necessary and applicable to my goals. Initially students in jiu jitsu are in a rush to accumulate knowledge. This is good, as they are starting from naivety and need something firm to stand upon just to get a start. As they progress they get more and more facts as they get deeper and deeper into the sport. At some stage however, the student must, if he or she is to rise to the next level of development, make a critical switch in direction away from the basic ACCUMULATION of facts and ideas, to the DISCERNMENT of which ideas and facts are most important to their goals and focus upon them. There must be a progression away from wasteful accumulation in favor of trimming the knowledge base down to the essentials that take you to your goals. A replacement of new facts for conceptual ideas. I would rather have knowledge of one fact that I use profitably every day than a thousand facts that I use once a decade. This shift from acquiring knowledge to acquiring wisdom is critical to high level jiu jitsu. It allows you to look at a complex problem and quickly see its essential element so that a simple and workable solution can be implemented immediately.Merry Christmas from the squad and NYC!! pg Today was a relaxed day of training for the squad focus was more on technical development and sparring in a relaxed manner. This idea of variable intensity is critical to long term training. Not every session can be a war. Big holidays give a great opportunity to reinforce this idea to the athletes. I love to see athletes train every day, but not to see them train as hard as possible every day that quickly leads to breakdowns. Improvement is measured in months and years, not days and weeks, so it is critical to be able train effectively over long periods. A huge part of this involves variation in intensity levels of daily training so that every day can represent a step forward and as few days as possible are lost to attrition and injury. Now that work is done its time to eat something the squad does very well Merry Christmas to you all from NYC!!The greatest skill of them all learning Every jiu jitsu athlete is in a constant quest to improve current skills and learn new ones as a means to performance improvement. However, there is one skill that stands above all other skills that one might acquire on the long road towards mastery the skill of learning. Every day we have people telling us how to learn a given skill, a new move, a new concept. Yet it is rare to have someone tell us how to learn. Learning how to learn is absolutely one of the keys to success in life in general and jiu jitsu in particular. Most people take a very passive approach to learning. They learn from their teacher and practice when told to practice what they are told to practice. This is fine at recreational level, but if you wish to go further you must take a proactive approach to learning. This is a huge topic, but let us talk today about three key methods of learning that we can use to improve our understanding of the learning process so that we can make better progress. The foundation of my coaching program is always THE TRIAL AND ERROR METHOD. This simple method of taking ideas and subjecting them to rigorous tests to determine their value. We spend countless hours on the mat testing our theories and ideas through sparring and competition until we put provisional faith in them. The second is the GREAT PERSON METHOD. I am a big believer in the idea of using great athletes in the sport to inspire and enlighten. If a given athlete is having tremendous success with a given move, thats a very clear sign that he is doing something right and important. By studying this, you are very likely to improve some aspect of your own game even if your own method ends up being significantly different from the athlete you studied. The third is THE ORGANIC NATURE OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT. Skills are like life forms they are born weak, naive and vulnerable; but if nurtured and cared for, can grow eventually into something strong and confident and capable. When you learn a skill, give it a chance to grow. Dont start using it on world champions. Start small and work your way up with it. In time these three principles can transform your gameForcing progress We all want to maximize our rates of progress in the sport . Most people work on the assumption that if they just show up for class, progress rates will be satisfactory. In the early stages, this is usually correct, since the learning curve at introductory levels is very steep. At some point however, you are going to run into your first experience with growth plateaus. This can be very frustrating for a student who has grown used to easy progress. As a coach, a big part of my job is to make plateaus less likely to occur and also to get students over them when they do occur. I have fond memories of my own first experience with growth plateaus and my sensei, Renzo Gracies method of dealing with it. When I first began jiu jitsu as a white belt I was physically bigger and stronger than most of my class mates. In addition, this was at a time when jiu jitsu was very young in the United States and the skill level among the average student was much lower than it is today. As a result, when grappling the other white belts I usually had an easy time of it and only got into trouble with the few blue and purple belts we had in class in those days. In my mind I thought I was doing extremely well with my peers. You can imagine my surprise when sensei pulled me aside one day and told me how poor my overall game was and how my training needed to change! Mr Gracie told me that henceforth I was only allowed to start matches in inferior bottom positions and was not allowed any top position at all until told otherwise. This change had an immediate effect those same smaller white belts who I had been dominating were now crushing me. Every match became an exhausting, frustrating battle for survival. It was immediately apparent that what I had thought was good training previously was anything but. I was forced to learn a whole new range of skills, tactics even mindset and grew greatly as a result. This example shows two important elements of good coaching. The first is obvious by forcing a student into new areas you can create progress. The second is not obvious. Athletes often are not aware that they are in a plateau and sometimes need outside interventionPositive and negative the two faces of jiu jitsu it is of the first importance to understand that in every aspect of jiu jitsu, there are two directions my game must push. One the one hand, I must do everything in my power to facilitate my ability to move freely in the directions I desire presumably in the direction of control and submission. On the other hand, I must do everything in my power TO UNDERMINE MY OPPONENTS ABILITY TO DO THE SAME. Let us illustrate this point through the example of speed. Obviously physical speed is a desirable trait in almost all sports, especially combat sports. When we first think of speed, typically we think of our ability to move at speed, and compare this to the speed of others. In jiu jitsu however, our speed potential is not nearly as important as OUR ABILITY TO UNDERMINE OUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE QUICKLY. To put it simply I dont HAVE to move quickly if I have first immobilized you. My need for speed is proportional to my ability to tie up and immobilize my opponent. The better my skill at undermining my opponents ability to move, the less I will require physical attributes to succeed in sparring. THIS ABILITY TO INTERFERE WITH MY OPPONENTS PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES the negative side of the game IS IN MY OPINION, MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES. This is NOT to say that physical training is unimportant only a fool would claim that traits such as speed and strength are unimportant in combat. What I am saying is that more of your training time and thought should go into the skill of interfering with your opponents attributes than the development of your own. Here, kohai student Oliver Taza does a fine job of tying up a struggling opponent with some more advanced elements of our back attack system he has created a situation where it will be extremely difficult for his opponent to use physical attributes with effect. Having negated those attributes, there is no need for speed now he can move at his pace and in the directions he wants to advance towards submission.New environment new perspective I have always loved to teach in a new venue to strangers. I spend the vast majority of my teaching time in the basement of RGA with my long suffering students. It is always a fascinating change of pace for me to go to a new venue and teach strangers and doubtless a relief to my poor students back home . When I go to a new room to teach, my intention is not merely to show a set of techniques, but always to show a new mental framework within which those techniques are housed and arranged. In truth, the most influential visiting teachers when I was a beginner were not those who showed me techniques techniques come and go as your game changes and evolves it was those who made me look at the sport in a new way that inspired me to look into and research some part of it in a way that created positive change and growth. It was CHANGE IN PERSPECTIVE , rather than learning new tricks, that had the greatest benefit for me. I always try to reflect this when traveling and teaching. As a stranger it is unlikely that I can, in the time available, create substantial and lasting improvements to your technique I have no doubt that I can improve them, perhaps even substantially improve them, but in a single session I cannot give you the heel hooking skill of my best students. One thing I can do however, is change your perspective and introduce new modes of thinking that can in time, with sufficient dedication on your part, point you in directions that can create real improvement and lasting change. I try to use the techniques to show a way of thinking about development which will create improvements not for a single day, but for as long as those ideas interest you. Here I teach at my good friend and former class mate at RGA, Shawn Williams, at his school in LA. Because Mr Williams and I share a common history and philosophy, its not so different as other schools I visit, but still, the notion of using techniques, not as an end in themselves, but rather as a vehicle for a new perspective on a given part of the sport, is the same. Just sixteen hours after this photo was taken in LA I was back in the blue basement in NYC teaching class Great day of Grappling at Studio 540 San Diego The squad went into a tough day of grappling under extended time limit EBI rules today in San Diego with mixed results but all positive experiences. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan lost in over time to the very talented 19 year old Kennedy Maciel in a great match of two super talented youngsters with a world of grappling ahead of them. Mr Maciel showed great positional skill with excellent passing and pinning control along with a superb transition from back to triangle sankaku in overtime to get a great win and show his potential. In the adult matches, Garry Tonon on a very impressive Kim Terra, who came out looking to play a positive attacking game very praiseworthy given that he is a weight division below Mr Tonon. Within regulation time however, Mr Tonon was able to make a very nice transition from back crucifix to high elbow guillotine and follow Mr Terra defensive maneuvers through to a beautiful submission victory. In the final match It was Gordon Ryans turn to match a larger opponent. He did a fine job of dominating the submission attacks, whilst his world champion opponent, the very talented Felipe Pena, dominated the positional attacks. At the 42 minute mark however, Mr Pena capitalized brilliantly on a mistaken entry to ashi garami, took the back and sank an excellent strangle to take a great victory. There was much for the squad to take away and learn from, much to be happy about and much to be improved upon. Tomorrow I shall teach a seminar in LA and then its back to the basement of wisdom in NYC Monday to start making the changes necessary to improve and win. Thank you to Studio 540 and flograppling for putting on a great event. Thanks also to Eddie Bravo for another great job of impartial and skillful referee work. Most of all thank you to my athletes who give their all and who have come so far in such a short time I am immensely proud of all you have done and extremely confident of even greater future successMeanwhile....As I wait for a plane to California, Eddie Cummings waits for a plane to Costa Rica! Mr Cummings will teach the first squad seminar at the dojo of my friend and student Arturo Wesson, who regularly comes all the way to NYC to train in our method and bring that knowledge back to his students at home. I am delighted to see Mr Cummings heading south to spread our message of control leading to submission. Of all my competitive students, Mr Cummings has spent the most time with me in private classes and has the deepest knowledge of my leg attack system. He is much more than that however. Like all my students he is an independent and innovative thinker and has developed his own specialized methods that have made him arguably the finest ashi garami exponent in the world. There is a sense in which Mr Cummings is the victim of his own success his leg attacks are so successful that few besides those he trains among have seen his other great skills. He outstanding back attacks, superb attacks from front head lock and truly excellent armlock and triangle juji gatame and sankaku attacks, among others. He is a fine teacher and I am delighted that our Costa Rican friends will get the chance to see such high level technique explained by such a fine practitioner who can really express the depth of his knowledge. If you are there dont miss it! Just dont let him anywhere near the ice cream or pineapple juice stand or he will gain one hundred pounds of blubber in a day! Mr Cummings will be training hard with the squad when he returns big plans for the new year Stay tuned! A big hello to Costa Rican jiu jitsu in general and Mr Arturo Wesson in particular have fun!JFK California bound Waiting at JFK after another missed flight Looking forward to meeting up with squad members as they prepare for action on Saturday. Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan and Garry Tonon will match up with three extremely talented Brazilian Grapplers all three with an outstanding pedigree and competition record. As always with the squad, its been a rough last week with minor mishaps, illnesses, miscalculations and general tom foolery but come Saturday we will be ready for action and ready to put on a show at studio 540 in San Diego. I leave a frigid NYC for the sunshine and smiles of Southern California Always a good feeling! The squad continues to impress me with their continual technical development so many new moves and tactics added to their always expanding repertoire. They face a very tough test on Saturday however. Young Nicky, just 15 years old will take on 19 year Kennedy Maciel, current world champion at purple belt and son of Ruben Charles Cobrinha Mr Maciel exhibits the same superb sense of movement and transition as his illustrious father and clearly has a big future ahead of him. Kim Terra, brother of jiu jitsu icon Caio Terra, has carved out a fine competition record of his own. These two brothers are known for the depth of their technical knowledge and this will be a fascinating stylistic contrast to be sure. Felipe Pena will square off with Gordon Ryan in the main event. Mr Pena is at the top of the jiu jitsu world both gi and no gi. I well remember his outstanding performance at the last ADCC. He is a mix of physical power with very refined technique that enabled him to go toe to toe with the heavyweight icon Rodolphe Viera in a titanic struggle he showed he can go for extended periods of time against the worlds best. He is a tremendous opponent. Sitting on plastic chairs at the airport, listening to the muzak, eating the lousy food, watching people scuttle by is usually pretty damn boring, but the thought of getting the squad ready for this epic challenge makes it much more exciting! Improvising Most of our training drills and principles involve learning precise algorithms of movement that take our opponent in predictable directions so that we can follow his defensive options all the way through to submission. As such, there is a lot of rote learning, memorization, repetition etc. it is an undeniable fact however, that in sparring and competition, situations commonly arise that are outside our normally drilling and training experience and we are forced to improvise as the situation unfolds. It is also undeniable that some people seem to improvise better than others. The question thus becomes HOW DO THEY DO SUCH A GOOD JOB OF IMPROVISATION? I believe that the most important reason for disparity in ability to improvise is the mental process that different athletes carry into the bout. Most people focus on the details of their algorithms. As long as the action stays within the boundaries of those algorithms, they do very well. This mindset however, does not cope well with unforeseen circumstances, as it does not have a precise, well learned algorithm to cover it. Other athletes focus more on the big picture of WHAT THEY ARE TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH at any given moment, rather than THE PRELEARNED DETAILS OF EXACTLY HOW THEY ARE GOING TO ACCOMPLISH IT. As such, they can take situation that is unfolding in ways they did not foresee or want, identify the end result they want and find an improvised path toward it. A fine example of this occurred when Garry Tonon won the EBI 9 event. Mr Tonin was by far the smallest competitor and entered with only three days notice. He battled to the final where he met world champion Vinny Magalhaes, a man far larger than himself. Our usual back control protocols were severely challenged by the size difference. Mr Tonon immediately switched his mindset from the usual routines to the overall desiderata maintaining spinal alignment long enough to create time pressure that would hopefully set up submission opportunity. He switched between a cluster of unorthodox grips and movement that saw him win a thrilling victory on riding time against his great rival.Gaining and retaining Imagine you met a man who told you that his annual income was one million dollars a year. Would you not be impressed by his wealth? I believe that most of us certainly would. What if that man then revealed that his annual expenses were 975,000 a year? Would you still be impressed by his wealth? Probably much less so. When it comes to accruing wealth, the amount of money coming in is not nearly as important as the amount you retain. EXACTLY THE SAME IS TRUE OF KNOWLEDGE. so often I see students chasing after knowledge. This is a good and desirable trait. Never forget however, that important issue is not how much knowledge you learn BUT HOW MUCH YOU RETAIN for it is only the knowledge you can access and remember that will prove useful to you in future action. It is critical therefore, THAT YOUR ATTEMPTS AT GAINING KNOWLEDGE FOCUS AS MUCH ON KNOWLEDGE RETENTION AS THEY DO ON KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION. You must have a program set out that solidifies the knowledge you have gained in a way that enables you to access it on demand in a way that leads to effective action on the mat. In the case of a group of professional athletes like the squad, this is relatively easy, as we spend large amounts of time together and begin and end each training session with discussion of the central concepts and problems we work on along with vast amounts of repetition to cement knowledge in place. In your case this may not be possible, as most people have busy lives, professional and family commitments etc. in these cases I always recommend the same methods we used successfullywell, partially successful in school and college note taking, periodic reviews, occasional informal tests etc etc. By shifting focus from acquisition to retention of knowledge you will quickly find the knowledge you have translating into more effective action. Here, squad members discuss technique and strategy before stepping out onto the mat in competition shiai. This helps to ensure the themes we want to express in the match are at the forefront of the athletes mind as steps out to face his opponent.Setting tough goals for progress I believe that whatever progress you make in your chosen field will be determined by the goals you set. If your goals are modest so too your progress will be modest. If you set difficult and challenging goals the greater work required to make an honest attempt at them will ensure greater progress even in cases where the goals are not fully met. I often create very difficult short term challenges for developing students. Their hard work and study in trying to overcome that challenge almost always creates progress. For example, Oliver Taza is a rapidly improving kohai student who is making all the kinds of commitment necessary for championship grappling in the future. He was looking for a tough assignment to gauge his progress. He entered a tournament this weekend a 10th planet brown belt invitational at 205 pounds. This was a very strong test, as Oliver normally competes at around 16570 pounds. To make it more interesting we placed the goal of victory by submission in all matches not easy given the rank of the event and the level of competition. Mr Taza trained with his usual great commitment and attention to the critical details that spell the difference between success and near success. In a superb display of skill he did exactly what he planned to do won every match by submission a mix of leg locks and triangle sankaku strangles and each in a dynamic and impressive style upon much larger opponents. These kinds of difficult short term goals, interspersed among your long term goals, are one of the best ways to main progress over time and maintain a bridge between long term and short term ideals. Of course its great when the goals are attained, as was the case with Mr Taza, but the deeper point is that even if they are not you will be closer to your long term goal of excellence in jiu jitsu.Reflections on my sensei Cross training When I first began jiu jitsu in the early to mid 1990s, the overall ethos of the martial arts scene was very different. This was a time of style versus style in MMA as opposed to the modern spirit of well rounded athlete vs well rounded athlete. This was a time of proving a new martial art BJJ, among the more established traditional martial arts and sports. As such, most jiu jitsu practitioners took on an us vs them mentality that was necessary at the time if jiu jitsu was to show it was a viable art that could stand on its own merits and be counted among the foremost fighting arts. One of the great insights of my sensei Renzo Gracie, was that this attitude, whilst necessary in the beginning, was limiting in the long term. Accordingly he strongly encouraged all his students to engage in the study of other arts, especially those with a competition sports aspect, such as boxing, Muay Thai, wrestling, judo, sambo etc. I can say of my sensei that HE WAS INTENSELY PROUD OF JIU JITSU AND HIS LINEAGE WITHIN IT, BUT AT THE SAME TIME, ENDLESSLY CURIOUS ABOUT OTHER COMBAT SPORTS AND HOW THEY COULD BE DRAWN UPON TO IMPROVE PERFORMANCE IN JIUJITSU. This insistence upon some degree of cross training was I believe, one of the many reasons why Mr Gracie was able to keep a very modern and cutting edge vibe to his school and his teachings after more than twenty years here in the USA. I have seen so many students profit from some degree of cross training, some more, some less but I have NEVER seen a student get worse from it. Nowadays cross training is the norm, with most jiu jitsu athletes happy to work wrestling and judo and other arts into their program. Whenever you find yourself stagnating or in some form of jiu jitsu plateau take heed of my senseis example and find inspiration and new directions in another art it will only make your jiu jitsu stronger.Chasing after the wind There is an old cliche in the sport of boxing Dont try to force a knock out those that do almost always end up disappointed and quite often the victim of the very end they sought after. Exactly the same is true in jiu jitsu. Chasing directly after submissions feels like chasing after the wind ; those who do so usually fail to get what they so badly wanted. Rather than chase directly after submissions CHASE THE PRECONDITIONS THAT MAKE SUBMISSIONS MORE LIKELY TO OCCUR. Once those preconditions are attained THE SUBMISSIONS WILL COME. So often I see students take to heart our program of emphasizing submissions, but falter badly when they race directly for submissions. Their game takes on a scrappy and forced look that garners meager results. A much better approach is to always to ask yourself WHAT ARE THE PREREQUISITES OF SUBMISSION? And FOCUS ON ATTAINING THOSE. Traditionally, jiu jitsu has always posited that POSITION is the prerequisite of submission. There is much truth to this. Our approach to jiu jitsu however, adds to this by emphasizing other prerequisites in addition to the traditional understanding of position. A deep study of this area will be of immeasurable value to your submissions percentages. Here kohai student Oliver Taza shows excellent preparatory skills in preparation to submitting an opponent in a recent tournament.The great problem of endurance When I watch beginners train together the single most common method of defeat is fatigue. Beginners typically lack the skills required to gain a victory through the purity of their technique and thus usually one of them is worn down to a state where they cannot maintain resistance and they succumb. The problem usually gets better with time, but remains to some degree throughout our jiu jitsu lives. Everyone has to confront and overcome this problem if they wish to remain in the sport. The problem is, most people attack the problem in the wrong way. The overwhelming majority of students deal with the problem by trying to bring about changes in their bodies they make efforts to make themselves stronger and fitter. This is good and desirable and yes it definitely helps to some degree. However, WHATEVER ENDURANCE IMPROVEMENTS YOU MAKE FROM STRENGTH AND FITNESS INCREASES ARE MINUSCULE COMPARED WITH THOSE THAT COME FROM INCREASED MECHANICAL EFFICIENCY IN TECHNIQUE AND PACE CONTROL DURING A MATCH. It will take a lot of time and training to increase your maximum bench press by just 10 but that increase will be barely perceptible to your opponent in sparring. However, small improvements in the placement of lever and fulcrum as you apply technique throughout a match will be immediately felt by an opponent as increased force and by you as energy saving if this is combined with pace control you will find dramatic improvements in grappling endurance without any significant changes in your physiology. Please be clear I am not trying to argue that strength and fitness are irrelevant and unimportant they definitely are were they not the shameful proliferation of steroid use in our sport would never have arisen. What I am saying is that the more important element of grappling endurance by far is technical efficiency and pace control. If you want dramatic improvements dont look to change your body, rather, look to change your technical insight and pace control. Here, Gordon Ryan shows superb pace control and technical efficiency in a marathon victory against the great Keenan Cornelius.Shared vision Teaching technique is one thing, teaching an overall vision of the sport is another. When I work with my advanced students we constantly talk about our own approach to the sport. Any technique we learn is done so in the broader context of that vision. One day I will get the time to outline exactly what that vision is to a wider audience but I am sure the more astute observers can look at the work of my students and make a good guess already. When there is a general vision that a team follows I find the optimal training environment develops students can express their individuality in technique while showing their allegiance through conformity to that broad vision and its principles. My role as coach thus has two main areas. The first is technical the refinement of existing technique and development of new systems to maximize their effectiveness. The second is directional to give those techniques and systems a guiding philosophy that creates a group of students who have their individual differences, but also a recognizable similarity thats suggests a lineage and a particular approach to the game that stands out for the norm. Here, Eddie Cummings and myself make observations of the next opponent at EBI 10 as Mr Cummings gets ready for another match. When he goes onstage he will be ready to express more than technique he will be trying to express a philosophy that we all share.The human body To be a student of jiu jitsu is perhaps more than anything else; TO BE A STUDENT OF THE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE HUMAN BODY. The more knowledge you accumulate in this regard, the more precise your attacks upon your opponents body and the defense of your own shall be. Our bodies are remarkable insofar as they exhibit both remarkable weakness and surprising strength at the same time. What makes the difference is knowledge and training. Think of two twins separated at birth. One of the twins is out in an Olympic gymnastics program and rigorously trained for decades in elite gymnastic skills. The other is allowed to relax and enjoy himself on the couch and feast and watch movies. When they meet thirty years later, the difference between the two in physical performance capabilities will be massive EVEN THOUGH THE GENETIC DIFFERENCES WILL BE MINIMAL. One will have a deep knowledge of how his body can be utilized to maximize physical performance, whilst the other, despite having virtually the same body, will lack the knowledge of body mechanics to perform anything more than the most rudimentary physical tasks. In jiu jitsu we must learn how make our own body strong, but even more important HOW TO MAKE THE OPPONENTS BODY SLOW AND WEAK. This requires a deep knowledge of our physical structure and how to hold it in positions that prevent it from moving efficiently and how to manipulate it in ways that cause it damage. In the long term, we also need knowledge of dietary and lifestyle habits that extend the lifetime of our body, since our goal is to train for the longest possible time to accumulate the most skill possible. This is wisdom with regards the human body the beginning and end of wisdom with regards jiu jitsu. The latter cannot be understood without the former. Here, rapidly developing kohai student, Oliver Taza shows excellent knowledge of the structure of the upper body as he ties up an opponent with juji gatame armlock at a recent tournament. Look how immobilization skills allow him to maintain a very relaxed demeanor to begin solving the problems his opponent is creating and go in to overcome them and take victory.Back in the saddle Monday morning in the basement of suffering the squad and all cohorts back in training for future events the most important of which will take place on December 17 in San Diego where three squad members take on three extremely talented Brazilian grapplers in what should be a fascinating contrast in styles. It was great to see Eddie Cummings and the others working on problem solving issues in our last outing and formulating solutions for our next. We always believe that consistently losing suggests something is deeply wrong with your training program and it must be revised from the ground up; but occasional losses are both expected and healthy THERE IS NO SURER ANTIDOTE TO COMPLACENCY AND HUBRIS THAN OCCASIONAL DEFEAT two elements that will undermine the success of a training program very quickly. Here the full compliment of Senpai and kohai get the camp off to a great start on a NYC Monday morning Back in NYC Great to be back in NYC first stop the blue basement of learning where the Ryan brothers are preparing for their big challenges on Dec 17 in San Diego against an extremely talented set of Brazilian athletes. Young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years old, will take on world champion purple belt Kennedy Maciel, son of one of this generations greatest jiu jitsu practitioners, Ruben Cobrinha Charles. Mr Maciel is considerably older 19, bigger and more experienced than Mr Ryan, but Mr Ryan is training exceptionally well and is anxious to step up to the next level of competition. Normally I am very much against matching very young athletes against older athletes, but in this case I am willing to make an exception. Mr Maciel has a game of dynamic movement combined with isometric strength allied to superb technique a combination that made his father one of the most successful competitors of all time. This will be a truly formidable opponent for Nicky Ryan. Mr Ryan is too young to have an adult belt in jiu jitsu and the youth belts dont really seem to apply to him so I never gave him a belt, but he does very well against experienced older belt levels in training and competition. Both Ryan boys are entering a phase of grappling maturity where they are starting to develop their own moves and tactics in ways that are truly exciting for me as a coach to observe I am confident that that excitement will be seen in this match up of the two rising stars. The true camp begins tomorrow, so today we spent time setting directions and goals and light rolling. The squad will all return tomorrow and then its on and forward!!Growing together As Kano so wisely insisted; the best form of benefit is mutual benefit. When two people work together and each brings something good to the table, great things can happen from their shared efforts. In my daily coaching, nowhere do I see this more clearly than in the development of the Ryan brothers Gordon and Nicky. Their symbiotic relationship is an inspiration to the other athletes around them. As one rises, the other must rise to stay in the game and the one who helps him rise the most is his own brother. Mutual growth is the healthiest state for the training room and there is no better example than these two. Both are deep in preparation for tough matches at studio 540 in San Diego on December 17 in a variation of EBI rules much longer regulation time before over time begins. When the squad returns from Mexico City this weekend, camp begins in earnest for Both Ryan boys and Garry Tonon in what should be an incredible event.Hey everyone, Gordon Ryan had my phone because he was supposed to take pictures of a training session.Georges StPierre works out with the squad...meanwhile...in Mexico City...One of my principal aims as a coach is to develop a sense of independence in the senior students Senpai. When we all talk technique and strategy, we talk as equals. Indeed, the senior students often shock me with the depth of their insight and originality. The greatest thing a teacher can give students is not technique or strategy or any of the usual things people judge the worth of teachers by, but rather THE ABILITY TO RESEARCH AND PROGRESS INDEPENDENTLY. instilling this sense of creative independence in the senior students has several great consequences. One of them is on display in this photo collage. Eddie Cummings is currently in Mexico City preparing for EBI 10 on Friday night. He is working with Local jiu jitsu players in the same system that the other squad members used today to train in NYC with Georges StPierre; who will himself go back to Montreal tonight to train independently what he learned today. If all these seniors could only blindly follow orders, this kind of activity would be impossible. It is their capacity to grow independently within themselves that ensures the growth of ideas that keeps our overall program growing and improving. Looking forward to the squad getting together with Mr Cummings Wednesday night in Mexico City for the big show Founding member of the squad Mr Georges StPierre returned to the basement of wisdom through pain for some some fine training sessions with the youngsters. The majority of my time training with Mr StPierre was in developing grapple boxing skills for professional MMA fighting very different from pure submission grappling. When he retired, he was able to have fun working on submission grappling skills and has made impressive progress Here the squad watches as he works his ashi garami drills with partner Garry Tonon. We use these drills to develop deeper mechanical knowledge of the position so that we increase the chances of success under the pressure of live combat, whether in the gym or in competition shiai. Often I have the students teach the move back to the class to ensure they have a solid understanding of the core concepts and principles that underly its use. A huge part of Mr StPierres success came from his willingness to always keep training and learning over his entire career and beyond with specialists in a given domain, so that he could add those skills and use them in the broader domain of MMA. Even in pure submission grappling he is one of the toughest training partners for the squad when they prepare for shiai remarkable, given that this is not his primary focus.From the basement to the bright lights Eddie Cummings completed the NYC section of his camp for EBI 10 in the basement of suffering today. As always the senior and junior members of the squad were on hand throughout to assist the preparation. Taking the skills created and refined in the gym and getting them to work under the bright lights of the big show is one of the toughest tests the athletes face. The squad is lucky to have a tight camaraderie that helps this. There is only so much replication of what is expected that is possible in the training room. At some point the athlete must find it within himself to make the shift to the big stage against people he has never faced before, under new circumstances and all under the critical eye of the fans. I have always been deeply impressed by the squads ability to do this. More than any other phase of match preparation, this is where the athlete must go beyond whatever assistance his team and coaches can offer and find within him or herself the will and the ability to reach their goals. Next time the squad meets as a whole will be in Mexico City, where once again the gulf between gym and stage must be bridged.Happy Thanksgiving from the squad ! Nothing earns thanks from the squad like a mat crowded with dedicated and ambitious athletes working on their skills in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. Early tomorrow thats exactly what you will find in the basement of despair and hope at RGA as the squad helps Eddie Cummings in his preparation for a third EBI belt in the 135 pound weight class in Mexico City next week. Skill development does not recognize holidays. Mr Cummings and his squad cronies are acutely aware of this and so we plan on a good session tomorrow. Afterwards however, our national holiday gives us an opportunity to reflect upon our dual nature as individuals with private ambitions and as citizens, with civic duties and awareness to our nation, without which, no individual ambition or achievement would even be possible. We hope you find happiness tomorrow both as individuals and, perhaps more importantly, as members of family and nation in ways that illuminate our nature as individuals housed the framework of a group, for it is only by understanding both aspects of our nature that greatness is possible.Perspective In recent days and weeks the jiu jitsu scene has seen a marked increase in provocative talk between camps and much of it has been centered around my own students and those of Marcelo Garcia. This is odd, as Mr Garcia and I are good friends. As is so often the case, what begins as banter and play can lead to consequences one does not want. Both Mr Garcia and myself are committed to the idea of a strong distinction between the spirit of MMA, where a certain amount of talk and showmanship is good for business, and jiu jitsu, where a more elevated sense of behavior is appropriate. I am all for jiu jitsu athletes being paid more for their hard work, but I am concerned that this may be achieved at the expense of the soul of the sport. Moreover, our schools are real neighbors, just blocks apart, and neither of us wants an us vs them attitude here in the NYC jiu jitsu scene. I met with Mr Garcia tonight at his school and we discussed the situation. He is so much more than just one of the sports greatest champions, he is an icon and a role model in my experience the kindest and gentlest soul in the sport. Accordingly, we have agreed that the mood of the last few days is one that is not good for the sport and even worse for the NYC jiu jitsu scene. As such, both teams will stop the negative social media talk and direct challenge matches athletes will still participate in regular tournaments with each other, but for now, no internet challenge matches. I have met most of Mr Garcias team, and they are all great fellows. Our squad may be a little rough around the edges at times, but they all have hearts of gold I dont teach people whose character I dont like I just dont interact with them. I believe this is a case of fundamentally good people letting words and escalation put them in a situation that does not benefit the sport as a whole. Mr Garcia is among the most sincere and well meaning men I ever met I think his concern about the sport and about the relationship of NYC jiu jitsu teams is correct. We all love competition and friendly rivalry, but a sense of perspective is needed to keep it appropriate and the sport we all love healthy.Beastie Boy Nicky Ryan, at just 15 years old, entered one of the toughest grappling tournaments in North America yesterday the ADCC world championships trials. Mr Ryan won his first two matches by submission heel hook variations before losing via armbar to take 3rd place, an incredible achievement for such a young man. Mr Ryan has always greatly impressed me with his determination and maturity. Normally I have grave misgivings about very young competitors entering adult competitions as the risk of injury is definitely higher than usual and Ive always felt there is something undesirable about pushing young people into tournaments, I prefer to let time pass and wait until they are a little older and enter themselves, rather than be entered by someone else. In Mr Ryans case however, I made an exception. His older brother trains with him daily and would coach him, and Mr Ryan is extraordinarily mentally mature for his age far more mature than all other members of the squad I must say!. As always, Mr Ryan put on a great showing, working hard to get the submission, as is our style. This young man has so much potential and it is an honor to be a small part of his progress. There will be many more ADCC trials for him and as his body matures to match his mind, you will all see the same potential that I see in him now.Mr Eddie Cummings With EBI 10 fast approaching, Eddie Cummings will step up to a new challenge his first EBI at 135 pounds. His record at previous EBI events has been nothing short of outstanding, with a 100 record of submission within regulation time, and the vast majority of those matches in far less than regulation time. This time however, he faces three new elements. The athletes in this event are among the best ever assembled in an EBI, with the man we consider the best of the 10th planet athletes, Geo Martinez, along with a very strong Brazilian contingent, including the outstanding Samir Chantre and Rafael Freitas. This may be the strongest overall EBI card since EBI 6. The second new element will be the weight cut. Even though Mr Cummings has a small frame, he has always operated above his weight category and has this never had to actually lose weight to compete before, so this should be interesting. A third factor will be of interest to all the athletes altitude. Mexico City is a difficult venue for those unused to the thinner air. This will effect everyone except the locals equally and is definitely a source of concern as we have no experience with this whatsoever. Mr Cummings will, as always, have to rely on his great depth of knowledge around submissions to get around these three problems. Of my students, he has spent the most time with me in private classes and has a truly superb knowledge of the mechanical details of our favorite attacks. Here we work both offensive and defensive measures in irimi ashi garami, a position that Mr Cummings truly excels in and has developed a very fine reputation for very effective use in competition shiai. A strange result of Mr Cummings excellence in ashi garami based attacks is that he has had few opportunities to show his other submission strengths he has many I suspect it is only a matter of time until the world sees what we see every day in the gym.Attacking the whole body A common misunderstanding of my approach to jiu jitsu is that I emphasize leg attacks over others. This is probably due to the fact that I teach a very advanced system of leg attacks to my students who compete in an atmosphere where most of their opponents have a relatively primitive understanding of leg attacks so a disproportionate number of their victories come via that method. In fact, I always preach to my students the theme of attacking the whole body in order to succeed with favorite moves tokui waza. When it comes to submissions, we have three choices. Strangles, upper body joint locks and lower body joint locks there are a few others, but they are of much less importance. Any attempt to over emphasize any one of those three options will always create strong defensive reactions which ironically, will make it harder to break through at that intended target. A much better idea is to spread your attacks over the whole body with equal skill. The confusion and distraction created by this whole body attack will open an opponent up far more successfully than predictable localized attacks. Thus if I want a leg submission, I would be well served to vociferously attack the neck and upper body and allow the resultant distraction and reaction to open the door to the legs. Here, kohai student Ethan Crelinsten shows excellent dispersal of attacks in a recent local tournament. He attacks with great determination with armlocks juji gatame and strangles trianglesankaku and legs ashi garami. The barrage of attacks leaves a confused opponent open to a finish via sankakujuji combination a fine example of dispersed attacks creating openings for a favorite technique tokui wazaAn observation When I go to write my daily InstagramFacebook posts, I make use of the photographs that my students and friends send me. Usually I like to post a visually arresting image of a competition victory or dramatic training footage or some image that captures an important principle or theme. Today when I went through my cache of photos I made the observation that for every dramatic or eye catching photo Stored in my phone, I have fifty mundane photos of daily training that suggest fatigue, frustration, Repetition and pain. A moments reflection reveals that this is how we experience jiu jitsu on a daily basis. We carry in our mind an image of the sport that is like a highlight reel we remember the big victories and defeats, the big breakthroughs and challenges, the revelations, the drama etc. Yet on a day to day basis it is a repetitious slog towards distant goals. It is critical that you find ways to make that daily grind fun and rewarding or you will not last. Everyone has their own way of doing it, but humor, camaraderie and goal setting are probably the most effective. This is another way that jiu jitsu mirrors life. Just as life is a daily grind interspersed with occasional peaks of joy and sadness, so to in jiu jitsu, where daily training usually is characterized by long periods of discomfort and frustration, but which is the engine that propels us towards our memorable moments and justify the hardships we went through. Here, the strain of high level contest shiai preparation shows on the face of Eddie Cummings as he takes a breather after a tough morning class and now must focus of weight loss and then on to an afternoon class as EBI 10 in Mexico City approaches. Whilst our memory will usually focus on the peaks and valleys of our lives, we must remember that it is only the multitude of forgotten days of grinding and struggling towards our goals that make those wonderful peaks possible.A word of support for Mr Bravo One of the costs of being an innovator is criticism. In general, people resist change, especially if they have invested a lot of time in the status quo. One of Eddie Bravos most important innovations was the rule set for his competition which involves the use of over times to force a decisive result to a match within a reasonable time frame. An important innovation in his overtime was the use of classical jiu jitsu submission positions, the rear mount and juji gatame armlock he calls it spider web positions. He was widely criticized for this. Most of the criticism centered around the idea that athletes should never be GIVEN those positions, but should have to EARN them. My own belief is that jiu jitsu needs around five different rule sets to make sure sure all the skills of the sport are kept strong and growing in healthy directions. I want to say, however, that I really believe Mr Bravos over time innovation is a healthy and good thing for the sport. First off, in EBI, the athletes have ten uninterrupted minutes to earn whatever positions they want the same time they have in IBJJ rules. Once in overtime, they must choose between the two most classical finishing positions of the sport back strangles and armlocks. This is where things get interesting. In truth, the overwhelming majority of jiu jitsu athletes spend 95 of their jiu jitsu defensive awareness on NOT GETTING INTO bad positions and only a fraction of that in actually training the skills and awareness of how to ACTUALLY GET OUT OF THESE POSITIONS ONCE THEY ARE IN THEM. EBI overtime rules FORCE ATHLETES TO REDRESS THIS IMBALANCE. For the first time, they have to devote serious training time to defending and escaping the main finishing positions of the sport. They cant simply train themselves to avoid the attack at the onset, BUT MUST LEARN TO WORK THEIR WAY OUT FROM THE COMPLETED POSITION. This takes real skill. As a coach I can personally attest that these overtime rules forced both me and my athletes to learn a LOT more about defensive strategy and technique in two of the classical submissions of our sport and this is a healthy thing for our athletes.Formality and informality As a general rule I prefer a rather informal class setting. I believe formality can be a good thing in childrens and beginner class, but I dont emphasize it at all in advanced classes. I dont really like being called professor, I work with first names and students do the same to me. We laugh a lot and say horribly inappropriate but usually funny things to each other all day . I have always found the deepest and most profound forms of respect are unspoken in daily life and only get uttered on special occasions. The ceremonial aspects of respect, belts, saying osu to everything you hear, calling everyone above you in rank professor we only do on a few special occasions. I always liked the informal atmosphere that my master, Renzo Gracie fostered. There was no endless talk about respect but there was a stronger unspoken sense of respect for him and the project we engaged in than any ceremonially lavish atmosphere I saw. Real respect manifests itself in significant actions, not words or trivialities. When I see athletes who study under me getting up every day at 5am to get to morning class and then work out between then and the afternoon class and then go home to an evening workout, study and practice the moves and concepts we expound, push through pain, fatigue and injury to finish a workout, make an extra effort to help a team mate prepare for competition how can I not respect them? And what words can capture the respect I feel I my heart for these men and women who do this, not for weeks and months, but for years, until they break though to their goals. Better to leave it unsaid. I focus on performance improvement and let respect come about naturally. Here the squad relaxes after another tough workout getting Eddie Cummings ready for EBI 10. Judging by the looks on our faces there is a 99 chance we are talking about women or some other fun subject anything except jiu jitsu performance Drilling without sparring is unrealistic sparring without drilling limits growth Students often ask me about the structure of their training. The most obvious element of structure is the relationship between sparring and drilling there are many other training methods between these two that have their place, but they form the most fundamental and important means of training. Nothing will ever beat live sparring for giving the student the opportunity to practice his or her skills in a realistic fashion under the same kind of pressure they can expect in match conditions. Sparring in all its variations and intensity levels is the king of contest preparation. Sparring alone however, is not enough. The great problem of sparring, especially when it is intense, is that it often forces us to use our most trusted moves to achieve victory. If I really want to win against a very tough opponent, I will inevitably fall back on my favorite moves tokui waza to get the win. This is fine for the further development of that tokui waza, but in the long term it can limit the influx of new moves into your Arsenal and create a lack of growth within your game that makes you predictable and leaves you in a plateau that you find disappointing. This is where drilling comes in. Drilling allows you to practice a move without resistance or against very low resistance and thus gain confidence as you learn about the mechanics and principles of the move. As your expertise increases, the move can be brought into sparring until in time it becomes a natural part of your full sparring repertoire. This ensures constant growth in your game over time. Thus the essential role of both sparring and drilling in performance improvements sparring improves your ability to apply moves in realistic situations, drilling expands the repertoire of techniques that you are willing to use in sparring, which in time will lead to performance improvements. Thus our training mantra DRILLING WITHOUT SPARRING IS UNREALISTIC SPARRING WITHOUT DRILLING LIMITS GROWTH. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan go through leg locking drills in England prior to Polaris 4, where those same skills won Mr Tonon victory via leg lockA truly remarkable performance UFC 205 had many outstanding performances, but main event star, Conor McGregor saved the best until last with a stunning victory against the title holder and immensely talented Eddie Alvarez. Much of what guides our intuitions as to an athletes ability is not just who he beat, but how he beat them. In truth it was shocking to watch the degree to which Mr McGregor used superb control of distance, pace, timing and placement to dismantle such a talented and tough opponent. In doing so he did what he said he would hold two belts at the same time. Whatever ones opinion of Mr McGregors public antics outside of fighting, one cannot deny that he has backed up what many see as overly brash talk with brilliant and successful action. Moreover, he has made huge waves in the sport in relatively little time it was not long ago that people where discussing him as a talented new comer and whether he was really worthy of a title shot at all now he has two belts around his waist both won against extremely good opponents via very impressive knockouts. In addition, he has shown a true champions ability to come back from a bad loss in short order and not just rectify the loss, but greatly surpass where he was prior to that loss. Whilst his style seems almost entirely built around the ability to get his dangerous left hand to bear upon his opponent, and there are open questions about his ability to prevail when he cant no one can deny the incredible achievements he has made with his relatively narrow skill set in a sport where we typically believe a very wide skill set is essential just to survival, let alone world beating success. His lifestyle, his demeanor, his fighting style and his goals all make him the biggest risk taker in the sport so impressive to see a man stand on the cusp of disaster and ridicule on the basis of those risks yet through the power of his personality, self belief and skill, turn it all into a bigger triumph. Hats off to a truly great fighter and personality who took the biggest event in MMA history and made it his.All American Brian Stann trains with the squad It is always a pleasure to meet the many visitors who come to the fine city of New York and make the journey down to the basement of learning. None were a greater pleasure to meet than former UFC standout, Brian Stann, who is in town for UFC 205 where he will provide color commentary in his field of expertise. This man is so much more than just another athlete. He is a former Marine Captain in our armed forces and today runs a charity dedicated to helping former servicemen and women find employment after national service. Talking to him you get a strong insight into his sense of civic duty. He is truly a gentleman warrior who finds that balance of the true martial artist between strength and kindness. It is a humbling experience to meet such a gentleman. We taught him submissions, but I think he taught us something much greater. Of course grappling for MMA is very different from pure submission grappling, but Mr Stann fearlessly went in and got his hands dirty with some of the latest techniques and strategies of submission grappling a real mensch of the sport. The squad is hard at work preparing for the ADCC trials, refining old skills and adding new ones. Look for Eddie Cummings to come roaring back into the spotlight as he prepares for both ADCC and EBI 10 in rapid succession he is training in an outstanding fashion for both rule sets Assembling the troops The biggest show of them all UFC 205 has rolled into town. Chris Weidman came to RGA to hone his highly developed skills in preparation for his fight with the uber talented Yoel Romero. It was a joy to see all the premier fighters and trainers around Madison Square Garden for this historical event. MSG was a fight center I would see on television when I was a child growing up in New Zealand when the greats of boxing in the 1970s and 80s fought their epic battles. To be among it all at the very first event at MSG in the modern era of MMA is such a special feeling. All the troops got together for a special night of training that went past midnight and created a memorable atmosphere among the many coaches and athletes. My beloved master, Renzo Gracie was on the mats delving out his priceless wisdom , experience and wit. My senpai big brother Ricardo Almeida was there. He is one of the few men I know who has been incredibly successful as a jiu jiu jitsu athlete, mma athlete, coach of both sports, ambassador of the sport and as a businessman growing the sport through schools he has done it all and done it exceedingly well. The immortal Ray Longo and tactician extraordinaire, Mark Henry were working hard. UFC Champions and standouts Fabricio Werdum, Eddie Alvarez, Stephen Thompson, Khabib Nurmagomedov showing a skill set that would make the entire Marvel and DC superhero line up look like wimps. What a room to be in!! As I went home at 1am on the subway I felt so privileged to be a tiny part of such a special city, at a special time, among so many special people Competition intensity Very often I am asked how I am able to reconcile safe training in the gym with the breaking intensity required for top level competition shiai. The squads safety record in training is very good despite being a group whose philosophy of jiu jitsu is based around ruthlessly seeking submissions over the whole body. People ask how they are able to train in a relatively mild way with each other every day, yet when the time comes in shiai, to be able to take a lock or strangle through to completion with maximum torque. The key is to focus skill development around CONTROL rather than power. When your ability to control an opponents movement is well developed, you can apply whatever degree of power you choose at the time you wish to use it. When control is insufficient, you will be forced to apply full power in the hope that maybe you will get a break before your partner can effect an escape. This creates a very unsafe training environment and a hit or miss competition record. Most of the major joint locks and strangles offer great amounts of control as well as breaking leverage learn to exploit that so that you can break and strangle at your discretion rather than in a flurry of movement where you are racing against time to get the job done. The great cliche of our sport is position before submission, but the squad operates with a different mantra CONTROL BEFORE SUBMISSION. In this way the gulf between the training room and the big shows can be spanned much more easily. Here Garry Tonon takes his skills honed in the gym on to the big stage with devastating results as he applies severe pressure to his opponents leg via heel hook at EBI 9. The big size difference is easily overcome as excellent positioning and precise positioning of lever and fulcrum create crushing power with excellent control.Reflections on my senior students I am often asked about how different body types influence the way I coach students. I have talked about this in the past. A question I am asked much less often, but which is in my opinion more important, is that of TACTICAL STYLE and how that influences my coaching. When you look at my three senior competing students, it is obvious that they are physically very different, but more importantly, they are tactically very different as well. Gordon Ryan has a PRESSURE based game where that pressure elicits defensive reactions that create opportunity. Garry Tonon has a SCRAMBLE based game centered around using movement where he controls the direction and pace of that movement to create advantage. Eddie Cummings has a KUZUSHI based game where he works from bottom position to off balance people in ways that create advantage Interestingly Mr Cummings game is the most similar to my own of the three. The great theme that I push to my students is this WHATEVER DIFFERENCES THERE ARE IN TACTICAL STYLE, THE FINISHING POSITIONS ARE THE SAME FOR ALL. Thus my students may employ very different overall approaches to the game, yet all have very similar finishing holds. In this way I approach the great problem of SIMILARITY AND DIFFERENCE in jiu jitsu. How to reconcile the need to promote individualism and spontaneity whilst remaining true to the mechanical nature of the sport which is based around lever and fulcrum and whose strictures dictate the same way to all, regardless of difference. In this way jiu jitsu can function both as a means of self expression and as a humbling lesson in the primacy of physics over our wants and desires.Its a celebration bitches! NYC style Actually no, the squad never celebrates victories. Tomorrow its back to the basement of suffering to refine and develop skills for the squad. The ADCC trials are around the corner, Eddie Cummings must step up to face the challenge of EBI 10 at a new weight of 135 pounds against the man we consider the best of Eddie Bravos students Geo Martinez. He is very interesting as an opponent because he is one of the few remaining 10th planet athletes who is really skilled in the true 10th planet system based around rubber guard lockdown half guardtwister rather than the modern 10th planet athletes style which is basically cloned after our own style. Mr Cummings preparation so far has been superb, but his aspirations are even higher. Then Gordon and Nicky Ryan face big superfight challenges in San Diego so its back to training and development for the squad time to turn off the disco lights and crank up the ashi garamis Awesome photo by Jeff ChuReflections on EBI 9 and rule sets The remarkable victory of welterweight Garry Tonon over a distinguished field of light heavyweights has impressed many, but underneath that victory are some interesting reflections upon the notion of rule sets and promoting desirable behavior among the competitors and directions of growth in the sport. The fundamental problem the sport faces is this on the one hand we want to make the sport progress in directions that express our ideals of the sport; on the other, athletes want to win, by whatever means the rule sets allow. In practice this often means that athletes will utilize the rule set to achieve victory in ways that fulfill the letter of the rules, but not the spirit of the rules. Thus they exploit the rule set by acting in ways that increase the likelihood of their victory, but which go against our ideals of the sport. At EBI 9 it was obvious that some athletes were looking to stall to get to the overtime and then exploit the overtime rules to secure victory. Whilst this is perfectly legal and even understandable every athletes wants to win after all it results in a situation where the ideal of the sport that we must look to secure control that leads to submission at all times, is lost. The usual response is to change the rules to prohibit undesired behavior. My point is this you can never really legislate away the natural tendency of athletes to exploit a given rule set in ways that raise the likelihood of them winning thats just what athletes do. GOOD ATTACKING, POSITIVE JIU JITSU COMES FROM A MINDSET, NOT A RULE SET. Ultimately, negative stalling behavior is a coaching problem, not a legislative problem. Athletes must be coached towards the ideal of the sport so that they express that ideal regardless of the rule set. Most of the great players of the last decade, Roger Gracie, Braulio Estima, Marcelo Garcia etc, applied an approach of attacking to submission regardless of the rule set they operated under and this is a big part of what made them great. Here Garry Tonon takes gold at EBI 9 where he embodied once again the ideal of constant attempts at control to submission regardless of time and rules.The spirit of attack Garry Tonon showed that a smaller man can carry a proactive attack strategy even against larger opponents tonight as he won EBI 9. Even when he failed to get a submission in regulation time, it was not for want of trying. Here he jumps into a flying sankaku triangle attack, showing the kind of calculated risk taking, backed by skills, required to make this approach work. Once again Mr Eddie Bravo put on a great show and format for the athletes and once again the squad showed up looking not just to win, but to do so in a way that shows the best aspects of the sport and helps it growth. I am in an airplane now at LAX, preparing to take the redeye back to NYC to teach tomorrow morning. Normally the redeye flight back from LA is horrid but when you have a student like Garry Tonon performing the way he does its a lot easier to enjoy the flight home Looking forward to seeing all my students tomorrow thank you all so much for your help in getting the squad ready for the big shows we could not do this without all of you.Mission impossibleAccomplished Garry Tonon celebrates his third title after winning EBI 9 in dramatic fashion via overtime riding advantage. He fought his way to the finals where he fought the great Vinny Magalhaes, former ADCC champion. It was the toughest EBI yet for Mr Tonon, as he was a last minute replacement for injured team mate, Gordon Ryan. He had just fought under a different rule set a week ago in England and then suffered a small but deep cut that interfered with the little preparation time he had in a weight division far above his own. Yet with characteristic professionalism, skill and gung ho spirit, he battled through to a win over the big men and showed that the true spirit of jiu jitsu built around the ideal of lesser size and strength controlling and defeating greater size and strength, is not empty talk, but with training and strategy, came to reality on the stage of the Orpheum theater in LA at EBI 9.What exactly are you waiting for? A common problem when I am coaching jiu jitsu athletes is that of students second guessing themselves when opportunity presents itself during a match. Too often students are looking for a perfect situation from which to launch an attack. Whilst I would never advocate sloppy set ups or random attacks; I do caution students on waiting for perfect set ups and moments for the simple reason that they rarely happen and are fleeting in nature. As a general rule, once an opportunity arises, it rarely gets better by waiting usually an intelligent opponent will become cognizant of his vulnerability and recover. Thus the skill of SEEING OPPORTUNITY AND ACTING UPON IT IMMEDIATELY is crucial to success. The great American General Patton said it well A good plan enacted now is better than a perfect plan enacted ten minutes from now. Once you see an opening, follow it with action and be prepared to follow the action through to your goal. This almost always garners better results than waiting for a better and better opportunity that may never arise and then force you to take greater risks as time runs out. Here, kohai student Eric Sherman shows fine recognition of opportunity followed by decisive action in the opening moments of a bout at a local show in NYC.Smallest competitor biggest skill set and heart Garry Tonon walks around at 167 pounds and could easily make the EBI 145 pound division he does not, as we like to see Eddie Cummings rule that domain. This Sunday he will take in athletes coming down from up to 230240 pounds to weigh in at 205 for EBI 9. This might seem like a suicide mission and for most, it would be. Mr Tonon however, has a long history of going up to fight bigger men. When he was a brown belt he took on Buchecha and Cyborg at ADCC and only lost narrowly by points. He dominated most of the action against Rousimar Palhares is a thrilling draw, despite a colossal size and strength disadvantage. He lost by negative guard pull to Vinny Magalhaes after pushing hard for submissions the whole match. He has beaten by submission, Ralek Gracie and Gilbert Burns despite a big size and strength disadvantage. In all my coaching experience I have not seen a grappling athlete with bigger heart and a stronger desire to go out and compete against anyone, any time, any place. Rest assured, the squad may have had a setback today, but come Sunday we shall come out all guns blazing Tomorrow the senpai and kohai will train and drill and get ready for this new challenge one which represents the best spirit of jiu jitsu the belief that with superior technique and strategy, greater size and strength can be controlled and overwhelmed by lesser.Sad news Gordon Ryan suffered a nasty cut on the eyelid today during his last day of hard sparring in preparation for EBI 9. It has been tightly stitched and dressed but there is no way he will be able to compete on Sunday. He will be replaced by Garry Tonon. Gordon was already the smallest man on the card and Garry is a weight division below Mr Ryan, so this will be a tough assignment indeed. Mr Tonon was himself cut during training in England, but his cut is much less severe and in a much less sensitive area than Mr Ryans. He will be ready to go by Sunday. Both cuts were the result of training with people outside of our gym there is always a catch here its good to train with unfamiliar partners as this is something you will experience in competition; however, sometimes these strangers bring a spastic and clumsy movement that is hazardous in terms of small and unnecessary injuries like these. Thankfully Gordon Ryan has other big upcoming projects to prepare for as soon as this problem passes, but still, the disappointment is strong. Mr Tonon will commence training as soon as his own cut allows and the show will go onTomorrow I will chat with team mate Matt Serra on his UFC Unfiltered podcast. Mr Serra is Renzo Gracies first American black belt and of course, BJJ world champion and former UFC welterweight champion. When I was a beginning student Mr Serra was one of Mr Gracies senior students Ricardo Almeida and Rodrigo Gracie were the others. As such he was my senpai big brothersenior and, as anyone who trained at RGA at that time will attest, an inspiration to all of us. Much of my desire to improve in the sport came from daily training sessions with Mr Serra whose skills and abilities left us all in awe wishing that one day we could attain such a level. Outside of jiu jitsu and professional fighting, Matt is absolutely one of the funniest characters in the sport he truly can light up a room when he enters. Best of all is when he has a target upon whom to aim that sense of humor. Usually it is the long suffering Ray Longo, with whom he combines to create so many talented fighters in Long Island NY. Tomorrow however, it will be me!! Mr Serra and I shall talk about old times in training along with a host of random topics. If you feel like listening in, you will see what a character Mr Serra is and perhaps learn a little about the approach to training that enabled Mr Gracie to create such a large number of outstanding students in those early days of jiu jitsu in the USA. Breakthrough!! Garry Tonon wins via his tokui waza, inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami defeating two time world champion and ADCC bronze medalist Gilbert Burns despite a major size and strength disadvantage at Polaris 4 in England tonight. It was an interesting match, with Mr Burns scoring some nice takedowns and positional scrambles to pins whilst Mr Tonon employed an interesting strategy of recovery into standing position to set up submissions. About two thirds of the way through the match, the strategy worked as Mr Tonon locked out a very tight cross ashi garami and controlled it through to the finish against the very explosive and strong Mr Burns. It was a good show overall. There was a fine match between 10th planet standout Nathan Orchard who countered the dangerous leg lock game of Japanese wizard Imanari with a solid traditional BJJ positional game through to a strangle. Dillon Danis put on a superb performance, two fine looking arm in guillotines, one of which was unlucky not to get a finish; then a very well applied inverted heel hook for a very nice win indeed against highly decorated and larger opponent, Jackson Sousa. It was nice to see three such well engineered submissions at such a high level against such talented opponents. Now we head back to NYC to prepare Gordon Ryan for EBI 9 where he will once again be then smallest man in the field depending upon his technique and tactics as his lifeline to victory.Structured training So often I see people engage in training with no plan as to what they are trying to accomplish. This will always limit your ability to improve over time the whole reason why we engage in practice. It is critical that someone in the room have a clear idea as to what we are trying to improve and how we are going to do it. In a beginners class or a general class, it is enough for the coach to know what the plan is and run the class accordingly. At elite levels however, I like to make the athletes part of the discussion as to what we are trying to achieve they have the knowledge and insight to add to the discussion and we can make adjustments based on their input. Here Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan and myself outline want we want to go over at a local gym in Poole England just prior to Polaris 4 once the plan is set, words get replaced by action and the room heats up accordingly.Realistic combinations In the past I have talked about the critical need for students to learn to combine submission attacks into short sequences to overcome resistance and break through to victory by submission. Just as no good boxer would expect to defeat a worthy opponent with single punches, so too, no jiu jitsu player would expect to defeat a worthy opponent first time everything time with the first submission he tries. One problem I often see however, is people selecting inappropriate combinations. Sometimes these look good when drilling on a non resisting training partner, but fail in live sparring. The key is to select combinations that allow us to transition in a way that MINIMIZES THE DISTANCE WE HAVE TO TRAVEL TO GET TO THE NEXT ATTACK WHILST MAXIMIZING OUR CONTROL OVER OUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT AS HE TRIES TO ESCAPE THE FIRST ATTACK. This creates very effective submission combinations that are difficult to avoid even when resisting as hard as possible. Here, talented kohai student Matthew Tesla shows fine form at a recent local tournament with a well selected combination leg attack that offers his opponent little opportunity to avoid or counter the second attack resulting in a nice submission win. Creating rationally ordered, short submission combinations based on the criteria I just outlined will greatly increase your chance of success with the various submission holds we work with with.Staying relaxed Probably the single greatest obstacle to efficiency in human movement in general, and jiu jitsu in particular, is EXCESS TENSION. We all have a natural tendency to equate maximum effort with maximum muscular tension. In jiu jitsu this usually leads to poor movement and an inability to mold our body into the complex postures required to complete the various moves of the sport. Dont get me wrong there are times we need tension in the body as we grapple finishing a submission is an obvious example and certainly we dont want to be so relaxed that we cannot form a tight connection to our opponents body when we need it. Nonetheless, as a general rule we must train ourselves to avoid unnecessary tension that inhibits efficient movement. Much of jiu jitsu requires us to fold, roll and tumble our body, all of which is best done whilst in a fairly relaxed state. In any given match there will be long periods where you can be very physically relaxed, along with many short periods where you can be fairly relaxed and a few moments where you will need to be very tense and tight. Finding the right proportions of relaxation vs tension is a big part of the journey towards expertise. Here, kohai student Emmanuel Vera shows a excellent degree of relaxed body allowing fluid motion into cross ashi garami and a fine heel hook finish where maximal tension is applied for a brief time. Very impressive for a blue belt on his way to winning gold all via submission in the expert no gi division at a recent tournamentThe link between standing technique and ground technique A theme that I always push upon my students is that of balancing standing technique tachi waza and ground technique ne waza. The most high percentage submission holds are all best performed on the ground, where control over an opponents movement is usually much easier than standing positions. Nonetheless, considerable time must be invested in bringing the fight down to the mat in ways that make submission possible if the art is to have serious combative value and of course, the opposite getting back up to your feet from the ground if the situation should demand it. This ability to move naturally and easily from standing positions to ground and back and forth at will is a fine thing to behold and has immense combat value. Of course in submission grappling most of our attention is devoted to the means of getting to, and finishing, submission holds so we cant realistically expect the kind of level of technique in specialized standing grappling styles like Olympic wrestling and Judo. What I often say to my students is this I EXPECT YOU TO BE KILLERS ON THE GROUND AND COMPETENT ON THE FEET. This a fair view that reflects the priorities of the sport whilst paying respect to the realities of combat. What we must avoid is situations where students get to a high level on the floor but are straightforwardly incompetent on their feet. Here kohai student Matthew Tesla shows a nice link between standing work and ground work utilizing de ashi harai, a form of footsweep that our team greatly favors for its efficiency you may remember it being used to good effect by Gordon Ryan against Keenan Cornelius in a recent local tournament. It is a very nicely performed sequence and reflects very well on Mr Teslas rapidly growing skill set.I see much to admire in the Japanese model of classroom structure. It is based around the distinction between senpai senior students and kohai junior students. The seniors take the biggest challenges and represent the school in the big shows. They provide the inspiration through their skills and deeds to the juniors and assist in the dissemination of knowledge through the training room. Equally important and far greater in number are the kohai. These students are a tier down in experience and skill level, but working their way up. They are absolutely critical in the contest preparation of the senpai and in building a strong training program which can build them into future senpai. The kohai often work in obscurity as they must first prove themselves in small local shows and work their way through merit into the ranks of the senpai. In every tough gym you will see this division occur naturally and organically, even when no one is trying to make it happen. This weekend several of our kohai emerged from the gym and put on stellar displays that show how their hard work and time with the senpai has hardened them and refined their skills. Ethan Crelinsten won first place at Sapeteiro 5 featherweight winning all matches by submission in regulation time EBI rules. Eric Sherman and Frankie Adam Rosenthal shared first place at Grappling Industries show in NYC yesterday. At the same show Emmanuelle Vera won first place in expert division, every match via heel hook he is only a blue belt! Watching them train so hard with the senpai every day is a privilege for me, a benefit for them, and a necessity for the senpai. As always, THE BEST KIND OF BENEFIT IS MUTUAL BENEFIT. The relationship between senpai and kohai is the perfect example of this. It was great to see the kohai have their time in the sun yesterday and show the fruit of their labor.The value of rematches A very natural question to ask as you engage in the study of jiu jitsu is whether or not you are really improving over time. The problem is that as you train and improve, so do the people you are training with. As a result, it often feels as though no progress is being made. A very good test to gauge the amount of progress you are making over time is to rematch an opponent you have not come up against in some time of course they too must have been training as per normal, otherwise the test will be rendered inaccurate. Exactly this situation occurred earlier today when Gordon Ryan rematched Todd Mueckenheim , a talented and athletic opponent who had narrowly defeated Mr Ryan by points when they last met. Today they met again in Florida. It was a short match, with Mr Ryan dominating the entire chain of events through to a submission win. It was gratifying to see in such a clear way the improvements in Mr Ryans performance and the effects of a progressive training program that constantly assesses and improves the sports performance of those following it. Mr Ryan put on a dazzling combination of ashi garami, back control and kimura systems and perhaps most interestingly, the manner in which these different systems can be linked in a bout to make them extremely difficult to defend against. Mr Muckenheim showed admirable confidence in his abilities in taking a bet of 10,000 dollars of his own money against Mr Ryan, who also bet his money though in the opposite way. However, he was not facing the same man he matched six months ago and the gamble was lost. Here you can see Mr Ryan using some of the more advanced elements of our back control system. Unfortunately the first component of the system has proved so successful in competition that the other five components have not been necessary to use, it was nice to see some elements of the second component being shown in public today.High percentage submission holds Our approach to jiu jitsu is centered around the idea of CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. Accordingly, a large part of our training time is invested in perfecting the mechanical details of the most high percentage submission holds. People are often surprised to learn that I only teach around 1520 families of submission holds. These are the most successful types of hold in high level competition in all weight categories and across all belt levels. There are only so many ways the human body can be broken and strangled by another body. Among those we find around fifteen to twenty types of hold are truly effective in competition. There are innumerable other holds, but I dont believe the meager results gained from them justify the amount of training time it would require to perfect their use instead we focus all our attention of those with a high probability of success. You will notice that I said families of submission holds thus the American lock ude garame is one such family. Within that single family there are many, many variations and still more set ups etc etc. thus fifteen to twenty families of submissions represents an enormous amount of study. Among them you will find all those families that one sees in every grappling event, juji gatame armlocks, kimura, knee bar, figure four toe hold etc etc. A big part of my job as the coach of this program is to deepen my students knowledge of the essential families of submission hold and and then embed them in coherent systems that enable a student to apply them against strong resistance; then let their knowledge of the mechanics of the move create the kind of pressure that will force a submission against even a very determined foe. Here fifteen year old Nicky Ryan gives Eddie Bravo, maestro of his own system the rubber guard a nice view of one of his favorite high percentage submissions, the heel hook, as he uses our ashi garami system to work into a variation of the move to secure victory in a recent super fight.Classroom role models An impression many people have is that the social dynamic in the gym is one of teacher teaching and students learning. This certainly may be the case in a small local class, but in a big and well established classroom it is an over simplification. A critical role is played by the senior students senpai. They often have a more direct contact with the junior students than the sensei does and often are an essential part of getting the teachers vision into the hands of the practicing students. One of my most important roles as a teacher is to establish a strong cadre of senior students who assist in the learning process of the entire training room. That way one can create a room where there are many guiding hands to help those who need it and yet all are united by a common vision of the sport. That is one of the reasons why I always teach to the level of the most talented people in the room. It builds that upper echelon who can then assist me in getting the knowledge to everyone in time. I was myself a product of this system. When I was a white belt we had Renzo as our sensei, but also Ricardo Almeida, Rodrigo Gracie and Matt Serra as our senior students. They were incredible role models and inspirational to us juniors. I never forgot how crucial they were to my development and worked hard to build a similar structure when I began teaching. Here I am with one of my favorite senior students, Garry St Ledger, whose world championship level judo skills in addition to his BJJ black belt make him a truly valuable addition to the room as he helps immensely in the standing skills that are such a big part of my vision for the future of the sport.Friends from afar One of the great things about being based in NYC is the frequent opportunity to have visitors come in to learn the kingly art of jiu jitsu at the academy. As the greatest of the great, Jigoro Kano emphasized the best kind of benefit is mutual benefit. It is a pleasure when talented and enthusiastic visitors come in. They bring new skills and perspectives and challenges to our squad, whilst gaining the same for themselves. Best of all is when they come regularly through the year. Then they get great feedback on their progress and the effectiveness of their training program and of course we get the same. The critical ability to apply your skills on an unfamiliar partner is also worked that is important for contest shiai preparation. It also creates a strong and important link between jiu jitsu and our overall happiness, as travel and friendship are two of the very best means of bringing joy into human life when combined with a passion for jiu jitsu its smiles all around Here talented visitors and friends Asim Zaidi and Assane Diop bring French flair and je ne sais quoi, their lovely girlfriends bring the looks and charm, the squad brings the submission skills and me...um...I guess I bring the sunblock and hairstyling skills Its a long way to the top Very often people ask me how my students progress so quickly to headline major professional grappling tournaments after a relatively short period of time in the sport. My answer always runs along these lines people only take notice of athletes once they get to the big shows what they dont realize is that all these athletes started small and did their time in local shows that no one pays attention to, developing their skills, their ability to control performance anxiety, their capacity to take their game and apply it upon someone they have never grappled previously etc. This developmental phase is crucial to anyone with big aspirations in the sport. Great athletes are not created fully grown and mature their athletic life mirrors their actual life they start off weak and totally dependent on others for help and sustenance, but in time grow in capability and confidence to become independent and strong. Nobody remembers the innumerable small local tournaments that Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan trekked to on their own volition and dollar, gaining critical experience that would prove invaluable later at the big shows. Dont rush this phase once its gone, it does not come back. Learn and grow here, always with your mind on your distant goals, but learning here and now to build the foundation upon which something great can be built. Here, Frank Adam Rosenthal takes his rapidly developing gym game to the local tournament scene and controls a variation of the juji gatame armlock position very nicely on route to the winners podium in one of many small, but very significant steps that must be made and profited from before the big leaps are made.Body type and advantage observe the three men in the photo. It is immediately apparent that all three differ markedly in body type. They share something in common however all three were Olympic champions in Judo and rose to be the absolute best in the world in their generation and arguably of all time. The same game can be played in jiu jitsu. There are many distinguished figures in contemporary jiu jitsu, too many to list here, but six names that nobody will argue against being described as among the foremost in success and influence in their time in the sport would be Roger Gracie, Braulio Estima, Marcelo Garcia, Rafael Mendes, Cobrinha and Leandro Lo. Yet it is clear that these champions have very different bodies and even look very different in the way they move their bodies. The lesson is simple WE CANNOT USE BODY TYPE AS AN EXCUSE FOR SUCCESS OR FAILURE IN ANY FORM OF GRAPPLING SPORT. There is no link between championship success and body type. So often I am asked whether an athlete I coach is more successful with a given move or position due to his body type. For example, people will often tell me that the long rangy body of Gordon Ryan is the key to his strong back control. Yet they overlook the readily observable fact that Eddie Cummings, with an entirely different body type, also exhibits very strong back control he just uses different methods. The same can be said of Roger Gracie and Marcelo Garcia both were superb in attacking the back, but they have very different bodies and very different methodologies. In truth, THERE ARE SO MANY DIFFERENT WAYS TO ACHIEVE VICTORY IN OUR SPORT THAT NO ONE BODY TYPE CAN MONOPOLIZE GOLD MEDALS. There are sports where body types and attributes confer advantage basketball is an obvious example there are only so many ways to get a ball in a net high above the average persons reach; but jiu jitsu is not like this. None of the major submission holds require any exceptional physical gifts and the means of getting to them are limitless so success is equal opportunity in jiu jitsu and the winners podium at the best known competitions reflect this heartening fact.Expertise When we think of expertise in jiu jitsu we typically equate it with skill level on the mat how good are you at performing the various moves and tactics of the sport and applying them against skilled opponents? It is important to realize however, that expertise is a concept with many faces. One of the most important elements of expertise and one which makes it easy to distinguish beginner from expert, is the ability of an expert to make significant distinctions between events and situations that the beginner simply does not see. Most people are familiar with the often used example of Alaskan natives Inuit or Eskimo and their vocabulary for snow. Most people typically use the word snow to apply to any situation where white powdery condensation falls from the sky in winter. For our purposes, one word, snow conveys enough information to get the job done. The Alaskan natives however, live most of their lives in snow. They must be able to travel, hunt, fish, derive water, build shelter etc in snowy conditions. As such, they need to be able to make fine grained distinctions between different kinds of snowfall, as this can have very important consequences for their actions. Accordingly they have a vast number of different words for snow each describing subtle, but very important, types of snow that I simply do not see or make. As such, they have an experts view of snow, whilst I have a naive beginners view and our respective vocabularies reveal that. So too in jiu jitsu. When the squad talks about a given move like ashi garami together in training, we have a complex vocabulary to match each of the many subtle but important distinctions that will make the difference between success and failure when applying the move on a skilled opponent. Thus we will talk about irimi ashi garami, outside ashi garami, ushiro ashi garami etc etc so that we can easily coach each other and indeed ourselves, to make those subtle but important distinctions that demarcate success and failure. So much of what we call expertise is exactly this the ability to make fine grained, but relevant distinctions, that others do not. Here the squad works on irimi ashi garamiInformation overload When I first began coaching I was anxious to pass as much detailed information as possible to students when demonstrating moves; in the belief that the more details they had, the more perfect their performance of the move would be. I soon found the opposite effect took place. The students did not have the experience to know which details ought to be given priority and so tended to emphasize the least important details over the most important. In addition, many simply lost track of vast amounts of detail and ended up remembering nothing. Worst of all, I often saw students in live sparring desperately trying to recall information and hesitating when speed of action was required much more than some additional detail. As I gained in experience I came to believe that it is quite counterproductive to throw vast amounts of detail at students, even advanced students, at one time. The real value of a coach is to make good assessments as to what are the CRITICAL details a student needs to get the job done, not ALL the details underlying any given move. Further details can always be added at another time. The determining factor in whether the student will be successful in applying his or her knowledge in live sparring is not how much he or she knows, BUT HOW MUCH THEY CAN RECALL UNDER STRESS. The truth is that none of us can recall very much under sufficiently stressful conditions. My job then, is not dumping information IT IS ABBREVIATING AND PRIORITIZING INFORMATION. Once I feel it is absorbed in ways that a student can utilize it under stress, I can add more. As soon as I made this adjustment, I noted increases in my students actual mat performance which of course, is the most important element in my work. Coaches share much in common with editors our most important role is to organize and arrange information in a way that the reader will benefit the most of course there is considerable irony in me, a man infamous for writing the most long winded and poorly edited posts in the history of Facebook and Instagram, try to tell you these things Here I have clearly gone into information overload with poor Gordon Ryan Perhaps I should read my own posts! The transfer of knowledge One of the greatest attributes we humans have is the ability to transfer knowledge from one person to another and one generation to another. It is this feature of our species that makes progress from one generation to another possible. If each generation had to start at the beginning of knowledge acquisition every time, there would be no progress just repetition from one generation to the next. Only the fact that each generation can build upon the prior work of the previous generations by learning their lessons through language is progress over time possible. This applies in jiu jitsu also. However outstanding the current crop of jiu jitsu athletes may be, I am very confident that the following generations will be better, as they are the beneficiaries of the knowledge given to them by the current generation and can build upon and improve upon that. Indeed I would say that MY CAREER AS A COACH WOULD BE AN UTTER FAILURE IF I COULD NOT RAISE A CLASS OF STUDENTS WHOSE SKILL LEVEL WAS CONSIDERABLY HIGHER THAN MY OWN. Anything less would mean I had failed to convey all that I knew and created students who had absorbed it all and had the individualism and initiative to improve upon it. Here I work with Gordon and Nicky Ryan on the mechanical tightness of their Achilles lock. When they go home for the evening they will work again with each other, experimenting and researching and then testing it in live sparring over the next few weeks, making small modifications for their own bodies along with their own insights. When I look at this photo I smile as I can see the intergenerational growth of the sport in a very clear and positive way.Guard passing in submission grappling Quite often I am asked whether I emphasize the skill of guard passing among my students. After all, in most of the tournaments in which my students take part, no points are awarded for passing an opponents guard. Given that guard passing on a talented opponent can be very hard work and that it scores nothing, and that my students are strong in leg attacks many people ask the question do you people even bother passing guard? The answer is absolutely yes. Indeed, visitors to the academy are often shocked at how much time we invest in guard passing skills EVEN WHEN WE ARE ARE PREPARING FOR TOURNAMENTS WHERE WE KNOW IT WILL SCORE ZERO POINTS. Even in this context, guard passing has great value for it allows you to ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY. The moment you start limiting your attacks to one part of your opponents body, you become predictable and defense for your opponent becomes easier. Our ideal is to attack our opponents whole body legs, arms and neck. Guard passing makes upper body attacks possible. Without it you would be limited to leg attacks only 50 of your opponents body. So in training, we often look quite traditional in our constant practice of passing work. The only difference is our MOTIVATION. We are not motivated to pass guard by points, but by the ability to attack the upper body with submissions. Thus we value guard passing as highly as anyone, just for slightly different reasons. Here Eddie Cummings does a good job of nullifying my guard attacks to work to a stronger passing position in training before an EBI event, where ironically, he knows guard passing will bring no points reward.A theory of pinning Most people think of pinning osaekomi as the act of displaying control by immobilizing an opponent. This certainly demonstrates control and is a very useful skill in combat. However, when one make SUBMISSION his primary goal, total immobilization of an opponent is not necessarily desirable. The act of totally immobilizing an opponent usually results in totally immobilizing ourselves as well. As a result, we are unable to make the transition to submission holds. The goal of the submission hunter is thus not static pins, but DIRECTIONAL PINS. These are pins which control the opponent in a way where he can only move in predictable ways that we control and determine. Thus we can anticipate his movement and take advantage of the inevitable extension of his body as he moves to shift from a pin controlling the torso to a submission hold attacking a limb. Static situations rarely give opportunities for submission. As a general rule WHERE THERE IS MOVEMENT, THERE IS OPPORTUNITY FOR SUBMISSION. Thus directional pinning, rather than static pinning, is the focus of those who favor submission over all else. Here I work the theory of directional pinning with the immensely talented Mikey Wilson, youngest member of the squad, who at age ten displays a maturity and talent that astounds me.Precontact Due to the very nature of grappling, which requires us to have some form of grip upon our opponent in order to be able work the moves, most people have a tendency to underestimate the importance of skills utilized prior to establishing our grips. It is very important to understand that the game begins BEFORE EITHER ATHLETE HAS LAID A FINGER UPON THE OTHER. As the two athletes approach each other, they should be working to gain advantage before a grip has even been taken. This can be done through stance, movement, angle, level and limb positioning. Subtle use of these factors as we approach an opponent prior to making grips can result in advantage that will give us the initiative as we enter the grappling engagement. Good athletes dont wait until they establish contact to begin the fight for advantage they begin as soon as they approach an opponent so that by the time contact has made, they already are a step ahead then its a battle to keep moving from advantage to advantage until victory. As in most areas of life, he who begins with advantage generally has an easier time in a competitive setting, jiu jitsu is no exception to this general rule. Here, Nicky Ryan has begun maneuvering to advantage with hands feet and stance before contact has even been made in his superfight in Canada yesterday. The small advantages he was able able to gain prior to contact translated into bigger advantage as the match progressed until he got his victory via heel hook.Proposed changes Mr Eddie Bravo, founder and chairman of EBI, one of the most successful and fastest growing grappling competition organizations, is proposing some radical changes to the shows format that will essential take it out of the grappling competition business and put it somewhere between grappling and MMA. The idea is to allow limited striking on the ground via palm strikes as a means of taking the grappling a step closer to MMA. This is certainly interesting. It may be a solution to a commonly voiced criticism of submission only formats that they allow athletes to take positions and make moves that would get them severely hurt in a real fight. Also it may encourage athletes to play a more traditional positional game as they will be rewarded with the opportunity to set up submissions with flurries of palm strikes from dominant position. I spent much of the first part of my coaching career developing grapple boxing systems for MMA fighters, but striking with the palm only is a very different game, so from a coaching perspective, this should be interesting. The main danger of the proposal is that it will scare off high level grapplers who dont want to be part of what they may perceive as a crazy slap grappling event that will be quite different from their usual competition training. Also there is a danger that it may end up looking like a mix of weak striking and weak grappling and thus please neither the MMA crowd or the grappling crowd. Obviously there will practical difficulties also, how to deal with cuts, broken noses etc in a tournament where athletes may have to fight four times in an evening. How it will work out is anybodies guess, but as they say, there is only one way to find out. The only certainty is that, as always, training, adaptation and strategy will determine the winners.Changes over time Ideally you should look at jiu jitsu as a lifetime activity. Of course there will be times you have to train less, or perhaps not at all, life is complicated and uncertain, sometimes our jiu jitsu training will reflect that but you can always return and resume. An interesting facet of life time training is the changes that occur naturally to our game over time. Sometimes these changes occur rapidly, other times they are barely perceptible even to ourselves. Sometimes they are due to changes in priority. When my sensei Renzo Gracie first came to NYC and began teaching, his bottom game was based around tomoenage sweeps from open guard and lapel and Ezekiel sode guruma strangles. When he began professional fighting and no gi ADCC grappling, he had to change his bottom game drastically towards hook sweeps Sumi gaeshi and guillotine strangles. Other times the changes are due to changes in our bodies usually due to age and damage. Whatever the reason, I always see change over time as a healthy thing. There is more to jiu jitsu than victory over an opponent. Much of its value comes from self expression, self knowledge and enjoyment. All of these are enhanced by variation and change in our game. If we just stuck to the moves most likely to generate a win the game would soon lose its appeal. It would become monotonous and boring and we would experience no growth over time. When we experiment and move in new directions we may initially lose some combat effectiveness though I am confident that in most cases you will eventually increase it by having a wider repertoire to attack with but we gain so much more. One of my favorite examples of change over time is that of my friend and coach, Matt Serra. When he first began as a standout grappler at the Renzo Gracie Academy his game was based around open guard work combine with lightning fast heists to guillotine strangles or rear strangles. After a long mma career and half a lifetime of change his game now is totally different, almost unrecognizable, based around top pressure passing and kimura attacks. Yet it is every bit as effective as the game that first made him a world and adcc champion.Reflections on my sensei A massive part of our experience in life is shaped by our teachers. We have all forgotten most of our childhood school experiences but we remember almost all our teachers. So too in our martial arts journey. Our senseis are probably the single biggest influence on the directions we go in the sport. Whenever a group of grapplers get together and start talking, it does not take long before the discussion turns to our senseis and the stori...The importance of tokuiwaza So often the Japanese grappling tradition expresses great wisdom. A core concept in the Japanese tradition is that of tokuiwaza or favorite technique. Every athlete will naturally develop certain techniques that he or she becomes particularly adept in. Usually it is our personality and body type that determines our favorite moves, though there can be other reasons as well. Tokui waza are extremely important for our technical growth in the sport. As soon as a beginning student develops their first tokui waza, I know they are on the right track. In our jiu jitsu life, the first tokui waza plays a similar role to our first car, first job, first apartment and first girlfriend does in our adult daily life it is a critical first step in the path towards grappling maturity. As soon as you have a favorite move, you can add variations and combinations to it. You can develop counters to your opponents counters IT FUNCTIONS AS MUCH MORE THAN A FAVORED MEANS OF WINNING MATCHES IT IS A CATALYST TO FURTHER TECHNICAL GROWTH AMD PROGRESS. The acquisition of just one tokui waza will often bring about more technical growth in a given time period than any number of generalized lessons. As time passes you must develop more tokui waza. The number need not be great I have met many fine champions who had a surprisingly small set of tokui waza. The importance is not so much the BREADTH of your tokui waza, but rather the DEPTH. The idea of tokui waza is to develop such depth of knowledge and skill around a small set of moves, that once you enter that tokui waza, your opponents cannot match your knowledge and skill in that specific domain and you can overwhelm them there to take victory. I am sure you can guess what Mr Eddie Cummings tokuiwaza is Interestingly, when I first met him it was the guillotine. He is a good example of someone whose first tokui waza is not necessarily his mature tokui waza. Photo Tiago MolinosCombination attacks In an ideal world, all of our submission attempts would succeed on first try. Unfortunately the world rarely cooperates with our desires. Most of the time our opponents anticipation and resistance, Combined with imperfections in our technique, result in a failure of the first attempt to get to a submission. This is where combination attacks come in. Combinations allow us to break through resistance and defense via a second, third or fourth attack which compliments the initial attack in some way that hopefully will take advantage of those defensive reactions and get the break though. The notion of combination attacks become more and more important as you climb in skill level, as your opponents ability to read and foresee the set ups to attacks increases. I find that students quickly learn to appreciate the value of combination attacks and work hard to incorporate them into their game but then a new problem emerges the problem of COMPLACENT ATTACKS. Students start thinking that since the real attack will be the third or fourth attack, they might as well put little or no effort into the initial submission attack that begins the combination. This is a crucial failure. A good opponent will simply not feel threatened by the initial attack and either not react in the way needed to set up the subsequent attacks, or worse, launch into his own counter attack off your weak attacks. It is critical that the first move be A GENUINE THREAT. Only then will you get the kind of reactions needed to drive the combination forward to success on the second, third or fourth move. That is why it is good for students to have several very strong and threatening moves that opponents know and fear. Faking these moves will always elicit strong and predictable defensive reactions that can be exploited via combination attacks. If there is no plausible threat at the onset, the subsequent moves are unlikely to be any more threatening. Here I work on leg attack drill combinations with Ms Ottavia Bourdain, looking to create predictable reactions off an initial attack that has to be taken seriously and thus set up a chain of events that will get to a submission.Connection and body geometry A critical part of grappling is the ability to create a solid sense of connection of our body to that of our opponent. Separation is the death of effective application of nearly all grappling technique. Most beginners use strength as the primary means of building that tight connection and as a result, quickly fatigue and become ineffective. A much better approach is to consciously SEEK TO FIT THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR OPPONENTS BODY. There must be a precise fit of your body into that of your opponent throughout the relevant areas that are in contact. This immediately creates a connection that can be maintained against strong resistance with minimal strength. The only way this fitting in of your body to his can be achieved is if your body is sufficiently relaxed and supple that you can fill the spaces in the same way liquid can fill the inside of any vessel into which it is poured, regardless of shape. Only when that precise fitin has been achieved is tension applied and the submission attempted. The feeling here is one of a key precisely fitting into a lock only then can the doorway to submission be entered. Developing this sense of relaxed fittingin of your bodys geometry into that of your opponent, followed by the isometric tension required for breaking, is a huge part of the development from beginner to expert. Here my student Shy Ace shows fine form as his ashi garami fits precisely into the geometry of his much larger opponents legs and hips to create a powerful submission win in a recent local tournamentThe principle of localized force The central feature of jiu jitsu is to use mechanical advantage to control greater strength and aggression with less. How is this possible? It is done largely through the principle of localized force. Lets say we have an opponent who can apply an average of one hundred units of strength in standard strength tests while we can only generate 50 units of strength. As a whole, he is roughly twice as strong as us overall. How is victory through grappling possible in such a case? The key is to understand that it is possible to use a very high percentage of our overall strength to attack a small percentage of my opponents overall strength at a point of his body which, if attacked successfully, will end his ability to continue the fight. If I can use the various movements of jiu jitsu to maneuver into a position where I can create a temporary LOCAL strength advantage at a critical point of my opponents body neck or joints, I can overcome an OVERALL strength disadvantage. The whole basis of our sport is precisely to develop the skill of maneuvering into these local advantages as efficiently as possible and using that to create a threat to a critical but vulnerable body part in a way that leads to submission. A good example would be ashi garami, where a very high percentage of our overall strength both legs, both hips, back and both arms are used to restrain an opponents single leg and hip in a way that allows us to threaten severe damage. If a good ashi garami allows us to use 90 of our 50 units of strength against an opponents single leg, 33 of his 100 units of strength, then we shall have a considerable local strength advantage on an opponent twice as strong as ourselves overall. This is one of the core principles of our sport and one which we must constantly keep in mind as we train and develop. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a high percentage of his total strength on the isolated leg of his opponent through a variation of ashi garami, creating a local advantage long enough to threaten a break and get a submission on his way to victory at EBI 8Banning moves Jiu jitsu is a contact sport based around the skills of breaking joints and strangulation as such injury is inevitable at some point. Nonetheless I believe there are certain movements in our sport that are unacceptably dangerous and which do very little to enhance the desired skills of the sport. In my experience, the most hazardous movements in jiu jitsu are not the joint locks and strangles, these usually cause no injury among responsible athletes and even when used recklessly, rarely do catastrophic damage. Far more dangerous is UNCONTROLLED FALLING BODYWEIGHT. This is often the result of throws from standing position where people try to resist the throw and land poorly. Sometimes it is the result of a poor throwing attempt that results in one athlete sitting on the outstretched leg of his opponent and crushing the knee or ankle. The worst offender however, is the most common and the most preventable the common practice of people jumping to closed guard and landing on the opponents hips, knees or ankles with their entire weight and momentum. Thankfully this dreadful practice has been banned at white belt belt level after years of unnecessary injury. It is time to extend the ban to all belt levels and training. I banned the practice entirely in all my classes many years ago after witnessing many terrible injuries. It is a worthless practice that teaches no worthwhile combat skills and has only very bad consequences with no redeeming features unlike flying submissions which do teach valuable skills. We should enforce a rule that if an athlete wishes to pull guard they must make contact with their buttocks or back on the mat rather than their opponent. It is comical to see a sport where knee reaping is illegal, but the act of jumping guard, which has ruined more careers than all the joint locks and knee reaps put together, is perfectly legal for upper belts. A good closed guard should be feared as Roger Gracies was for its fine tactics and technique not the injurious clumsiness of it jumping entry. The sport needs to ban this dangerous movement that does nothing to promote the skills of the sport and does much to reduce its safetyThe indirect path We work in a sport where we are actively trying to defeat someone who is actively trying to defeat us. This almost always creates a mindset in both athletes to go as fast and directly as possible to their respective goals. The problem is that both athletes usually have a good idea of what the goals of the other are. As a result, we run into a wall of defense and get shut out. Often you will get much better results if you employ an indirect path to your objectives here is a general rule which I work hard to instill in all my students, the law of direction the more sophisticated and knowledgeable your opponent, the more you will be required to choose the indirect route to your real objectives the less sophisticated and knowledgeable your opponent, the simpler and more direct your attacks should be. Only when your real intent is masked behind fakery and deception will you pass through the defenses of an astute opponent. Now reading and saying this is easy; but performing in this manner whilst being vigorously attacked by a dangerous opponent is quite another. Very few people ever achieve the nerve, subtlety and patience to carry it out in a combative situation. If you can however, the rewards can be tremendous, as creating confusion and misdirection will make it far easier to execute your favorite moves in the heat of competition. Of all my students, none surpassed the subtlety, patience and indirectness of Georges StPierre in the set ups to his favorite move the double leg takedown. People usually remember and admire his strong driving finish to the double leg. Very few ever comprehended the subtle indirect set ups that enabled him to get to that move on all comers for over over a decade. Here, Mr StPierre gives one of his strongest rivals, Josh Koscheck, multi time NCAA wrestling champion, some serious air time in the second match in Montreal.All or nothing An interesting element of jiu jitsu and of submission holds in particular, is their all or nothing character. They either work 100 and end the match, or they dont work at all. If you show me a man who knows 95 of what is required to complete a juji gatame arm lock, I will show you a man who has never submitted anyone with that move. As such, there is, perhaps to a greater degree than any other aspect of our sport, a need for exactitude and precision. There is nothing more heartbreaking than getting very close to a submission and then losing it in the last stage. Not only is it psychologically damaging, it is usually physically exhausting, as most submission holds require considerable amounts of isometric strength in execution. Students have to learn through experience to walk a fine line between working hard to successfully finish a submission versus abandoning one to save energy and switch to another option. We are engaged in a sport where a failed submission has no more worth than a punch that missed. As such our execution must be perfect down to the smallest details or, if not, it must be followed by another movement that justifies the energy expenditure of the first submission attempt. Nowhere else in our sport is greater knowledge and precision required in the placement of fulcrum and lever small mistakes can have deep consequences here. At the ADCC world champions, Garry Tonon took the attack to his much larger rival, Vinny Margalhaes, an extremely talented ADCC champion, in the open weight division. The expression on Mr Magalhaes face shows that he is close, but despite several determined attempts, was ultimately unsuccessful. It takes great self belief to choose the path of submission failure almost guarantees losing in points based tournaments but success brings the deepest feelings of satisfaction our sport offers. Photo by Tiago MolinosThe basis of confidence Often I am asked how it is that my students play such a confident attacking game. They appear to attack without regard for the risks of failure. Many people voice to me a commonly felt fear that if they attempt submissions and fail, they will lose positional control and be defeated. This is a sensible fear. All offense, especially submission offense, carries inherent risk within it. If it should fail, there is often a price to be paid, as it can lead to positional loss or even being strongly countered by submissions. This is why I always teach escape as the foundation of a strong offense. If a student truly believes in the effectiveness of his escapes, both from pins and submissions, he will have no fear of failure in his offense. On the other hand, if a student knows his escape skills are weak, he will always hold back on his offense in a high pressure situation, no matter how technically proficient his offense may be, his inner doubts will stop him from pulling the trigger, even when he has all the physical tools and tactical opportunity in his favor. Escape work is thus a huge part of our training ironic for a squad known primarily for submission offense. Let this be one of your training principles confidence in your offense rests upon an unshakeable belief in your defense. The skills of jiu jitsu are evenly divided into offense and defense. They are not opposite ends of the game, but rather work in unison, as yin and yang, to create a confident proactive game that is a pleasure to behold and a terror to face. Here I put Gordon Ryan through his defensive drills with Garry Tonon shortly before his superfight with the great Keenan Cornelius where his defensive skills would be strongly tested before his eventual victory.Everything begins with grip In all the grappling arts, every engagement, whether in training or competition, begins with grip. When I first grapple a stranger I can tell in the first few seconds all I need to know about his skill level by the manner in which he grips me. Sadly, gripping is usually taught as an attribute rather than a skill. It is usually understood in terms of strength and so usually trained in the same way. Most people think that increasing the strength of their grip will improve their gripping. Whilst this may have some small benefit, it will be insignificant compared with the gains possible by training it as a skill. Precise placement allied with a tactical sense of what you wish to achieve with the grip you are fighting for is the backbone of gripping skill. Often visitors to the academy are shocked at the gripping skills of my best students and claim they are extraordinarily strong, then when they see those same students do strength training they are shocked to see they have very modest strength. They failed to see the technical precision which creates the illusion of great strength. Here Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon go over gripping drills in standing position just prior to EBI 8Teaching the teachers One of the more interesting facets of my job is the division between my usual task improving sports performance of students; versus another, very different task teaching coaches to improve the performance of their own students. The central concern of an athletestudent is his or her own skill enhancement. The central concern of a coach is the skill enhancement of others. As such, they are very different enterprises. Often I see people who are very strong in one area, struggle in the the other. Once the distinction is made we can begin to explain the often seen phenomenon of people who never excelled as athletes do well as coaches and vice versa. Some of the most admirable people in sports are those who conquered both realms. My own teacher, Renzo Gracie, had an outstanding career both as athlete and coach. In Judo, Jimmy Pedro is doing an outstanding job of transitioning from stellar athlete to coach. In wrestling Dan Gable, John Smith and Cael Sanderson are obvious examples of men who made the transition with enormous success. Here I work with the teaching staff of VT1 gym in Sydney Australia as they work hard to create a strong instructional program in the rapidly growing Australian jiu jitsu scene.Working against skilled resistance The true measure of competence in the application of any given jiu jitsu move is not whether you know how to perform it per se; but whether you can perform it against skilled and knowledgeable resistance and counters. At this stage, everyone knows my students have strong leg locks. When they go out compete, their opponents have done much research and deeply practiced countering the expected leg attacks. Yet in the vast majority of cases, my students break through the resistance and get to their submission hold. So many times I meet people who think it is enough to know how to perform the move in basic drill form, and from this erroneously believe they have a working knowledge of the move. The rubric we work with cannot be I can perform the move, but rather, I can perform this move against skilled and knowledgeable resistance. The former will gain you victory only against beginners and the incompetent; the latter will take you to championship level. Here, Gordon Ryan follows the movements of his rival Matt Arroyo through multiple defensive twists and turns and hand fighting to get a fine submission victory against strong resistance in EBI 8 on the path to gold.From the gym to the big show Here is an interesting photograph it was taken one day before EBI 8 at Shawn Williams academy in LA. I taught a seminar on our back control system. Afterwards Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon did some light sparring both to help Mr Ryan finalize his EBI preparation and get a workout for Mr Tonon before his bout in Florida the following week. Can you identify the move Mr Ryan is using here on Mr Tonon? It is the exact Kimura sequence that he would use the next day to defeat Mr Hillebrand in his second match of the evening. This ability to take moves from the gym to the big show is critical to success at the highest levels. So often athletes have all the skills they need to perform, but lack the confidence to pull the trigger when the opportunity arises on the big stage. Note the calm reaction of young Nicky Ryan as he watches this action unfold. He has seen the sequence so many times he barely reacts interestingly his reaction the next night at the big show was identical he calmly called out the steps in the sequence as we have all seen and done thousands of times. Breaking down the psychological barriers between gym rolling and big league competition is a huge part of our contest preparation it is interesting to see such a clear example of it in operation here.An interesting point an interesting point from last nights EBI 8 tournament is the relative size of the competitors. The weight limit was 185 pounds. The winner, Gordon Ryan walks around in daily life at 1878 pounds and often competes at 160 pounds. As such he was one of the smallest competitors on the night. Most of the athletes dropped considerable weight to make the limit it appears Joe Baize was the only other athlete who did not have to lose weight though I cant be sure of this. The squad has a good history of fighting much larger opponents and prevailing. I believe this is due to our strong emphasis of ashi garami. In this position there is no chest to chest top pressure which is where weight discrepancy has its most effect. The most important determinant of success in this position is knowledge, rather than size as there is relatively little body contact. Mr Ryan will next compete at EBI at 205 pounds where he will be very small compared with his opponents indeed. Still, our team is getting used to this and are proud of our ability to use our tactics and techniques to control and submit larger opponents a test that we consider the fundamental desiderata of jiu jitsuThe day after Immediately after winning EBI 8 Gordon Ryan completes a tough training session with team mates Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan at my good friend Shawn Williams gym in LA. We worked in preparation for Mr Tonons match in Florida this weekend. It is impressive to see an athlete coming back to train hard the day after victory to help his team mate and it gives a good sense of why these great friends have experienced so much success. Unfortunately I wont be there for the last few days of training as I shall be headed to Australia tonight but we got a clear sense of direction worked out in the last two weeks and we will communicate across the pacific to finalize plans. Mr Ryan will be there to corner and support Mr Tonon Always sad to leave LA it is a city I have always been fascinated by and always enjoyed my time sometimes I think about teaching here, I am sure it would be fun shawnwilliamsbjjWhen the match is over Most people only analyze their defeats that is why so many athletes say they learn the most from their losses rather than their victories. It is very important that you analyze even your victories. Any truthful analysis of a match will show that in most cases the outcome could have gone the other way if just a few things were changed. This is good news when you lose, but worrying when you win. In order to make victory a habit rather than an enjoyable accident, you must investigate thoroughly what was good and bad about your performance and what concrete steps you will take to improve your faults and maintain your strengths. In this way you ensure progress over time the fundamental goal of every training program and create conditions where one victory can lead to others. Here, young Nicky Ryan talks frankly to me about what he could have done better whilst holding the gold medal in his hand a great attitude that explains much of his current success and points to a bright futureContingency plans One of the few certainties of combat is this at some point things will go wrong. When they do go wrong, they tend to do so quickly and in ways you had not anticipated. It is crucial then, that you have contingency plans worked out in advance to deal with bad situations. Half of the story of victory is not losing you must be able to work out of potential means of losing and back into means of winning. Having clear and well defined plans for defense and escape ironically helps your offense, as it gives you the confidence to take risks on offense, knowing that if you should find yourself on the defense after failed offense, you will have the means to get out and resume your offense. If you dont believe in your defensive skills, you will avoid any kind risk that may expose that weakness. Here Gordon Ryan begins his warm up with our defensive contingency plans prior to a bout. People talked a lot about his winning offense in this match, but often overlook that it was built on the foundation of belief in his defense.Getting the little things right We are all involved in a sport where the smallest errors can have the deepest ramifications. So many times I see tiny errors that resulted in failure at critical times failures that meant an athlete can let victory slip from his grasp and then a short time later suffer defeat in its place. It is so easy to gloss over details that are easy to ignore until the day you really need them. Rest assured that when you think you know a given move, you dont. You have merely achieved a level of competence that you currently find satisfactory. One day in the future you will find yourself in a situation where that level of competence proves inadequate so keep learning those additional details and nuances. Discipline in this regard is a big part of what separates champions from the crowd. Here, Georges StPierre works on his ashi garami attacks with my friend Carl Massaro as I add some ideas. The look on Mr Massaros face suggests a level of competency has been achieved, but like a true champion, Mr StPierre keeps looking deeper into the lock.Controlled aggression Ultimately the goal of all combat is victory. This requires at some point the notion of defeating an opponent through physical harm or the threat of physical harm. At some point we have to take the fight to the opponent in a way that gives us victory, thus there must be some degree of aggression involved, sometimes more, sometimes less, depending upon our character and the context of the situation we find ourselves in. The problem we confront as beginners is that nature teaches very naive forms of aggression. Watch any street fight between untrained and inexperienced protagonists and you will see a comedic array of missteps, lost opportunities and unforced errors as the fearless combatants try to express their aggression with what little knowledge they have. The various martial arts require us to direct our aggression through thick layers of technique and strategy. This requires of us all a large measure of self control in the mental and physical turmoil of combat, we have to insist upon precise mechanical details and refined movement; all set in the context of an overall plan that directs our technique. Building this mindset of a disciplined, methodical, detail oriented inner state whilst engaged in extreme physical turmoil is one of the most import aspects of our training. This is why live sparring must always be the foundation of an effective training program and why those who engage in live sparring have a huge advantage over those that do not. Here, young Nicky Ryan shows the kind of inner mental composure that allows him to focus on all the required mechanical details required for successful application of a heel hook variation he favors all set during a tough match against a talented, knowledgeable opponent. There is no emotion here just cold calculation there will be more than enough time for emotions laterTraining vs fighting one of my favorite aspects of UFC champions Georges StPierre and Chris Weidman is that when they come to train in my classes they always pull guard at the onset of sparring and work bottom position this despite the fact they they could easily take down everyone in the room if they chose to. They recognize that the value of training here is in submission grappling, so they expose themselves to that as much as possible in the time they have. They work on their submission grappling skills, even though that will make their work much harder they will work their takedown training with specialists in that area at another location better suited to that skill. This willingness to come into a room and trade skills with specialists is what keeps them learning and improving over time and yes both of them give our submission specialists hell even in our specialized domain! They recognize the need for an MMA athlete to see the big picture of skill enhancement for their sport overall as far more important than winning anonymous battles in training rooms by avoiding the skills utilized there and stalling away the training time. They come to gain skills rather than to learn to avoid them. Here Georges StPierre works bottom position with Robson Gracie during a tough afternoon training session with the squad.Carrying the flag In modern MMA, most people see an individual art like jiu jitsu as a component of the total fight game. For some, that component is more than for others, but regardless, it is never more than a component. Demian Maia is one of a handful of elite MMA fighters who use only a very pure form of jiu jitsu as his whole game, not a component. His fights look like a perfect statement of the traditional approach to BJJ takedown, positional advance, working through a hierarchy of pins culminating in submission. In bottom position recover guard, sweep, submit or stand back up and look for takedowns. That he is able to get such a traditional approach to work at such a high level is remarkable. Even more remarkable is the fact that Mr Maia appears to be getting better at this approach with every fight remarkable for a man of 38 in a young mans sport. One of the most interesting coaching assignments of my career was helping Chris Weidman fight Demian Maia. Mr Weidman had outstanding jiu jitsu skills, so I was not worried going into the fight even though he took it on only 17 days notice. In truth however, Mr Maia has greatly improved since then. When he fought Mr Weidman, he was trying to add kickboxing to his skill set. In my opinion this actually reduced his effectiveness and made him an easier opponent to beat. When he went down a weight division he went back to his jiu jitsu and refined it in a way that has made him far better now than he was earlier. His traditional jiu jitsu style has not proven popular with many MMA fans, but he will always be one of my favorites. In a world of trash talking, brawling entertainers, he stands out as a man who has dedicated his life to control both of himself and his opponents so that he can achieve the martial ideal of bloodless victories in a violent sport. All MMA fighters use some jiu jitsu, but I cherish watching the fights of this man who uses nothing but jiu jitsu. He has a tough fight ahead with Carlos Condit, but win or lose, I will always appreciate the exceptional work of this lone flag bearer of our sport.Grapple Boxing My average day is mostly concerned with teaching jiu jitsu, but sometimes my students compete in MMA and then I teach a very different curriculum which I call grapple boxing. This is the merging of grappling and striking technique on the floor very different from pure jiu jitsu. I always hated the usual term for this skill ground and pound as it implies that only the athlete on top who has performed the takedown does the striking which is not true at all. Moreover, the term pound implies a brutish, clumsy activity rather than a highly refined skill, which it certainly is at the higher levels. My students Georges StPierre and Chris Weidman were both masters of this critical element of MMA and both could inflict severe damage in seconds. Developing a system of grapple boxing was one of the most interesting and rewarding elements of my coaching career it was done during the change over of MMA from its beginnings as a single discipline activity to the modern era. It created new skills not seen in twentieth century arts I suspect they have not been seen in such detail since the Ancient Greek Pankration and it was thrilling to be a small part of that movement in the sport. I had the privilege of working with students who learned and used it extremely well. Here, Georges StPierre shows great poise as he unleashes grapple boxing technique on Carlos Condit himself a fine grapple boxer during their titanic championship match in MontrealMisunderstandings Quite often I get questions that make me believe there is a misunderstanding as to what my vision of good jiu jitsu is. Many people appear to believe that I favor leg lock attacks over other forms of submissions. This is a natural mistake to make, as the most distinctive and obvious feature of my students work in grappling competition, and that which most obviously makes them stand apart from other competitors, is the use of a new approach to leg locking. In fact this is not the case. One of my major goals as a coach was to correct what I saw as a long standing weakness in traditional jiu jitsu, a lack of effective submissions systems to the lower body. Correcting this weakness has been a major part of my work however, this correctional work and coaching goals must be distinguished from my notion of what constitutes the ideal of jiu jitsu. My ideal is simple to state I believe that jiu jitsu players should be able to attack the whole body with submissions with equal efficacy. This mostly means legs, arms and neck. If I show any bias in submissions, it is in favor of strangleholds shime waza over joint locks kansetsu waza. But my ideal is a player who can attack the whole body with great and equal effect. Visitors to our training sessions are often surprised to be caught in volleys of leg locks arm locks and strangles. Afterwards they say they expected the leg locks, but were surprised by the arm locks and strangles. This is the ideal we must strive for. If you limit your attacks to one part of the body, they become easy to defend, but defending the whole body against determined and skillful attacks is a difficult task indeed. Here Garry Tonon shows his attacking versatility with a strong strangle attempt on Ralek Gracie, progressing towards an armlock, and ultimately finishing his opponent with a leg lock a fine expression of our style in action Photo by Jeff ChuIntensity levels I am often asked what level of intensity ought I to train in my daily jiu jitsu sessions? A basic demand of the sport is that we can control bigger stronger opponents doing their best to defeat us that is, an opponent operating at maximum intensity. Clearly then, we cannot completely avoid hard training sessions where we spar at maximum power. The problem is however, that training at maximum intensity usually has two effects. First, it tends to increase the severity and frequency of physical injuries which can often harm progress. Second, when we operate at maximum intensity, most athletes will limit themselves to their favorite moves tokui waza as these work best in tough situations. The result is that if we always train in this manner, our skill set does not expand as we limit ourselves to our current tokui waza. The opposite extreme is where we never spar or only spar in a very soft fashion. This means we never get to use our technique at full power and thus never develop the fine interplay between our physical body and our knowledge set. This usually results in failure to be able to apply the techniques in a harsh competitive situation and the lack of necessary physicality to apply theoretical knowledge. Finding a happy medium between these two extremes is the goal of a good progressive program. Different athletes will find a different balance, but each must monitor his or her progress over time to see if they are on the right track. Here Jake Shields gets some hard work in against Gordon Ryan. Mr Shields often visits before a match, so typically training sessions with him are very physical. However, when he vacations I always make a point of having him spar with the blue belts to work new techniques and make technical progressUchi Mata! One of the most versatile and high percentage upper body throws will always be uchi mata the inner thigh throw. It has so many applications both with and without the gi. It is equally useful as a proactive attacking throw and as a reactive counter to takedowns. Some of the moves of our sport are so fundamental that it is difficult to succeed in the sport without having them in your Arsenal Uchi mata is a good example. All jiu jitsu students should be familiar with it and be able to apply it. Students must be able to discern the truly essential movements of the sport and use these as the foundation of their game. On top of that foundation they can add their own favorites to give their game individuality and personality, but the essentials can not be passed over. Here Garry Tonon launches grappling stand out Dillon Danis with a well applied uchi mata at the ADCC world grappling championships Photo by Tiago MolinosThe big show There is nothing like a big prize fight to get peoples attention. All of the worlds great sports have their appeal but none of them have such a primal appeal as fighting. Other sports are ritualized, sublimated combat, but a prize fight is combat itself so much more basic and direct. Love it or hate it no one will ignore it when it unfolds in front of them. It is like a look back at our common ancestral past and as such, we are all involved at some level. The appeal seems to treble when the two protagonists appear to genuinely dislike each other. I believe this is because most people enter and understand violence on an emotional level. Most people only get into confrontation when their emotions are aroused. A professional fighter must be able to fight cold, even against someone they like. For him or her it is a contest of skills. Most people have a hard time relating to this as they lack the technical knowledge of fighting to understand what is going on but emotions everyone can understand hence the appeal. The fighters themselves must be very careful in these circumstances. Managing the emotions prior to and during the fight is absolutely vital to success many a fighter has drowned in the exhaustion of nervous energy in an overly emotional fight. Tonights match between Mr Diaz and Mr McGregor will be a fascinating example of an emotionally charged fight where emotion and professionalism must be reconciled.Structured training The overwhelming majority of work that I observe when watching people train is unstructured. It is simply two people or a group of people coming together and sparring for a time, perhaps some random practice of a move or set of moves. This is unfortunate, as it limits the amount of progress that can be made in the time available. I much prefer a strongly structured practice where there is a clear goal as to what the athletes are trying to accomplish and a plan as to how that goal will be reached. I usually find this garners better long term results than random practice. We work in a sport where it is quite possible to put in considerable amounts of effort to make relatively little progress. Hard work is of little value of it is not going in a direction that favors forward progress. If students put as much effort into formulating a structure for their training as they did for the actual physical training, I am certain their progress would be better. People are often surprised at the skill level of some of the students I train, given the time they have been training. For example, when Eddie Cummings fought Augusto Tanquinho Mendes, Mr Cummings total time of jiu jitsu training was less than half the time Mr Mendes had been a black belt competing at world championship level bear in mind Mr Mendes has defeated Rafa Mendes and Cobrinha in competition and is thus clearly at the very top of the game. Even more surprising given that Mr Cummings did not even start jiu jitsu until his late twenties. Yet a well structured training regimen allied with very hard work allowed him to match Mr Mendes positionally whilst dominating the submission exchanges. Paying attention to structure worked for him it can for you too. Here I work with young Mikey Wilson and Nicky Ryan, we start by outlining our goals for the class and put them in the context of our training overall and then into concrete means of achieving them then let the workout begin Reasonable expectations Going into a bout of any kind there will always be huge amounts of uncertainty as to what will transpire. Nonetheless, No matter how uncertain the ultimate outcome and the action leading up to it may be, there are always going to be reasonable expectations that we can make about the upcoming match, based on the evidence we have prior to the bout. These reasonable expectations will determine the nature of our fight camp and even the final drills and warm ups just before the action starts. We begin with a detailed analysis of the opponent and match the strong and weak points we observe with what we believe are our own strong and weak points and start to devise a training program based around that preliminary analysis. Feedback from daily training sessions gives us an idea as to whether our program is going in directions we want and we make any necessary adjustments as time passes. Here you can see Gordon Ryan drilling with variations of heel hooks that would ultimately win his match with the great Keenan Cornelius. So strange to see this photo now and see the very move that would bring victory being rehearsed in front of Mr Cornelius immediately prior to the match. Photo by Luciana Marcos tofightYouth training I always enjoy training talented and dedicated youngsters. It is incredibly rewarding to see how quickly they pick up the skills of the sport and express themselves through those skills. One aspect of youth training that I have always had misgivings about however, is the notion of teaching submissions to children. Obviously there is a danger to the use of submission holds. A sensible question to ask is this is it appropriate to teach submissions ...Prematch Talk A fascinating part of the match between Gordon Ryan and Keenan Cornelius was not observed by most people. Shortly prior to the match, the referee came by the warm up mat to confirm the rules to the athletes. Mr Cornelius suggested a change to the prior rules. Initially it was deemed that if the athletes went out of bounds, they would be restarted in neutral standing position at the center of the mat. This was due to the difficulty of accurate restarts in grappling positions. Mr Cornelius suggested this was not desirable, as it could lead to fleeing the mat as a response any submission threat and make the chance of successful submission much less likely, undesirable in a match where submission was the only means of victory. I was impressed by his suggestion. It conveyed a spirit of hunting for the submission and confidence in his ability to get to it and successfully follow through. Not to be outdone, Mr Ryan immediately agreed, even when the possibility of athletes going off the mat and onto the hardwood floors was mentioned as a possibility. It was a delight to see both athletes express a keen desire to get to a submission and prevent weak tactical escapes such as fleeing the mat and instead demand that any escape be a genuine technical escape. It set the tone for a great match in the tradition of the old school approach of whatever time it took to get the truest measure of victory submission; with as little outside intervention as possible Helio Gracie once fought an MMA fight that was over three hours long! And many of the early grappling matches went over an hour. It was deeply impressive to see the same spirit in both athletes and their confidence in their ability. Once the match began, both men were true to their word there was almost no outside intervention in what was a very pure match where submission was the only possible result. A match of this style is not seen often these days, but it was a pleasure to be a small part of one as epic as this.Prematch drills and warm ups Running Gordon Ryan through some prematch grip fighting drills and warm ups minutes before his match with the great Keenan Cornelius. Interestingly, Mr Cornelius was just five feet away from us as we warmed up! Usually competitors warm up in separate areas, but this time we had a small common mat which was fun At this stage the work has been done and the drills serve mostly to prepare the athlete for physical activity and remind him or her of the main themes we have focused on in training, whilst keeping the athlete active enough to prevent negative thoughts emerging without unduly tiring him. The nature of the warm up will be greatly influenced by the rule set of the match and the style of the opponent. Here you can see a much more laid back approach than normal due to the anticipation of a long match against a very experienced and relaxed opponent.Reflections on rules There are currently several different rule sets used in competition. It is natural to ask which one best promotes the interests of our sport. Yesterdays epic win by Gordon Ryan over the great Keenan Cornelius was set in a no time limit submission only format. This is unquestionably the most pure form of competition as it settles unequivocally the most fundamental question of any jiu jitsu competition which of these two has the better abili...New tricks I always like a coaching challenge. When Jake Shields came to NYC prior to his fight with Rousimar Palhares the most feared lock locker in MMA he asked if I could help him defend the leg lock game. It seemed like a difficult assignment, as Mr Shields struggled in his initial sessions to defend moves that he had no training in. I told Mr Shields the only way to defend them is to learn the entire leg lock game. In a surprisingly short period of time he began making real progress. After a little training he went on to fight Mr Palhares in a controversial match where he successfully avoided the leg submissions of the Brazilian leg expert, only to get caught in an upper body submission. It did not matter he saw the value in what he had seen. Soon he became a regular training partner with the squad. Mr Shields is a nononsense hard working sort of fellow who fit right in with the team. Very soon he started telling me of success in training rooms around the country with his new skills. Last night, Mr Shields fought a professional grappling bout against MMA legend Lyoto Machida at an event run by Musclepharm. Mr Machida has always shown fine grappling skills in MMA and has a win against grappling champion Rafael Lavato in submission grappling. Mr Shields was able to show his great improvements in lower body submissions by locking in a very finely applied heel hook to force a submission and show that new skills can indeed be built on to an established game and that change is always possible if a commitment is made. It was a great result for Mr Shields and a testament to his dedication to come such a long way to learn and in his confidence to use new weapons in a battle against such a skilled foe. Here you can clearly see the great pressure he imparts upon Mr Machida that forces a submission on a very tough opponent.The real significance of this week in Judo Without question this has been the most successful week in American Olympic judo history. However, few people understand the deeper significance of what happened this week. A truly great Judoka, Isao Okano was once talking to a foreigner studying judo in Japan. He noted the foreigner was making a concerted effort to be as Japanese as possible he was not just learning judo he was learning to be Japanese. Okano remonstrated him, saying, dont try to be Japanese, try to be the best American living in Japan studying Judo that you can be. He was making a very important point. When you try to copy another person or cultures style, you lose your own identity and usually you never perform as well as the person you copied. A much better approach is to build a style that may have components you took from other influences, but whose totality is uniquely your own. This is exactly what Jimmy Pedro is doing so successfully with USA Judo. He is creating a unique American approach to the sport based around disciplined gripping, superior transitions from standing to ground and very strong ne waza attacks on the floor to create a winning team and great success. American judo always seemed to suffer from a lack of identity. Attempts to copy Japanese and European models bought only limited success. Mr Pedro has found a style quite different from our competitors and has forged a winning team with it. Interestingly, this style goes in direct opposition to the current rules of modern judo, which greatly favor athletes who use mostly standing technique, but such is the strength of his approach that his athletes are winning regardless. The future will tell if this model will be able to survive the rule set of the modern sport, but the results so far are more promising than anything we have seen in American judo history. With the rise of grappling as a sport in North America and the cross training many athletes partake in, American ne waza will only get stronger and hopefully create a new generation of athletes for this burgeoning American approach to the sport and the strong sense of identity it has created Golden Girl Another incredible day for American Judo as Kayla Harrison wins her second Olympic gold medal! She is the team mate of Travis Stevens, winner of the Olympic silver medal yesterday. Like Mr Stevens, her primary coach is the great Olympian Jimmy Pedro, who has done an incredible job preparing the American squad for the Rio Olympics. I remember Mr Stevens telling me on many occasions how talented Ms Harrison is and how she was not only the best in the world on the mats, but also a truly good and admirable person off the mats she has an incredible story behind her road to Olympic glory that is an inspiration to all who research it. She showed again how strong the American squad is in Ne Waza ground grappling and how the American team is using this skill set to advantage against the worlds best. What an incredible year for American Judo, for Ms Harrison, Mr Stevens and Mr Pedro. America and the world grappling community is so lucky to witness their work and success Jiu jitsu A Bronx Tale Around two years ago a very close friend and student, Doug Pelinkovic, was terribly injured in a training accident. He had a school in the Bronx NYC and I was worried that his school would suffer as he would be out of commission for over a year. I volunteered to teach every Monday night to help give the instructors direction and keep morale positive. Mr Pelinkovic is himself a fine teacher and the students were of a tremendous level given that it is a small local school. I began teaching a similar program to that I use with my students at RGA and very soon great results. Submissions skills increased tremendously and on several occasions when I brought in notable world champion black belts they were put under tremendous pressure by the better students. I tend to be a man of habit, once I start a routine, intend to stick to it, now two years later, Mr Pelinkovic is fully recovered, but I still go up every Monday to see how everyone is doing You can see the results is this fine sequence shown by one of the leading students, Stanley Rosa, who shows great form in a local tournament with some of the techniques we often work on. Note how well Mr Rosa switches between a relaxed body when movement is required and an isometric, tight body when immobilization of an opponents limb is the goal a superb demonstration of a skill that many students struggle with.Olympic hero A massive congratulations to Travis Stevens who represented our country with such brilliance and skill today in the pinnacle of all sports the Olympic Games. Travis fought through some of the best Judoka in the world to get into the finals, defeating his opponents with a superb blend of powerful and disciplined gripping, mixed with a superb sense of opportunity and technical precision on the mat. One could not hope to see a better display of the fusion of standing grappling tachi waza and ground grappling ne waza. The years of hard work under his great coach, Jimmy Pedro himself a master of the interface between standing and ground paid off with a memorable path to the finals. Mr Stevens is the first American male to win a silver medal in Olympic judo since 1992. In doing so he showed that the fusion of standing and ground grappling can produce incredible results at the very highest levels. The squad is so proud of this amazing achievement made all the more special by the fact that he fought not just for himself or his team but for his nation. Thank you, Travis Stevens, for representing our nation and our sport so superbly. Cant wait to see you back in NYC Integrated grappling At the ADCC World Championships, Garry Tonon hits a nice variation of Ouchi Gari, one of his favorite takedowns, on the very talented Dillon Dannis, a fine student of Marcelo Garcia. This takedown set up what would prove to be the decisive finish to the match, a powerful inverted heel hook. It represents a good example of skills taken from judo and wrestling integrated into the submission wrestling game with very positive results. What good are powerful submissions on the floor without the ability to bring the fight to the mat? Conversely, what good are throws and takedowns if you cannot do anything to a grounded opponent? Only when the two are merged do you get a truly effective fighter. I have never seen a jiu jitsu fighter get worse by adding judo and wrestling to his or her study, but I have seen many limit their development by failing to do so. Photo by Tiago MolinosAny time, any place The only constant in the life of a professional athlete is training. Often a busy competition schedule require extensive travel commitments. That does not mean training can be sacrificed. The athlete must be prepared to work out effectively in unfamiliar surroundings at whatever time is available with whomever is available and still get profitable work in. This requires planning and communication with the training partners you meet in location so that they become a temporary part of your program, rather than a challenge to be faced there will be enough challenge out under the lights at the big show. Here, Garry Tonon gets good work in at Ralph Gracies school in Northern California prior to a show. Ralph is brother to my teacher, Renzo Gracie the family connection always makes for a welcome training location when possible.The best laid plans of mice and men As a coach one of the main aspects of my job is to conceive plans of action that raise the likelihood of an athlete winning an event. Yet despite our best intentions, there is always a good chance of things going awry that require spontaneous change and adaption in the face of unexpected circumstances. All the major MMA fight camps I have been a part of furnished unforeseen incidents and drama that could not have been predicted and which had to be overcome. Probably the most flawless and well run fight camp I ever saw was that of Georges StPierre in preparation for Nick Diaz Interestingly, his prior fight camp with Carlos Condit was probably the worst. We had an excellent game plan, the physical preparation was excellent, superb choice of sparring partners, all match contingencies covered, no injuries, no backstage drama, perfect weight cut everything was perfect until the very night before the fight when Georges drank some watermelon juice for rehydration that had been too long out of the fridge and got a badly upset stomach. He spent the entire night vomiting. It was so sad to see such a perfect camp get ruined at the last minute by such a minor oversight. The night of the fight, Mr StPierre came in underweight and drained. We had to curtail the warm up for fear of exhausting him before the bout even began. There was some drama with Mr Diazs camp insisting that both sides have their hand wraps double checked. This was done, but we did not want them to see how bad Mr StPierre looked, so he had to put on an act of confidence and vigor when they came in the dressing room. In the end, Mr StPierre showed why he was a great champion that night, putting on a dominant shutout performance to win a unanimous decision no one in the audience would have guessed how serious a problem he had to overcome. He used a system of pacing the rounds and timing the takedowns and allowing standing escapes to maintain the pace of the fight whilst controlling the action but at the same time, not exhausting himself. It worked brilliantly and the problem was overcome. This kind of adaptation is crucial in fight preparation at all levels.Proactive and reactive approaches to the sport A very useful distinction to make in jiu jitsu and combat sports in general is that between proactive and reactive approaches to the sport. A proactive game is one where I initiate moves against my opponent I am the first to act. A reactive game is one where I wait for my opponent to act and I react to his movement, taking advantage of any vulnerability that has arisen as a consequence of his initial action. W...Everything begins with stance and posture When teaching I always emphasize the iron law of stance of posture that the human body is capable of almost limitless different configurations in stanceposture and that for any given task there is a posture that optimizes the athletes ability to perform that task. Our job is to be able to find that posture under pressure and maintain it for as long as we need to perform that task whilst shifting seamlessly from posture to posture, stance to stance, as our tasks change second by second during a bout. Here, Georges StPierre shows near perfect posture in the open position as he squares off with the very dangerous Josh Koschek, who displays a slightly different posture more appropriate to the skills he possesses. Both men have their respective tasks and both have chosen the ideal initial posture relative to those tasks. So often I see athletes who have a clear idea of what they want to do, but find themselves working much harder than they have to due to poor stance and postureCalm under pressure One of the most crucial attributes of good competitors is the ability to maintain calm under pressure. The ability to solve problems as they arise during the match is absolutely crucial to victory. Your ability to solve problems is directly related to your ability to maintain as calm a mind as possible as you work. If you look at the faces of elite athletes in all sports as they engage in tough competition, it is surprising how calm and composed they look despite the immense pressure they are under. Here Ethan Crelinsten works hard against teammate Frank Rosenthal both men showed excellent use of leg locks and back attacks at the recent Finishers Sub Only tournament and fought a pitched battle in the final. You can practically see their minds working to solve problems as they battle for control. This kind of internal control over our own mind and demeanor is a prerequisite of control over an opponents body. It must be developed in the gym like any other skill you will need it in competition outside the gymThought Experiment Imagine we came across a race of human like creatures who were identical to ourselves in every way except for one strange feature. Located in the middle of their forehead was an off switch, which, when pressed, literally turned them off and temporarily paralyzed them. When you begin to talk to them and live among them you learn that they are avid martial artists and have a well developed grappling style that is very popular among them. Ask yourself wha...Size difference The essential quality of jiu jitsu is to be able to control greater size and aggression with less. In the gym we are expected to spar with whoever you match up with in class, which often entails people larger than yourself. Some, like Garry Tonon, make it a feature of their competitive career also. His standout performances against big men like Marcus Almeida Buchecha, Roberto Cyborg Abreu, Vinny Magalhaes, Rousimar Palhares and here, Ralek Gracie, provide inspiration and live up to the ideals of jiu jitsu. Matches of this kind force us to emphasize different aspects of body and limb positioning, along with tactical considerations, in order to cope with the weight disadvantage. While it would be simply dishonest to claim that size and strength are not very important in determining the outcome of bouts there is a reason why there are weightagesex divisions in combat sports, it is nonetheless remarkable how training and tactics can allow a smaller person to perform very well against much larger people in what often become thrilling underdog matches.Ups and downs This photo was taken prior to Chris Weidmans first fight with Anderson Silva. After battling past all the other contenders for a title shot, Mr Weidman suffered a catastrophic injury to his shoulder in a training accident. I still remember getting the gut wrenching news from him via phone it seemed his dream of a UFC title fight against the greatest middleweight of all time was gone. Soon after, Mr Weidman went through major reconstructive surgery. Shortly after the surgery, my good friend Doug Pelinkovic and I went to see him bring what money we had, food and talk to help. Soon after this he would experience terrible loss again, losing his house to Hurricane Sandy. To anyone in that room that night, it would seem impossible that this man would soon come back in the best shape of his life with near perfect preparation and decisively defeat Mr Silva to attain his dream. Looking at this photo now I remember the doubts and fears we all felt that night and marvel at the the outcome brought about by dedication to a program, a dream and unshakeable self belief. There will always be ups and downs in our lives. In those dark times it is crucial to keep your dreams alive by setting realistic goals in a program toward first recovery, then regaining your former level, and then moving forward to new levels. An odd twist to this photo is that Mr Pelinkovic would shortly afterwards suffer a terrible accident that required multiple reconstructive surgeries. I was already suffering from severe hip problems that ultimately required hip replacement surgery so everyone in the photo went through problems requiring major surgery. As each man went through problems, he found inspiration and assistance in the actions and achievements of the other two in ways that helped him return to his place in the sport. This kind of mutual support is a crucial addition to the goal setting mentioned earlier. One of the few certainties that life offers us is fluctuation in fortune. Creating the needed conditions to create good times out of the darkness of bad times is critical to your longevity in the sport and indeed, life in general.Professional cornering Here is an interesting photo. It was taken less than a second before the submission victory of Garry Tonon over Ralek Gracie at Metamoris 7. Mr Tonon has secured ushiro ashi garami and is faking a figure four four toe hold to create a reaction to enter a kneebar variation. The trap has been set and all that remains is to shift his left arm to Mr Gracies leg in half a second he will do so and victory will be his. Garry knows this, I know it and so does Gordon Ryan. We have all seen and done the move a thousand times the only ones who dont know what is about to happen are Mr Gracie himself and the audience members you see behind us. Yet if you look at myself and Mr Ryan you will see no emotion on our faces though we know already that victory is at hand. There is no sense of jubilation, though we know victory is certain. So often I see cornermen, even in high level events, who essentially function as cheer leaders rather than cornermen. The central idea of a corner man is to offer advice that leads to performance improvement. Yet I usually see behavior that does nothing to improve performance. All too often the advice is so general as to be useless. Get out of there! Does not help an athlete escape a pin. Advice must be specific and purposeful rather than general or emotional. I believe there are a few exceptions where certain kinds of emotional cornering can have value, but in the majority of cases, dispassionate, technically useful, tactically sound advice is needed, rather than cheerleading and fervent emotional appeals. MMA cornering is further complicated by the notion of physical recovery between rounds, but in grappling events this is not the case. Every time one acts as a corner man, one must ask is this action aiding my athletes performance? When those actions stem primarily from emotion and ineffectual generalities, the answer is usually no.Current and past goals As a coach, I often try to set goals for myself and my students. These goals vary greatly in scope and size. For example, I might have a small goal over the next seven days, or a bigger project over the next three months. At any given time there may be dozens of different goals for different people, stretching over different lengths of time. Whilst all of these daily, weekly and monthly goals are being set and hopefully attained, there must be ...Teaching every aspect of the game Here is an interesting shot of myself and Gordon Ryan cornering Garry Tonon during his victorious match with Ralek Gracie from a week ago. I dont just teach my students how to grapple. I teach them how to create a complete system of support for an athlete or a team mate through every aspect of preparation and match. Cornering is a skill like any other. I believe there are ways of doing it which can increase by some degree the odds of an athlete winning a match. I knew that I would not be available to corner Garry Tonon at Fight2Win Pro 8 the following week, so I had Gordon Ryan at my side at Metamoris 7 to learn and practice cornering for Fight2Win Pro 8 in seven days time. He did a superb job helping take his team mate through to another leg lock victory. Metamoris 7 was thus an interesting evening for me as I coached two men in two completely different roles simultaneously Garry Tonon as an athlete and Gordon Ryan as a corner mancoach. I am happy to say both men passed their respective tests with excellent grades Back in action Garry Tonon celebrates another submission win via heel hook over the very talented champion and coach, Dustin Akbari. The match was made more interesting by the fact that Mr Akbari had narrowly defeated Mr Tonon when Mr Tonon was a brown belt. The rematch offered a chance to gauge Mr Tonons skill development since that time and the progressive nature of our training system. The match featured some excellent throws by Mr Akbari and half guard sweeps from Mr Tonon. In the end however, the game is always about control leading to submission and in this direction, Mr Tonon showed an interesting use of a scorpion lockdown to 10th planet fans to generate kuzushi off balancing into a submission hold one of his favorite heel hook variations. Here he celebrates with the victors belt for Fight To Win, who put on a nice event and continue to grow as an organizationTeam culture At the last EBI event there was a small incident after Eddie Cummings match with Mike Davila. For the first and hopefully only time in my coaching career, I deliberately refused to shake hands with my students opponent and corner crew. Normally I always go to shake hands after a bout as a basic sign of respect for a worthy opponent and his camp except in cases where the opponent has been injured and it would simply be inappropriate to force a handshake u...Kuzushi in jiu jitsu One of the great insights of the grandfather of our art, Jigoro Kano, was the importance of kuzushi the act of off balancing an opponent as a precursor to throwing them. In the standing position the act of knocking someone off balance is crucial to being able to throw them with minimal effort and with little probability of being countered. When someone is off balance they must, for a critical fraction of a second, devote all their attention to recovering their stability that is the time for you to throw. Kano made this insight the centerpiece of his art. In the standing position good judo players are masters of creating kuzushi when facing them, it can feel like the soles of your shoes are covered in Vaseline as you stand on ice in an earthquake. One of the most important tenants of my approach to ground grappling, or ne waza, is that I want to take the notion of kuzushi and apply it to ground work just as Kano did to standing work. The act of off balancing an opponent prior to attack is just as useful on the floor as it is in the feet especially when working from bottom position. All of your bottom submission attacks and sweeps become dramatically more effective when your opponent is constantly being taken out of balance. My whole approach to bottom position is built upon the pattern of employing kuzushi generators movements designed to take an opponent out balance whenever possible to make bottom ne waza more effective. Most people work bottom position with their primary emphasis on grip and immobilization of their opponent by wrapping them up as tightly as possible. Beginners typically hold their closed guard as tightly as possible thinking that this is the way to success. I believe a much better approach is to focus on kuzushi as the basis of all bottom position and to feed all attacks off an initial attack on the opponents base of support. Thus my approach to guard work and all pin escapes is built around the ability to generate kuzushi upon my opponent. In my experience this approach always trumps over bottom methodologies based around holding opponents tightly in place with legs and arms. Here Eddie Cummings uses our kuzushi based approach to guard work in a fierce contest against world champion Augusto Tanquinho Mendes. Observe how Mr Cummings, despite being slightly smaller, has Mr Mendes completely elevated with only a single limb on the floor for balance. This is where world championship fighting gets decided, yet this critical skill is rarely taught in a systematic fashion. As a result it remains a skill used by most world champions and ignored by the vast majority of casual practitioners. Photo by Tiago MolinosBig weekend for the squad Garry Tonon wins a hard fought match against a very tough Ralek Gracie via leg lock submission. It was a fascinating camp and match as we knew very little about the opponent other than the fact that he was around 40 pounds heavier than Mr Tonon and came from a very fine grappling pedigree. Mr Gracie showed excellent defensive poise and training, a credit to his family heritage, but in the end, Mr Tonon was able to break through successfully with a fine variation of a kneebar out of ushiro ashi garami. Here we all relax with the two stars of the weekend Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon, who won every match they entered this weekend via submission and advanced our method of grappling in a way that was very pleasing indeed. Now I have to go straight to airport and fly home to NYC and get ready to teach tomorrow morning!Big night for the squad in LA at EBI 7 Eddie Cummings wins again every match by submission in regulation time to win the maximum possible prize money of 20,000. Mr Cummings was able to extend his submission range in this event and incorporate elements of our back attack system which proved so effective for Gordon Ryan in the previous EBI. This system will, I have no doubt, prove as game changing as our leg lock system. It gave his performance a well rounded look featuring both Le g locks and strangles and exploded the myth that his game is one dimensional. His game simply looked several levels above his competitors and shows how he is continuing to make technical progress at a rapid rate. Interestingly the other competitors seem to be following our lead in submission grappling style, but lacked the nuances to make it work. Now we will go on to tomorrow where Garry Tonon will square off with Ralek Gracie in what will be a fascinating contrast in styles along with a big size advantage to Mr Gracie. Thank you as always for your interest in the exploits of the squad and our attempts to change the sport of submission grappling.The subtleties of ashi garami Whenever you attempt ashi garami, there will inevitably be some degree of exposure of your feet and legs to your opponents counters. This unavoidable fact must be factored into your plans as you launch your attacks. Sound knowledge of the many subtleties of foot and leg positioning is essential if you are to avoid being strongly countered as you attempt your own locks. A fascinating example of this occurred in what was probably the greatest leg lock battle of all time between leg locking maestros Garry Tonon and Rousimar Palhares. Mr Tonon shocked many by initiating all the leg locks in the match on the much larger and universally feared Mr Palhares. In characteristic style, Mr Palhares aggressively countered with his own locks. The crowd gasped as both men went hard for the break. Most people in the audience expected Mr Palhares to prevail due to his size and reputation as a leg breaker. Yet it was he who had to break away first. Mr Tonon did a fine job of positioning his feet in a manner that gave him mechanical advantage in this ferocious leg lock shoot out. Every jiu jitsu student must have faith in the idea that Mechanical advantage will prevail over size and aggression this is the proposition upon which our entire sport is based Mr Tonon showed his faith that night. Interestingly, as the match progressed, Mr Palhares stopped trying to counter leg lock and went straight to escape as a safety measure such was the precision and effectiveness of Mr Tonons leg attacks on his opponent. Here the two men go for their respective locks early in the match.Progressive training programs It is of the first importance that you design training programs that continually refine existing skills whilst adding new ones. So often I see people who make a certain amount of progress and then stop, often resulting in drop out or stagnation. When I first started training young Georges StPierre, he was just a blue belt. He would come down part time and learn what he could. When he first fought Matt Hughes, he was very inexperienced and his overall game, though filled with enthusiasm and talent, was unrefined. It was just his third fight in the octagon against the man who that time, was the most dominant welterweight in the sports history. Amazingly, Mr StPierre came out on fire and took Me Highes down and appeared to be winning the first round only to be caught in a beginner level mistake and lose by armbar submission. The next time the two fought, a greatly matured Georges StPierre knocked Mr Hughes out to win the title. When they met a third time, Mr StPierre was a very good black belt in Jiu jitsu. I encouraged him to show this taking the fight to the floor and looking for submissions, even though the floor was Mr Hughes forte and it would have been safer to look for a standing KO as he had done in the second match. When the fight went to the floor it was immediately apparent just how much progress had been made. Mr StPierre easily passed guard into dominant pins and finished his legendary opponent with the very same armbar that he once lost to. Underneath the irony was an important lesson in progress. Time and training, ordered according to a rational plan, can completely reverse the relative skills levels of two athletes. It is so important that training programs be monitored to ensure progress is being made and that degeneration has not set in. Only in this way can you reasonably expect to defeat tomorrow the people who are beating you today.Composure When one looks at the best jiu jitsu players in competition, it is clear that the majority of them exhibit a very impressive degree of composure as they compete even when they are under tremendous physical pressure. This stands in contrast to an average beginner class where most of the students grunt and grimace their way through the session, even when under very little pressure. This transition from grunting beginner to composed expert is critical to your long term success. Only when you are in a relatively composed and mentally relaxed state can you work methodically through the many small details required to make the moves work and make second by second adaptations to your opponents resistance. Remember this it is not enough to merely defeat your opponent in training. You must be able to understand HOW and WHY you defeated him, so that you can replicate and eventually improve upon that performance next time. If every muscle fiber in your body is in maximal tension and your lungs are on fire, you will assuredly not be able to recall what you did during the match to win and thus you will not remember the details that brought you victory and employ them upon subsequent opponents thus ensuring poor rates of progress in training. Learn to keep your physical intensity levels at a level where you can think and remember the reasons for success and failure in each sparring session so that each lesson builds upon the other in a way that generates progress over time, rather than a collections of exhausting brawls that furnish no lessons for the future and guarantee performance plateaus. Here Olivier Taza shows admirable composure as he locks in a heel hook to finish another opponent. Note that he is literally observing his own actions as he performs them to ensure the various details are in order. There is no unnecessary tension, just enough to get the job done. He is in full control of his mental faculties as he performs the move. Whether the move succeeds or fails he will be able to tell you why and how. Thus will he be able to either replicate its success or correct its failure the next time he uses it.Passing guard If you have ever had the experience of watching an MMA fight with a group of people who know very little about fighting, it will immediately become apparent that none of them understand the significance of the fighter on top working to get past his opponents legs to a secure and dominant pin position passing the guard. To the naive, every top position is equally dominant. The Japanese appear to have been the first in the modern era to note that this is not the case. Kanos judo clearly specifies that pins osaekomi do not count unless the fighter in top clears his opponents legs. The Brazilians inherited this tradition and greatly added to it, making it the centerpiece of their top game. The habit of pressuring past your opponents legs to side or mounted positions must be ingrained from the earliest days of training. Only by being able to pass your opponents legs will you be able to attack your opponents entire body with submissions. If I cannot get past my opponents legs, the only submissions I can attempt are locks to the legs. Whilst these are very good and effective, they are only 50 of my opponents body. Eventually my opponent will see my attacks as predictable and counter. The ability to pass the legs means I can also attack arms and strangleholds bringing the entire body into the firing line and making my attacks more wide ranging and thus far less predictable. In addition to making the whole body a target for my offense, guard passing strongly undermines my opponents offense. The vast majority of grappling offense from bottom position involves the use of the legs tangling around my head, arms and legs. Once I clear the legs, my opponent cannot do anything offensive until he first recovers his leg position. Considerations like these show why it is so important for developing students to form the habit of constantly pushing past their opponents legs into dominant pins. Among a crowd of MMA fans, when you see one of them murmuring approvingly as the top fighter passes his opponents guard whilst all around the naive fans boo and hiss, you know you have found a kindred spirit. Here, Eddie Cummings and I tussle for leg positionThree milestone UFCs whatever complaints people may voice about the UFC, it remains the longest running, most prestigious, most financially successful, most recognizable MMA organization among a sea of failed competitors. UFC 1 was the shot heard around the martial arts world that started a revolution. It transformed overnight the publics ideas of what real fighting would be like. UFC 100 was the biggest event in UFC history, with superstars like Brock Lesnar and Georges StPierre and the then unknown, Jon Jones. Mr StPierre fought the outstanding kick boxer Tiago Alves that night. It was truly a coaching highlight for me. I was privileged to be among the top MMA talent in the world a whos who of fighting all stars from every era of the sport and to see Mr StPierre put on a flawless display to win a decisive victory from cage side. By UFC 100 the sport has matured greatly from its primitive beginnings and Mr StPierre epitomized the modern professional fighter in a sport exploding in popularity. Now we are in the eve of another milestone for the sport and the organization. UFC 200 represents new improvements in drug testing. Earlier UFCs had only the most rudimentary testing. Mr StPierres stand against drug use and retirement over the issue prompted much discussion and change. Now the testing system, whilst far from perfect, is considerably better than previous milestone UFCs. This is a healthy direction for the sport. Heres to UFC 200 I hope one day I watch a UFC 1000 and marvel at the positive changes since those crazy early days Positional advantage A core element of Jiu jitsu is the notion of advantage. As much as possible, students are encouraged to seek some form of advantage prior to attack. In this sense, jiu jitsu is the skill of creating unfair playing conditions in my favor. Most students are introduced to the notion of advantage through the concept of POSITIONAL advantage. Indeed, this is the basic structure by which the sport is judged and scored. This provides an excellent and easily understood means of getting students thinking along the correct lines as well as giving them a very effective sense of direction as they spar each other. Interestingly, the concept of positional advantage is only really taught and discussed on the ground. In fact it applies just as much in standing positions, though this is not reflected in the scoring system. Here I coach one of the best means of gaining positional advantage on the feet a variation of the duck under, which takes us from a neutral position in front of our opponent to an advantageous one behind him.Peaking for an event The main purpose of our training overall is to raise our general skill level in the sport of jiu jitsu to the highest degree possible. The purpose of a fight camp is quite different. Here the emphasis is on maximizing our performance against a specific opponent or set of opponents on a particular date in a particular venue. As such, the training tends to be much more specialized and structured according to the time available before the event. As Eddie Cummings prepares for EBI 7 we begin to work on specific drills for given opponents. Here we work on leg pommeling drills in the ashi garami position where the subtleties of the leg lock game come into play. So many people see only the general features of this position and claim knowledge that they simply do not have. I often tell the squad it is one thing for everyone to SEE what you do, it is quite another for them to FEEL IT. People look with superficial eyes and miss entirely the key elements that make our game effective. Daily drilling between Mr Cummings, myself and the rest of the squad keeps his skill set moving in the right directions as EBI 7 approaches...Young masters One of the enduring cliches of the martial arts is the idea of the aged master, having spent a lifetime acquiring knowledge, having greater fighting ability than his younger, less knowledgable opponent. The simple observation that the old masters of the sport never appear on the medal podiums puts this silly cliche to rest. There is a lot more to fighting ability than knowledge. More importantly, I want to go further and say that age and time in the sport is not even a guarantee of greater knowledge. It is my belief that students can be taught in such a way that they can become young masters they can have the knowledge of people who have spent a lifetime in the sport whilst still in their athletic prime. The key is in their method of instruction. So often I see the following problems that limit knowledge acquisition over time. First, students stop learning at a certain point and permanently plateau. Second, their instruction leaves them with only partial understandings of technique rather than complete understanding. Third, less than optimal methods of inculcating whatever theoretical knowledge they have into their physical movement in ways that lead to lowered performance. It is my belief that if these limitations are removed, there is absolutely no reason why a dedicated student of a young age could not acquire a degree of knowledge that would shock his older masters. This is always the way in which I teach my leading students. After just a few years of such instruction they often surprise and delight me with the amount of learning they carry within them. An interesting test of my beliefs occurred when 23 year old Garry Tonon took on Masakazu Imanari, the man most people identified as the most knowledgeable leg locking expert in the world. In his home country of Japan, he is known as Tenth Dan of leg locks in recognition of his technical depth. Yet when the action started it was Garry Tonon who easily prevailed, winning via leg lock against the leg locking master himself. The fact that the match was over so quickly and that Garry never made use of top pressure show it was not fatigue due to age or size that got the win it was knowledge.Favorite coaching memories One of my favorite coaching memories will always be the second fight between my student Georges StPierre and the great double UFC title holder, BJ Penn. The two had fought earlier, with Mr StPierre taking a very close decision. By the time of the second clash the overall situation between them had changed considerably. In the first fight the first in which I ever cornered Mr StPierre, Georges was a youngster fighting towards a title ...Problem solving Jiu jitsu is a constant solving of problems. Problems come in many forms. If I ask you to divide three hundred and forty two by fourteen, this is a simple problem with a static nature. Once the question is asked, the problem remains the same as you attempt to solve it. The problems of jiu jitsu are very different. All the problems are dynamic problems. Dynamic problems change as you attempt to solve them. As I attempt to sweep my opponent, I calculate w...Learning curves Often I am asked questions about the length of time that will be required to achieve proficiency in jiu jitsu. An interesting corollary to this question is of great importance to many of the professional athletes that I teach if I am to compete against an opponent who has trained far longer than me, how can I ever hope to catch up to his level, given the disparity in total training time? On the face of it, it seems impossible. If athlete A has been training 20 hours per week for ten years and athlete B has been training 20 hours a week for 5 years and A and B are of similar size and body type, it would seem that B ought to have little chance of success. It is my belief that this is not the case. Once an athlete has a strong foundation of the basic movements and concepts in the sport, there can be radical differences in learning curves that can allow for seemingly miraculous acts of catch up where athletes with significantly less total training time can do very well against more experienced opponents. The most important factor in an athletes training background is NOT length of time training, but rather rate and sustenance of performance improvement. Most coaches and teams simply teach students the same way they were taught themselves, with no thought for improving transmission of knowledge. As a result, many training programs cease being effective in continuing to build new skills after a certain point. Athletes go into skill stagnation and are more or less the same at ten years as they were at five. An interesting test of my beliefs occurred when my student Eddie Cummings competed in EBI championships. He knew he was slated to fight the outstanding veteran grappler, Baret Yoshida, who had competed very successfully at the highest levels for well over a decade. Understandably, Mr Cummings was worried that his total training time of only just over five years would not fare well against the highly skilled Mr Yoshida, who had been doing jiu jitsu three times longer than that. Yet on the night, Mr Cummings won with relatively little trouble despite having only a third of his opponents total training time a gratifying vindication of our program.Body type and jiu jitsu Very often people will ask me about the effects of body type on jiu jitsu. It appears that many people hold the belief that there is an optimum body type in jiu jitsu that confers advantage over other body types. Even a moments reflection will reveal that this is false. A look at the medal platform at the world championships will always show a wide variety of body types which are represented in no particular order of success. If I ask you to name for me the five most successful jiu jitsu champions of all time, I guarantee your list will show big disparities in body type. There is no dominant body type on the medal stands. There is however, a dominant body ETHOS. Champions always maximize the ability of whatever body they were born with to perform the skills of the sport. Whilst there is no one body type that dominates the sport, there is a need on everyones part to maximize what you can do with your body that will improve your jiu jitsu performance. Everyones body has an optimal weight and conditioning that maximizes its performance for a given activity. It is your duty to find what that is for you and to maintain yourself close to that ideal getting closer if competition is near. Thus any body type can win a world championship, but only one way of maintaining that body of yours will maximize your ability to perform the skills you hope to win that championship with. Here are three EBI champions. All three are very different somatotypes Garry Tonon is a classic mesomorph. Gordon Ryan an ectomorph and Eddie Cummings an endomorph masquerading as a mesomorph. Yet all three have found a way to maximize their very different bodies to perform the skills they needed to win. Thus any body type can win a world championship, but only one way of maintaining it will maximize your chances of doing so.The relationship between MMA and jiu jitsu In my teachings I try never to lose sight of the relationship between jiu jitsu and MMA. This is something I inherited from my teacher, Renzo Gracie. My first four teachers and training partners from white to brown belt were Renzo, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All four were both grappling and MMA stand outs. All of our grappling was done in the context of fighting. Indeed, if jiu jitsu had not figured so heavily in early MMA, I never would have taken notice of the art and joined up. Effectiveness in fighting will always be the most basic appeal of any art that seems to call itself martial. As modern jiu jitsu has matured, the relationship with MMA is slightly more distant. This is a natural consequence of the two sports evolving and pushing in their own directions and the need for specialization to stay ahead of the competition within a specified rule set; but those early years still bear heavily in my thinking and in all honesty, no part of my coaching gets me as excited as helping an athlete prepare for a professional fight. Here, Georges StPierre and Kenny Florian go through their grappling drills in our Monday afternoon class.The power of adaptation Very often in the sport we have to adapt our game around changes in our body. Usually these adaptations are in response to injury or age. When one part of our body is incapacitated we have to adapt our game around that problem and find new ways to play in order to maintain our overall effectiveness. The main thing to remember is that our goal is to continually improve our overall effectiveness in the sport. It does not matter if I lose some of my best weapons due to injury, so long as I can adapt and create new ones. Sometimes this cycle of adaptation in response to physical changes and problems can have very good effects. An injury can make us play the game in a very new and exciting way; then when the injury resolves itself over time, you get your old weapons back along with your new ones. In my own case, I always favored ashi garami on my left side, but after my hip replacement I completely lost my ability to perform it. I quickly had to become more proficient on the right hand side in order to demonstrate to my students post surgery. Now it feels as natural as it used to on my left. Here I work for a rather feeble looking ashi garami on my left against the highly skilled Eddie Cummings the end of my 14 inch surgical scar visible outside my shorts perhaps one day it will return and I shall be ashi garami ambidextrous Teaching to teach Throughout my coaching career I have always avoided the common tendency to teach with a do this, do that approach to jiu jitsu. I always try to teach not only the how of a given move, but also the why. In this way students learn not only the technical performance of the move, but also the contextual elements that show them not only how to use it, but when and why. As I teach my students, I always try to do so in a way that enables them to teach others the same lesson. I do this by trying to explain the logic and rationale behind each move. I dont want students who can merely mimic a move, I want students who can understand its underlying principles. Teaching in this manner has a pleasing side effect; not only do students make faster progress in their own games, they rapidly take on the ability to teach these skills to others. Rather than be able to merely regurgitate information, they can explain information a critical difference. In this way the overall level of the training room can increase quite rapidly and a mutually beneficial training environment can emerge and take root. Here my student, Garry Tonon shows his pedagogical skills with young Mikey Wilson, an outstanding ten year old student. Garry is explaining the mechanical underpinnings of ude gatame, one of our favorite upper body attacks as young Mikey enacts them.Defeat The only people that never lost are those that never went against the best competition. In life and jiu jitsu, defeat is as certain as death and taxes in other people lives. The question then, is not whether you will be defeated, but how you will react when defeated. Of course the initial reaction is always emotional, but after that comes two general types of reaction. The first is denial. The athlete tells him or herself that the loss was an aberration due to outside factors, an injury, a distraction, an unfavorable environment or whatever. The loss is dismissed and the athlete goes on doing what he has always done and goes to the next match essentially the same person. The second approach is acceptance. The athlete accepts the defeat as a sign that something needs to be changed if the cause of that defeat is to be overcome. It may be something small, or it may be a major overhaul, but some form of modification is necessary. This second approach generally gets the better results in the long term though many athletes have had good careers using the first. Here Eddie Cummings and his team show the pain of a narrow loss by penalty in over time at the world championships, but already ideas of change and modification are going through our minds Photo by Tiago MolinosThe iron law of posture For every given human physical activity, there is a posture that maximizes our ability to successfully complete that activity. This insight is critical to success in physical action. In jiu jitsu our ability to work in accordance with this law is severely tested, since our position and goals can change second by second and everything is done in a competitive environment under duress. Learning how posture can improve our efficiency, learning how to move from posture to posture in accordance with the unfolding action and learning how posture is related to the goal of minimum effort for maximum effect is the foundation of the truly deep part of the study of jiu jitsu. It is here that we begin to gain deep insight into our physical bodies and their workings. Here Eddie Cummings and his opponent, Tanquinho, both display fine posture relative to their respective goals as they engage in their match at the ADCC world championships Photo by Tiago MolinosContinuous combat The ideal grappler of the future will be able to apply him or herself through the full spectrum of positions from standing to floor. Once combat is begun they will be able to follow the action effortlessly and confidently from upper body throws to leg takedowns to standing submissions down to the floor in both top and bottom position strong in both positional and submission attacks over the whole body. Currently, most grapplers are specialists who are much better in certain areas than others. This creates a rather artificial or limited look to their game where the action stops as soon as they get to an area outside their speciality. This creates problems when they have to transition to fighting or MMA. Some great figures of the past give a good idea of what is possible for the future. Here is the truly great Isao Okano, who displayed great balance and flow between standing and ground technique of the highest level. Men like him are an inspiration to a future where grapplers exhibit an ability to flow continuously between every scenario in grappling at a high level of proficiencyTraining intensity levels one of the best aspects of grappling is that training intensity levels can be varied according to the task at hand. When world championship fights are close, intensity levels rise. When expanding ones skill set is the primary goal, they lower. One of my favorite applications of lowered intensity levels that provide benefit all around, is the training of children by my senior students. Pictured is the very talented ten year old, Mikey Wilson. He and his father travel great distances to come and train with me in NYC, exhibiting that dedication and drive that is the foundation of all human accomplishment. Teaching him and watching him roll with the senior students is such a joy. Like his seniors, I encourage him to try the moves he learns and expand his ever growing arsenal. Kanos maxim of mutual benefit is fulfilled as young Mikey can move about in ways that expand his technical knowledge and direct him towards a bright future, whilst the seniors get to practice their moves without any recourse to physical strength forcing them to gain deeper understanding of the mechanical and tactical nature of the game. Here, young Mikey strangles Garry Tonon with fine technique and afterwards relaxes with Gordon Ryan after a splendid training session where both walked away as better jiu jitsu practitionersTraining intensity levels one of the best aspects of grappling is that training intensity levels can be varied according to the task at hand. When world championship fights are close, intensity levels rise. When expanding ones skill set is the primary goal, they lower. One of my favorite applications of lowered intensity levels that provide benefit all around, is the training of children by my senior students. Pictured is the very talented ten year old, Mikey Wilson. He and his father travel great distances to come and train with me in NYC, exhibiting that dedication and drive that is the foundation of all human accomplishment. Teaching him and watching him roll with the senior students is such a joy. Like his seniors, I encourage him to try the moves he learns and expand his ever growing arsenal. Kanos maxim of mutual benefit is fulfilled as young Mikey can move about in ways that expand his technical knowledge and direct him towards a bright future, whilst the seniors get to practice their moves without any recourse to physical strength forcing them to gain deeper understanding of the mechanical and tactical nature of the game. Here, young Mikey strangles Garry Tonon with fine technique and afterwards relaxes with Gordon Ryan after a splendid training session where both walked away as better jiu jitsu practitionersLower body expertise Many people ask me how they can progress more rapidly in the sport. There are many parts to any satisfactory answer to such a question, but one that I always mention is this the people who make the fastest progress in the sport are invariably those who learn early to play mostly with their legs and feet rather than their hands and arms. We all come from a modern lifestyle that massively emphasizes the use of our upper body over lower body in fine motor skills. Every day we eat, drive and work mostly with our hands. Other than walkingrunning, the overwhelming majority of our daily tasks are done with the hands and arms. We form a very a sophisticated coordination between hands and brain that allows us to perform physically complex tasks such a playing a piano, opening a tin can, changing channel on tv, writing etc. All of these tasks would be extremely difficult if not impossible for us if we had to do them with our feet and legs. Our feet and legs, relegated to the tasks of walking and running, never develop any fine tuned coordination and remain for most of our lives as the hopeless, bumbling, clumsy relatives of our nimble and dexterous fingers, hands and arms. Then we begin jiu jitsu and find that many of the most important moves require us to move our feet and legs with the dexterity of our hands and arms. To a person used to doing everything with their upper body, this can be a horrifying experience. Many resist this as long as possible trying to play the sport with their upper body as much as they can. These people invariably progress at the pace of snails and frequently get frustrated to the point of giving up. Others make the mental breakthrough early and commit themselves to training their lower body these people will invariably progress much faster. The key is to understand that the human body is endlessly adaptable and then in time you can develop great dexterity with your legs and feet in ways that will give you a tremendous edge on the mat. My inspiration in this area of training comes from an unexpected source far outside the world of jiu jitsu. It comes from people who have no arms. By necessity they gain a dexterity in the lower body that even the best jiu jitsu people can only dream of. I have attached some remarkable footage of one such person Imagine how easily such people would learn open guard movements and submissions that require the use of the legs. They show what is possible if we push ourselves hard enough. Every time I wonder if I am doing enough to train myself in the dexterous use of my feet and legs in ways that would benefit my game, I think of these people and realize I have a long long way to go.If I asked you six moths ago to find a photograph of someone attempting a leg lock on the great Rousimar Palhares you would have come up empty handed. Such was his reputation in the area of the game that people would have thought it suicide to even try. Yet when Garry Tonon engaged him in a match he went forward with confidence and attacked Mr Palhares legs repeatedly, along with a host of other submission and positional attacks. This was not the result of any suicidal tendencies on Mr Tonons part. It came from confidence in a system of leg offense and defense he had put a tremendous amount of work into over years. Despite a huge size and strength disadvantage, he took it to the legendary leg locker and dominated all the leg exchanges. Here he tests Mr Palhares legs with a powerful inverted Achilles lock variation that puts great pressure on the big man. Real confidence comes from knowing you have the answers to all the problems you can reasonably expect out there under the lights and the physical preparation to manifest them.Transmission of knowledge Sometimes people tell me that the only reason my leg lock system works so well for my students is because they train with me twice a day every day each time under my personal supervision. In fact this is not the case. If my system was so complex that is required constant monitoring by me over vast amounts of training time, this would reflect badly upon the system itself. Any effective combat system ought to be relatively simple if it is to be effective under the stress of combat. This simplicity should allow the knowledge to be easily transmitted to others, who in turn should be able to teach it to other people who have never met or trained under me at all. An interesting test of this notion occurred yesterday in far away South Africa. My student Kurdt George, teaches at an affiliate school in Cape Town where he teaches jiu jitsu in between running away from great white sharks, crocodiles, black mambas, lions, hyenas, honey badgers and African killer bees. Kurdt has been been faithfully traveling all the way to NYC several times a year for many years now. He studies very precisely the game that I teach, taking it back home and showing it to his ever growing numbers of students. Yesterday, at the biggest local grappling event, Unanimous a sub only 16 man elimination format featuring teams from around the area, Kurdts students won the event overall and racked up eight submissions, all via heel hook easily the most impressive submission performance of the day. It provides an excellent example of a conscientious and dedicated student taking a system and transmitting it to others with no external support and getting great results. Here is one of his students working the system in a pattern that I am sure many of you will recognize.Three forms of body control There are three major forms of control over the movements of the human body. The first is control over the movements of our own body. The human body has a vast potential for movement which very few people learn to fully exploit in the course of a lifetime. Sports such as gymnastics, yoga, solo dance, contortionism and others teach the student how to maximize their bodys ability to move through its full potential range. Their goal is to teach control over the movements of our own body. A second form of control is seen in partner dance, professional fake wrestling and other such cooperative activities. Here the intention is to work with a cooperative partner and demonstrate control over the movement of two cooperating bodies. The two work as a unit and try to exhibit control over their shared movement through whatever art form they are trying to express. The third form of control is to me the most interesting. This is control over a the body of a resisting opponent who is simultaneously trying to control you. Now you have to control someone who does not want to be controlled, but who on the contrary, seeks to control you. That is when things get truly interesting. The key is to understand that the grappling arts, jiu jitsu included, must involve training in all three areas if progress is to be maximized. Students must make sincere efforts to maximize their control over the movements of their own bodies. This can be done with gymnastics and yoga or some other equivalent. Remember always THERE IS NO LEARNING TO CONTROL THE MOVEMENTS OF ANOTHER PERSONS BODY, WITHOUT FIRST LEARNING TO CONTROL THE MOVEMENTS OF YOUR OWN. Jiu jitsu also involves the second form of control, over a cooperating partner. This is done during partner drilling, where movement skills are learned with an a partner who assists you through the movements until they are understood and natural. Lastly comes control over resisting opponents in live sparring randori and ultimately, competition. Thus the jiu jitsu student must familiarize himself with all three faces of body control of he or she is to make a deep study of the sport.Body asymmetries in jiu jitsu Students often ask me if they ought to perfect the various moves of jiu jitsu equally on both sides of their body. They are generally surprised when I say no. You do need to have strong attacks and defense on both left and right sides, but that does not imply that you ought to practice each and every move equally on both sides. Indeed, the overwhelming majority of champions in the sport heavily favor one side of their body for each given move. If I have a very good rear strangle with my right arm, but a poor one with my left, it is easier and less time consuming for me to learn some simple transitional tricks to ensure I can always move my opponent into a right arm strangle when I get behind him, than it is to learn and perfect the rear strangle with my left arm. Our bodies are not symmetrical, it makes sense that our jiu jitsu game will reflect this fact. Now we must not confuse two issues here. We must be effective on both sides, but we can be effective in very different ways on both sides. Saying that I dont need to have equal efficacy in all my favorite moves on both sides is NOT saying that I can have a strong and weak side overall. Let us look at the example of escaping side pins. I dont know which side my opponent will pass towards I dont control that as much as he does. Accordingly, I must have effective escapes from side pins on both sides of my body. I might have a very strong elbow escape on my right hand side, but a weak one on my left. I can make up for this deficiency by for example having a very strong side escape to my knees on the left hand side thus I am effective on both sides, I just use different methods. There is nothing inherently wrong with the notion of practicing all moves on both sides my student Georges StPierre is fanatical about this. My point is that it is not necessary as evidenced by the fact that most champions have strongly asymmetrical games. Nor is it time efficient, as most moves can be put in the context of a simple set up that will carry the opponent into a position where he can easily be attacked on your strong side. Those set ups are generally much easier to learn than the much more time consuming route of mastering the complete move on the other side. Here I demonstrate an example with the guillotine strangle. I have a respectable high elbow guillotine on my right side, but a poor one on my left. I make up for this by the fact that I have respectable armin guillotine strangle on my left side, though a poor one on my right. Thus I can perform a respectable guillotine on both sides just different versions. In this way the physical asymmetries in my body that could potentially create problems for my guillotine attacks, can be overcome.Building a culture of respect One of the favorite moments of my coaching career occurred at the ADCC world championships. My student Garry Tonon squared off against the very talented Dillon Danis, student of the great Marcelo Garcia. The two had a rivalry and met in the first round of the tournament. After a fierce exchange of technique, Mr Tonon prevailed with a very powerful heel hook. In a gesture that made me far more proud than the actual victory, Mr Tonon immediately went over to check if his rival was alright, then went to bow and shake the hand of his great coach and mentor showing his respect for all his wonderful achievements in the sport. I dare say that that bow and handshake made me more proud than all the leg locks, armlocks and strangles my students have performed put together. Respect for an opponent is the foundation of the martial arts. It is what distinguishes the martial arts from mere violence. If a man fights another with hate in his heart it is a fight. If he does so with respect in his heart he is a martial artist. Remember in the end, whatever trivial differences there are between teams and schools, they are insignificant compared with the many similarities there is so much more that unites us than separates us. Building a culture of respect is the basis of our enterprise. Photo Tiago MolinosWhat is so special about the ground A distinguishing characteristic of almost all grappling arts is the aim of getting an opponent down to the ground. Even grappling styles that focus primarily upon the standing position, such as modern Olympic judo and Olympic freestyle wrestling, still have as the primary aim the skill of getting an opponent down to the ground. A natural question to ask is what is so special about the ground? Why do all grappling styles have this c...A common factor in sports performance the parable of the prodigal money spender Very often students come into the sport of jiu jitsu with very little athletic background. Others come from a background that has little or no overlap with the movements of jiu jitsu. In both cases, the usual result is a tremendous over use of force that very quickly puts them into a state of fatigue. This state is analogous to a money manager who allocates a certain sum of money to get projects completed by the various work teams he funds. If a given task can be successfully completed for 1000 but he over spends and allocates 1500, obviously he has overspent by 500. He may be able to make this error occasionally without a problem, but if he consistently makes this mistake, it is only a matter of time until he bankrupts the company or allows rival companies to outperform his. The majority of beginning jiu jitsu students are like this prodigal money manager, only their unit of expenditure is joules of energy rather than dollars. The common tendency is to spend ten dollars on a five dollar job. This kind of wastefulness is the opposite of what we see in all good athletes in all sports. The distinguishing factor in all elite athleticism is TO GET MORE DONE WITH LESS. This crucial theme must be pushed if students are to progress from their inevitably clumsy beginnings, to maturity in the sport. This does NOT mean that they should flop around the mats with no application of strength that is even more damaging to effectiveness than over tension. It means they should learn to correlate the amount of energy they are currently expending to perform a given task in jiu jitsu with the actual amount required. Sometimes this will still be quite a large amount of energy that will make severe demands on your strength reserves but in the vast majority of cases it will be significantly less. Learning to judge and compare your current energy expenditure with the actual amount required by the task at hand is one of the most vital steps in progressing from clumsy and exhausted beginner, to smooth and efficient expert. The place for students to begin learning how to make this judgement is in drilling, for it is here, with a cooperative partner rather than a resisting opponent that it is easiest to see discrepancies between how much energy you are expending versus how much you NEED to expend. Good students are not just students of jiu jitsu they are students of ALL HUMAN MOVEMENT AND ATHLETICISM, of which jiu jitsu is just one example. Next time you watch elite athletes in any sport, dont do as most people do, and simply watch for the result. Look deeper and assess the efficiency of their movement in relation to the tasks they are performing. You will see that the best all use the minimum energy to get the job done. Learn from their greatness in their domain and try to carry that over to yourself in yours.Olivier Taza Learning the leg lock system A very fine example of the speed with which my leg lock system can be learned and the effectiveness with which it can be applied was presented by the very talented and hard working Olivier Taza yesterday, when he won the sapateiro invitational grappling tournament. Mr Taza won all matches via leg lock submission, including an impressive win over 10th Planet black belt Nathan Orchard remarkable given that Mr Taza only recently received his purple belt. Mr Tazas story is quite an instructive one. He lives in Montreal and trained at Tristar gym under my student, Firas Zahabi. I often send my students, Messrs Tonon, Cummings and Ryan to tristar to assist the grappling program there. Mr Taza was so impressed that he traveled to NYC for long stretches of time, training twice a day and thoroughly immersing himself in our game. Very soon he made tremendous improvements and in less than a year became a very different player. Mr Taza is the kind of student everyone likes quiet and humble, studious and intelligent, yet with ambitions and the work ethic to fulfill them. Yesterday all those hours on the mat manifested themselves in perfect submission victories using the leg lock system he has worked so hard to learn. Here, Mr Taza and his good friend and training partner, Gordon Ryan, reflect on lessons after classTeaching the room On any given day of teaching jiu jitsu, there will always be massive variations in knowledge, ability and attributes on the part of the attending students. There will be older students, some with less dexterity and coordination, some from a different school enough variation to make it a real skill to present a class from which everyone present can benefit. How is it possible to teach a class where both a neophyte and a world champion can witness the same move and both walk away with a sense of benefit? The first thing to realize is different people will benefit in different ways from the same class. As I teach a given move, one student may focus on the grip and set up elements and benefit from this. Another may see the tactical set up component and benefit from this. Yet another may learn from the mechanical elements of breaking. Dont try to teach everyone the same lesson teach the move and let them take home their own lesson. As a teacher, I should be able to teach a well known move in such a way that students of very different abilities can all benefit. Many teachers make the mistake of trying to slog through vast amounts of detail when teaching. Indeed, people often measure the value of an instructor by this rubric. This, I believe, is mistaken though I know such a view will be seen as heretical by many. Students will quickly forget details when presented en masse. Much better to present the most pertinent details ranked roughly in order of importance. You dont have to teach the move in its entirety in one lesson if the student walks away from the lesson with one clear and memorable detail that he can apply in live training and which makes a tangible increase in his performance, that is excellent progress for one day he is a step closer on his path to perfection over time. The very realistic goal of kaizen is perfection over time; not the very unrealistic goal of perfection in a day.Dojo camaraderie The dojo or gym is a fascinating experience in social psychology. I have always said that in order for a person to enter the door and begin training in jiu jitsu, they must have some demons inside. To stay long enough to attain a black belt, those demons must truly be special. Yet somehow, if a training program is to take root and flourish, that room full of demons must find a way to coexist, learn, endure, befriend, compete against, nurture, brutalize and ultimately grow and move towards their dreams and aspirations together. This extreme socialization, set against a backdrop of constant suffering, fatigue, injury, disappointment and frustration; occasionally interrupted by moments of triumph, forges some of the closest and most genuine friendships I have seen. It is a sense of shared adversity towards a common goal. When training begins, the truly egalitarian nature of the sport emerges. No one cares what you look like the only beauty that counts is the beauty of your movement. No one cares about your finances the only riches we admire is the wealth of knowledge you have with regards the art of controlling and submitting an opponent. No one cares about your race, your ethnicity, your age only your ability. In an age where appearance is everything, jiu jitsu is a last stronghold where what a person can DO is valued far more than what he LOOKS like he can do. One of the pleasures of a lifetime in the sport is being around the myriad different personalities in the dojo though they all have a common goal, they each have very different paths to it. The art of marshaling a group of vastly different people in a common direction is a fascinating one. My teacher, Renzo Gracie, with his easy acceptance of every mindset and overall warmth of personality, was truly a master of this. Here I work with a real dojo character, the irrepressible Garry Tonon, as he recants another hilarious story of his post training antics to the squad. Characters like him make training a joy and can transform a room from a dungeon of suffering to a hall of laughter and joy. Letting peoples positive character traits shine builds a team. Remember always that the healthiest environment is one where people train because they WANT to, rather than because they feel they HAVE to or OUGHT to. Getting people to open up and express their positive character traits is a huge part of this process.Every submission hold has its own character we are involved in a sport where the submission hold is the pinnacle of techniques the very soul of the sport. Accordingly, deep study of the main families of submissions is essential to your progress. Each lock and strangle has its own unique character and applicability that is why it is common to see athletes who are very strong in some, yet weak in others. One could easily spend a lifetime of study on just five families of submissions and still not come close to the limit of what is possible. Typically athletes will develop a special affinity for four of five submissions, plus several more as back up in case of emergency. Depth of knowledge counts for more than breadth of knowledge in submissions and indeed, in most elements of jiu jitsu. Here Benson Henderson works on a variation of the Achilles lock with the squad. Drilling like this provides a great opportunity to deepen your understanding of the correct mechanics underlying the lock that will make the move work in the pressure of competitionCompetition intensity The majority of training time ought to be concerned with skill acquisition. Accordingly, I often encourage my students to train in an experimental manner where the primary emphasis is on attaining and developing new skills. This is best done by reducing the intensity of training sessions to a level where thinking and learning can occur. It is a very different matter during contest preparation and match time however. Now the athlete operates to impose those skills on a maximally resisting subject. Opponents are often shocked at the intensity of a grappler highly skilled in submissions coming at them with bad intentions. Things get much more interesting when the intent changes from I will pass your guard or sweep you into a pin and control you, to I am coming to break or strangle you. Here, Eddie Cummings shows his competition intensity to win yet another EBI championship belt for the squadThe remarkable achievements of Michael Bisping When Michael Bisping stepped into the octagon last Saturday night, few in attendance or watching on screen gave him much chance of victory and seemingly with good reason. Not too long ago, Mr Bisping had lost a one sided fight via submission to Luke Rockhold, the new champion of the division and Mr Rockhold seemed only to have improved since then. Yet just a few minutes into the action, Mr Bisping threw a splendid left hook ...Encouraging creativity One of the hardest things for a coach to master is the balancing of the need to impose a direction and vision upon a training program, while at the same time, giving room for individual creativity and style to the athletes. Too often I see programs that churn out a team of cookie cutter clones of their sensei. They are all taught the same approach despite massive differences in body type and psychology. The unfortunate result is a stifling of individualism and self expression. An interesting element of the three most well known grapplers that I coach is that they share my vision a relentless game of control leading to submission, but have very different ways of expressing it. This is due to the fact that I teach a very wide array of moves, including a great many that are not part of my own game. I allow advanced students to pick and choose on their own. Over time, their own unique game will begin to crystallize and take shape. I have a general vision of the sport if people like it, they will come to me to learn, if not, they will go elsewhere, where a different vision is taught. Once I begin teaching them at advanced level, most of the emphasis is upon getting them to express themselves as they express my general vision. Consider an analogy two generals wish their men to take a certain hill that is occupied by enemy forces. They share a common goal they both want to take the hill. The first general uses a system of micro management. His soldiers are given minute by minute instructions from which they are not allowed to deviate. If they run into expected resistance at certain points, they must radio back for new instructions. If they see spontaneous opportunities for success, they cannot take them, but must follow the initial orders to the letter. In other words, the first general dictates not only the end of the mission, but also the all the means to that end. The second general only specifies the end of the mission take the hill but does not specify the means by which they do so. Instead, he gives responsibility to the junior officers to make individual decisions based upon their growing knowledge and experience, so that if they run into problems or see unexpected opportunities, they can immediately react to them. One will be a micro managed army that is only as good as the general who leads them. The second will be a genuine team with a flexibility, spontaneity and individuality that the first will never know. It is my contention that the second endcentered method produces better results than overly strict means and ends methods. At the same time, it is better for the athletes as people and indeed, the sport overall. Here I work on fine tuning to the game of Garry Tonon, one of the most free spirited and unique athletes I ever had the pleasure of training.An early innovation in my jiu jitsu when I was a blue belt in the early mid 1990s I made the observation that almost every strangle hold in our sport has an inverted or reverse variation, except at that time kata gatame often called an arm triangle strangle. At the same time, my friend Shawn Williams came to me with a problem related to guard passing when opponents would scramble to their knees in a quasi front headlock position to avoid conceding pass points. At this time I was experimenting a lot with wrestling moves like three quarter nelsons and their applicability to jiu jitsu. This marriage of seemingly unrelated topics spurred me to try an inverted kata gatame as a counter to an opponent scrambling up to turtle position I would break them down with a three quarter Nelson and enter this new strangle. Mr Williams told me it felt very effective at that same moment I also came up with the idea of a front kata gatame anaconda strangle, but I later learned that I could not claim originality with this move as it was common in the sport of wrestling to apply it as a strangle even though technically this was illegal the gold medal winning Schultz brothers were famous for this. I showed the move to Renzo , who wanted a proof that it was effective I performed it on a strongly resisting partner who of course did not know the move and promptly passed out. Renzo laughed, got up and got the same result when he applied it to another man thus was born what I called the inverted kata gatame I went on to experiment over the months with many variations of entry and finish with considerable success. I showed it to my friend and student, Joe Darce, who quickly became very proficient in its use, particularly out of guard passing scrambles. He competed in California and quickly defeated many opponents with it. The Californians had never seen this strangle and called the move the Darce after Joe something we both still laugh about to this day. Here my student, Chris Weidman a true specialist in the technique, applies it brilliantly to render his opponent, Tom Lawlor, unconscious in a matter of seconds on his title run towards Anderson SilvaThe development of my leg lock system Many people ask me about the development of the leg lock system that Gordon Ryan, Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon have used with so much success in competition. When I started jiu jitsu in the earlymid 1990s, leg locks were largely dismissed in the jiu jitsu community, even though the rules of the sport actually permitted more variation in leg lock attacks than does sport sambo a grappling style with a reputation for being leg lockce...Stranglehold or chokehold? My long suffering students will attest that I often show a fastidiousness that can make me a rather unpleasant person to be around at times ! one mistake that is guaranteed to evoke a nasty reaction is the very common tendency for students of jiu jitsu to confuse strangleholds and chokes. It is of the greatest importance that students gain a deep understanding of the workings of the human body this is an art and your canvas is the human body learn as much as you can about it and your jiu jitsu will improve. A choke refers to the act of obstructing the passage of air to the lungs. So for example, if you swallow food too clumsily, you can be choked. Strangulation refers to the very different action of restricting blood to the brain, usually by constricting the carotid arteries in the neck. Chokes can take up to several minutes to render a well conditioned person unconscious. Strangles will do the same in around ten seconds. Due to the fact that the airways are in close proximity to the carotid arteries, most strangleholds will also incidentally have a choking effect and vice versa but always it is the intention of the jiu jitsu player to strangle, rather than choke, an opponent due to the much greater efficiency of the former. Therefore, it ought to be standard practice to refer to our attacks to the neck as strangles rather than chokes and please avoid the nonsensical phrase blood choke Here, young Nicky Ryan works on his strangles a move he and his brother show great proficiency in, while his notoriously nitpicky and obsessive sensei looks on approvingly The primacy of strangles The submission holds of our sport are broadly divided into joint locks kansetsu waza and strangleholds shime waza. I, along with many other instructors, believe that strangle holds have a special status above joint locks. There are several reasons for this. First, strangles give the jiu jitsu fighter a very wide range of force to apply against an opponent. The mere threat of a strangle applied from dominant position can be used to pacify an unr...Tangled up in legs Ashi garami is usually translated as leg entanglement. It captures well the idea of two of my legs immobilizing one of my opponents legs in ways that make submission attacks and positional sweeps possible. There are many variations, each with distinctive properties that make them good for some purposes, weak in others. Here I work to control the legs with an ashi garami variation on Eddie Cummings never an easy thing as Mr Cummings is himself a young master of ashi garami, having taken on with great attention and passion every lesson on the subject I ever taught him in a way that quickly took him to the top echelons of the leg locking world. In a situation like this even very small errors have have dramatic and devastating consequences yet Mr Cummings displays the calm and technical nuance associated with success in this position.Back attacks The human body is set up well to deal with threats from the front, but does not cope well with threats from an angle. The best angle of them all from which to attack is directly behind an opponent. From here the attacker has considerable mechanical and tactical advantages that should enable him to prevail in most cases, other things being equal. One of the most important skills to develop then, is the ability to work your way behind your opponent and stay there long enough with sufficient control to do damage or finish the match. Jiu jitsu shows its fighting pedigree in awarding maximum points for getting to an opponents back in recognition of this fundamental fact about its value in unarmed human combat. Interestingly, many other grappling arts, such as Judo and most wrestling styles, do not award points at all, or award relatively minor points, for attaining this most dominant of grappling positions. Here Georges StPierre works on his back attacks prior to his bout with the formidable Nick Diaz a skill he used extensively to dominate the action in that memorable fight.Tachi waza and Ne waza Most of the main grappling styles styles of the world recognize the fundamental distinction between grappling in the standing position tachi waza and on the ground ne waza. Usually any given style has a bias through the rule set towards one or the other. So for example, modern freestyle wrestling and Judo are mostly tachi waza sports though each has a definite ne waza component BJJ is a good example of the opposite extreme, it is almost entirely ne waza based. The general aim of most tachi waza styles is to get the opponent down to the floor. The general aim of most ne waza styles is to pin or submit the opponent on the ground. As a general trend today, the grappling sports are becoming more specialized as either predominately tachi waza or ne waza. The result has been good in some ways a definite rise in skill level in certain areas due to increased specialization and time spent in limited scenarios. It has been negative in others we are seeing athletes with incredible skill in specialized domains but equally incredible naivety outside of those domains. Remember always that tachi waza without ne waza is pointless what is the point of putting someone on the ground if you cannot control him there? On the other hand, ne waza without tachi waza is useless what is the point of refined ground technique if you cannot get him there in the first place? Nowhere is the marriage of tachi waza and ne waza more important than in mixed martial arts, where failure to integrate them adequately often has disastrous results. Here, Georges StPierre works on the crucial interface between standing and ground grappling with Garry Tonon.Off the mat When most people think of the life of a martial artist, they immediately think of the time spent on the mat and in competition or fighting, since these are the most distinctive elements of the lifestyle. The truth is however, that no matter how tough your daily training regimen, you will spend many more hours off the mat than on. Accordingly, it is of the first importance that your lifestyle off the mat be paid as much attention as your performance on the mat. In...Travis Stevens and the soul of the martial arts It is with considerable pride and happiness that I learned this memorial weekend of the outstanding success of my friend and student, Travis Stevens. Travis won the world Judo masters tournament an elite invitational tournament where the worlds best are pitted against each other in one of the toughest events of the year to win in jiu jitsu, masters events are the old age events not in this case. Travis embodies much of what I take to be the deep soul of the martial arts. He is truly one of the hardest working athletes I have ever met. When I asked him to be part of one of Georges St Pierres training camps he immediately agreed and became one of the best and most valued members. He would drive up from Boston four hours and cross the border to be first man on the mat and last to leave. Then he would immediately drive back to Boston to do the evening Judo workout under the great Jimmy Pedro. Even Georges, a man of tremendous drive, would often comment approvingly on his discipline and work ethic. Like a true friend, Travis always tries to give as much or more than he takes in a relationship he came to learn the ground game, but always we benefit from his insight and prowess in the standing game. Whenever Travis comes to town to train with the squad the room crackles with extra energy and verve. He does all this with little to no expectation of financial reward as Judo is not a lucrative sport here in America. I always find it disturbing that a man as tough, skilled and hard working as Travis should make but a fraction of the money as the pampered stars of the far less demanding sports that dominate our public consciousness. Like a true martial artist, Travis works through a stunningly grueling training and competition schedule that would crush the stars of these other sports with only the love of his art to drive him. Through it all, he keeps an all American optimism and contagious vitality that is a joy to be around and to be inspired by. The first day I met Travis Stevens he applied himself very well and spoke to me after class. He said, John, dont teach me jiu jitsu for judo just teach me jiu jitsu. He launched himself into the study of the new sport and soon excelled in it. Now he mixes the two brilliantly. In his victory at the world masters this weekend he used a dynamic mix of tachi waza standing technique and ne waza ground technique to break through to the winners place on the podium. Here is my favorite image of Travis in action it tells so much about this man of the mats All American, all Budo built to last. Next time you feel tired or apathetic about training picture this image and ask yourself if you really have an excuse to keep you off the mats...Solo movement drills Some of the most impressive training lessons I learned came from watching great boxers go through their solo movement training shadow boxing. They approached this part of their training with great seriousness. Indeed, it occupied a considerable part of their overall workout and was done with a commitment and sense of purpose that was deeply impressive to me. This stands in stark contrast to the rather lazy fashion in which most grapplers approach solo drills. Usually they are done in a very perfunctory way prior to partner drills before class as a warm up. There is none of the mindfulness, sense of technical perfection and most important relevance to actual sparring that was so evident in the shadow boxing of the great pugilists. This experience led me to develop grappling solo drills that were designed to improve movement in ways that would make a difference in live training just as quality shadow boxing improves the sparring of good boxers. Time invested in this project will serve you well it will give you so much more than just a warm up. It will deepen your understanding of efficient movement in ne waza ground grappling, reinforce good habits of posture and placement and enable you to workout effectively whenever you are alone. Here, young Nicky Ryan goes through his solo drills just prior to stepping on to the mat in competitionThe two faces of jiu jitsu Every aspect of jiu jitsu has two sides a positive side where my intention is to enforce my game upon my opponent, and a negative side where I attempt to prevent my opponent doing the same to me. So for example, in a grip fighting exchange, I try to impose my grips upon my opponent, whilst simultaneously negating his attempts to impose his grips upon me. When I pin someone and look to transition from one pin to another, I aim to position and hold myself in a way that maximizes my ability to move freely around my opponent, whilst at the same time doing my utmost to inhibit movement in my opponent. This dual nature of enhancing my aims while undercutting and negating those of my opponent is a key element of victory. Note that one without the other is without value. If I only care to impose my game without shutting down my opponents, he can move as freely as me and the result will be uncontrolled scrambles leading nowhere. If I only seek to negate what my opponent does without any positive movement and attacks of my own. I will never amount to anything more than an annoyance to my opponent by slowing him down without ever actually presenting any danger to him Here, Eddie Cummings exhibits a fine example of this duality. He has attained a position where he can readily move his body in the appropriate directions to apply crushing force to the leg of 10th planet black belt champion, Nathan Orchard, while at the same time completely eliminating Mr Orchards ability to move in a way that would allow escape. This creates a huge imbalance in movement potential that leads to decisive victory.Skepticism and leg locks One of the most valuable traits a person can have is a healthy sense of skepticism. The skeptical mindset is one of the pillars of the scientific method; all proposed theories are treated with skepticism until sufficient verification is accumulated before the scientific community will provisionally accept it as confirmed. One of the downfalls of many traditional martial arts was the lack of a proving ground through open competition and a resultant la...From rivalry to friendship The very nature of our sport is centered around competition and the ability to gain and enforce competitive advantage over an opponent. One of its greatest pleasures however, comes from the realization that however strong the fervor of competition might be, in the end, the sport as a whole is bigger than any temporary rivalry between ourselves and another person for we are all ultimately united by the kingly arts of combat. Years ago my student Georges StPierre was matched to fight the formidable Jake Shields, who at that time had not lost a fight in almost eight years and who had crushed numerous UFC champions and contenders along the way to his title fight. The fight and the camp leading to it were as tightly contested as any, yet years later, Mr Shields came by to train and work on skills. It was a valuable reminder to me that friendship and camaraderie are more uplifting and lasting than rivalry and advantage. In the end; it is far more important to be a good human being than it is to be a good fighter. Skills in a competitive world and the great achievements they can bring us make us stand out from the crowd, but it is our humanity and empathy that bring us back. Jake and I share some stories from old campaigns after another tough session with the teamThe essence of jiu jitsu The ability to control greater size, strength and aggression with lesser size, strength and aggression One of the defining characteristics of jiu jitsu and indeed, all the combat sports, is the ability to control and overcome greater size, strength and aggression with less. It is the quintessentially human action of using the ingenuity of our conscious minds to make up for the deficiencies of our body. Jiu jitsu is one of the few remaining combat sports that still permits open weight bouts where this essential feature can be tested. The finest example in recent memory was the clash between Garry Tonon and Rousimar Palhares a man who was the very symbol of size, strength and aggression in our sport and who was in addition, highly skilled in submissions, particularly leg locks. Yet it was the much smaller, weaker and less psychologically aggressive Garry Tonon who dominated most of the action winning all the submission exchanges in a thrilling encounter of psychological aggression versus tactical aggression that went the distance. It was a superb example of the essential nature of the kingly art of jiu jitsuSubmission holds The various submission holds are the most distinctive and revered element of jiu jitsu a fact revealed by the point system of the sport. You can be losing a match by any number of points, but if you are able to lock in a successful submission hold, the match is yours. No other part of the sport is valued so highly. Each of the submissions has its own unique character, which helps explain why so many jiu jitsu players are very good at some, yet surprisingly weak with others. Gaining deep knowledge of the nature and application of each of the main submission holds is a huge part of your ultimate progress in the sport. Like a large and disparate family, they are all related, yet quite different from each other. Among the main joint locks, the most basic distinction is among the linear locks and the twisting locks. Here I demonstrate a fairly standard variation of ude garami, commonly known as Kimura in BJJ parlance. This belongs in the category of twisting locks and is among the most important and effective of the upper body submissions. One of its great hallmarks is its versatility; being equally useful gi or no gi, in both standing and ground grappling, from either top or bottom positions, as both a means of submission and as a means of control, as either an end in itself or as a lead in to other techniquesLoneliness is a crowded room Match time; Eddie Cummings goes through our final pre match preparations as he is about to go on stage. In the end, in a crowded arena, coming from a crowded gym and a crowded corner of coaches and team mates the athlete goes out alone. Learning to understand the strengths and weaknesses of your own mind in these crucial moments is a large factor in your success or failure. As a coach I must be sensitive to the individuality of the athlete in these moments each one must find their own way of coping. What works for Eddie Cummings will not work for Gary Tonon or Gordon Ryan. Many a man has melted in these last moments and found their stage performance fell far below their gym performance finding a routine to prevent this is one of the most deeply personal and difficult aspects of professional grappling and fighting.Ukemi is the skill of taking or receiving a throw or fall. It is a truly crucial combat skill that must be mastered for a simple reason the most catastrophic injuries in the sport do not come from submission holds they come from falling body weight landing in an unsafe fashion. The forces created by the weight of your entire body falling at speed into the floor are far, far greater than even the best applied submission hold. Numerous MMA matches and judowrestling matches have been immediately ended by a competitor trying to avoid conceding a takedown or throw by bracing out an arm resulting in sickening injuries that are so severe there is simply no way the match can continue. A good example is Shogun vs Mark Coleman, or Yoshida vs Honorato at the 2000 Olympics. Remember the first rule of combat is not to get hurt in ways that make eventual victory impossible. This is why ukemi, the skill of receiving falls safely is primary among combat skills. It protects us from the worst form of injury in grappling the danger of uncontrolled falling body weight which has ended more careers and resulted in more hospital time than all the submission holds combined. Not only is it a crucial physical skill to master, it also has a key metaphorical element that teaches us about the nature of combat. It teaches us that it is alright to be thrown down so long as we can absorb it and recover we can come back to eventual victory. It teaches us that real combat is almost always an ebb and flow of periods where we are winning and periods where we are losing. We have to be able to recover from setbacks and come back to secure final victory. Ukemi teaches us to concede a technique to the opponent and recover to come back and fight again rather than refuse to concede anything and risk being broken and losing everything on the spot. It is a recognition that fights have an ebb and flow where sometimes we have the advantage, sometimes the opponent. What counts is the final outcome, not any given moment of the battle. A good example of ukemi playing a vital role in a grappling match occurred when Garry Tonon took on the very powerful and dangerous Rousimar Palhares. Many people prior to the match thought Mr Tonon had lost his mind when he specifically asked for this match despite a massive size and strength disadvantage. Mr Palhares had developed a fearsome reputation as a leg breaker and had shown himself to be among the best submission specialists in the world both in MMA and grappling. In truth however, it was not the leg locks that concerned me as I mapped out training preparation for Mr Tonon. I was very confident that Mr Tonon possessed a more sophisticated leg lock Arsenal than Mr Palhares that would prevail despite the size and strength imbalance and that this would enable him to dominate the leg submission exchanges. What concerned me most was the danger of heavy slams to a potential knockout or injury. Mr Palhares had proven himself fully capable of effortlessly lifting and powerfully slamming even big MMA stars and grappling experts Mr Tonon was three weight divisions below him, so the danger of a catastrophic slam was real. Accordingly a big part of fight camp was advanced ukemi training and how to use this to enter immediately back into submissions. We trained diligently in the skill of over rotating out of a slam at a speed higher than the slam itself so that immediate counter attacks would open up. During the fight Mr Palhares exhibited his extraordinary lifting ability on several occasions one big slam in particular, but Mr Tonon was well prepared the next big lifts allowed Mr Tonon to use ukemi skills to roll faster than the lift itself and over rotate back into attacks with no damage. So the most basic of skills, ukemi, proved vital in a clash between two of the most advanced submission grapplers in the world.Ukemi is the skill of taking or receiving a throw or fall. It is a truly crucial combat skill that must be mastered for a simple reason the most catastrophic injuries in the sport do not come from submission holds they come from falling body weight landing in an unsafe fashion. The forces created by the weight of your entire body falling at speed into the floor are far, far greater than even the best applied submission hold. Numerous MMA matches and judowrestling mat...Training pace most jiu jitsu students always train at the same pace and often without a clear goal in mind for that particular session. Learn to work at different speeds and match the intensity to your goals. Very often technical progress is optimized by working particulars skills at a slower speed. If the goal is preparation for a competitive match, then intensity levels will need to be raised to those expected at match time. Here Ms Ottavia Bourdain and I engage in skill development in ashi garami variationsOne week on Facebook I have been on Facebook for one week now. Thank all very much for putting up with my total ignorance of the nuances of social media and the resultant inadequacies of my posts so far. I usually write these posts on the way home after work on the NYC subway waiting for my train or at the supermarket after getting daily groceries and dinner. As a result, the topics tend to be random reflections upon whatever was on my mind at the time with little in the way of order and direction. I also need to start using paragraphs as these posts sometimes get longer than I originally intended them to be! Please excuse the many spelling and grammatical errors my eyesight is not what it used to be and I write all this on my little iphone 5, so often I dont see errors, especially on a moving train! Many of you ask very interesting questions. Unfortunately I dont have time to address them all, as I work all day and need time at night for study and dating etc. Subway and supermarket time is all I have! I shall try to address some of the questions in future posts when I get time. Hope this Sunday finds you all healthy and happy and ready to improve yourselves in whichever way you desire over the coming week For the last decade a debate has raged over the merits of training with and without the standard uniform or gi in jiu jitsu. Two polarized camps have emerged. Traditionalists claim that gi training results in greater technical advances for students over no gi training, whilst the advocates of strictly no gi training claim this is merely dogma based upon bias stemming from tradition, culture and fallicies. The debate has numerous claims and counter claims mostly revolving ar...Dictator and Libertarian I often say to my students as a coach I am a dictator with regards the fundamentals of the sport, but a libertarian with regards everything else. In jiu jitsu and indeed in life, there are certain fundamental skills without which you simply cannot perform well. It is absolutely crucial that these skills are developed and maintained. Any other projects must be curtailed until they are mastered. In this sense I come across as dictatorial and inflexible. A skill as fundamental as an elbow escape simply cannot be overlooked. Show me a student with a feeble elbow escape and I will show you a student whose game as a whole is feeble. One of the most talented students I have ever had the good fortune of working with is Garry Tonon. Interestingly, when Mr Tonon first came to work full time with me, his game was largely confined to half guard based scrambles to the back and finishing with rear strangles. I always insist that a good jiu jitsu player be equally adept at strangling from behind an opponent and in front of an opponent. I dont care what strangles you choose to employ obviously there are many choices, but you must have at least one good strangle that you really apply well from the back and one from the front, if not, your game overall will suffer from the deficiency. I started pushing Garry towards developing a strong high elbow guillotine attack for frontal attacks. Surprisingly, Mr Tonon really struggled with this and several times tried to give up. I put my dictatorial foot down and insisted he keep working. Our persistence paid off as Mr Tonon eventually developed a truly impressive high elbow guillotine which he showcased in several high profile matches and many, many training sessions. With regards more advanced players who have demonstrated a solid foundation of skills, my libertarian side emerges. I believe the long term directions of my students will be mostly determined by their body type and their personality. In class I show a very wide array of techniques under the assumption that advanced students will pick and choose over time for themselves rather than try to force my favorite moves upon them and make them an imprint of myself and my personality in my case this is a very good thing imagine me trying to enforce a jiu jitsu style for a man with a crippled leg and a notoriously unpleasant personality upon my poor students!! When visitors come to my class they are often surprised by the many very different styles of jiu jitsu my students express on the mat. This, I believe, is a healthy thing; as it makes jiu jitsu a very satisfying form of self expression that will change as you change and grow as you grow...Now get back on the mat and work your elbow escapes you lazy slobs!! Dictator and Libertarian I often say to my students as a coach I am a dictator with regards the fundamentals of the sport, but a libertarian with regards everything else. In jiu jitsu and indeed in life, there are certain fundamental skills without which you simply cannot perform well. It is absolutely crucial that these skills are developed and maintained. Any other projects must be curtailed until they are mastered. In this sense I come across as dictatorial and inflexible. A skill as fundamental as an elbow escape simply cannot be overlooked. Show me a student with a feeble elbow escape and I will show you a student whose game as a whole is feeble. One of the most talented students I have ever had the good fortune of working with is Garry Tonon. Interestingly, when Mr Tonon first came to work full time with me, his game was largely confined to half guard based scrambles to the back and finishing with rear strangles. I always insist that a good jiu jitsu player be equally adept at strangling from behind an opponent and in front of an opponent. I dont care what strangles you choose to employ obviously there are many choices, but you must have at least one good strangle that you really apply well from the back and one from the front, if not, your game overall will suffer from the deficiency. I started pushing Garry towards developing a strong high elbow guillotine attack for frontal attacks. Surprisingly, Mr Tonon really struggled with this and several times tried to give up. I put my dictatorial foot down and insisted he keep working. Our persistence paid off as Mr Tonon eventually developed a truly impressive high elbow guillotine which he showcased in several high profile matches and many, many training sessions. With regards more advanced players who have demonstrated a solid foundation of skills, my libertarian side emerges. I believe the long term directions of my students will be mostly determined by their body type and their personality. In class I show a very wide array of techniques under the assumption that advanced students will pick and choose over time for themselves rather than try to force my favorite moves upon them and make them an imprint of myself and my personality in my case this is a very good thing imagine me trying to enforce a jiu jitsu style for a man with a crippled leg and a notoriously unpleasant personality upon my poor students!! When visitors come to my class they are often surprised by the many very different styles of jiu jitsu my students express on the mat. This, I believe, is a healthy thing; as it makes jiu jitsu a very satisfying form of self expression that will change as you change and grow as you grow...Now get back on the mat and work your elbow escapes you lazy slobs!! Early days in jiu jitsu Jiu jitsu is a lifelong journey, however, there is no doubt that every students first months and years of study are very often the most enjoyable. In many ways they replicate our experiences of childhood where innocence and navet made every day an adventure as we crawled, stumbled and then walked and ran for the first time. My own early experiences were particularly memorable as they involved many luminaries in our young sport. I started at a very ...Meeting The Man...On role models I am a huge believer in the power of role models to improve and inspire our behavior. I myself was extremely fortunate to have superb role models in every phase of my life, particularly in jiu jitsu. Often I use the example of my senior students to guide and help beginning students and inspire them when they most need it. One of the most inspirational and the most well known is the great Georges StPierre, whose story can serve as one of the very best to move aspiring martial artists in the right directions. When I first met Georges, he was fighting in the TKO and UCC federations, local Canadian MMA shows. He would drive or take a bus down to Manhattan to train in Manhattan at the Renzo Gracie academy where I was teaching classes on the weekends a seven hour drive each way you can see the level of his dedication and drive even in those early days. At that time he was just a fresh faced kid who spoke almost no English with a strong sense of drive and some degree of athleticism. He was a blue belt who impressed me with his physical toughness, but was clearly lacking in technical skill. I can honestly tell you that there was nothing you could see him doing on the mat that would suggest that he would one day be a world champion. He was just another tough blue belt among many. An interesting question becomes what made him progress so rapidly in skill level from these inauspicious beginnings to the level he is today and what can we learn from this to aid our own progress? I believe there are a number of factors.On role models I am a huge believer in the power of role models to improve and inspire our behavior. I myself was extremely fortunate to have superb role models in every phase of my life, particularly in jiu jitsu. Often I use the example of my senior students to guide and help beginning students and inspire them when they most need it. One of the most inspirational and the most well known is the great Georges StPierre, whose story can serve as one of the very best to move aspiring martial artists in the right directions. When I first met Georges, he was fighting in the TKO and UCC federations, local Canadian MMA shows. He would drive or take a bus down to Manhattan to train in Manhattan at the Renzo Gracie academy where I was teaching classes on the weekends a seven hour drive each way you can see the level of his dedication and drive even in those early days. At that time he was just a fresh faced kid who spoke almost no English with a strong sense of drive and some degree of athleticism. He was a blue belt who impressed me with his physical toughness, but was clearly lacking in technical skill. I can honestly tell you that there was nothing you could see him doing on the mat that would suggest that he would one day be a world champion. He was just another tough blue belt among many. An interesting question becomes what made him progress so rapidly in skill level from these inauspicious beginnings to the level he is today and what can we learn from this to aid our own progress? I believe there are a number of factors.On role models I am a huge believer in the power of role models to improve and inspire our behavior. I myself was extremely fortunate to have superb role models in every phase of my life, particularly in jiu jitsu. Often I use the example of my senior students to guide and help beginning students and inspire them when they most need it. One of the most inspirational and the most well known is the great Georges StPierre, whose story can serve as one of the very best to move aspiring martial artists in the right directions. When I first met Georges, he was fighting in the TKO and UCC federations, local Canadian MMA shows. He would drive or take a bus down to Manhattan to train in Manhattan at the Renzo Gracie academy where I was teaching classes on the weekends a seven hour drive each way you can see the level of his dedication and drive even in those early days. At that time he was just a fresh faced kid who spoke almost no English with a strong sense of drive and some degree of athleticism. He was a blue belt who impressed me with his physical toughness, but was clearly lacking in technical skill. I can honestly tell you that there was nothing you could see him doing on the mat that would suggest that he would one day be a world champion. He was just another tough blue belt among many. An interesting question becomes what made him progress so rapidly in skill level from these inauspicious beginnings to the level he is today and what can we learn from this to aid our own progress? I believe there are a number of factors.On role models I am a huge believer in the power of role models to improve and inspire our behavior. I myself was extremely fortunate to have superb role models in every phase of my life, particularly in jiu jitsu. Often I use the example of my senior students to guide and help beginning students and inspire them when they most need it. One of the most inspirational and the most well known is the great Georges StPierre, whose story can serve as one of the very best to move ...On the difference between principles and techniques in jiu jitsu Very often students struggle with the process of learning jiu jitsu due to a failure to adequately understand and differentiate between the relatively few underlying principles of the sport and the numerous individual techniques that enable us to manifest those principles. Most of our daily training is done in the form of learning and drilling techniques or moves. This is good. However, as you progress you must go further and start identifying the broad principles that underlie the sport and which give unity and direction to the innumerable individual moves in ways that can be used profitably in hard combat and which allow a student to improvise and adapt rather than merely try to rehash what he or she rehearsed earlier. Jiu jitsu provides us with a veritable ocean of moves upon which it is easy to drift forever without direction it is up to us to find common currents that can takes us where we wish to go to find land on the other side. I once said to a friend The underlying principles of jiu jitsu and indeed, all combat sports are as fixed and unyielding as the night sky, rooted as they are, in the unchanging strengths and weaknesses of the mind and physical body of man. The techniques of jiu jitsu on the other hand, change with the rapidity of the waters of a river, since they are the result of the restless minds of men, who endlessly seek out innovation, change and study in order to gain competitive advantage over each other. Techniques without the guidance of general principles are merely a grab bag of tricks principles without concrete techniques to enact them are worthless theories that will accomplish nothing. Find the balance between the two this is a huge part of your journeyOn the difference between principles and techniques in jiu jitsu Very often students struggle with the process of learning jiu jitsu due to a failure to adequately understand and differentiate between the relatively few underlying principles of the sport and the numerous individual techniques that enable us to manifest those principles. Most of our daily training is done in the form of learning and drilling techniques or moves. This is good. However, as you progress you must go further and start identifying the broad principles that underlie the sport and which give unity and direction to the innumerable individual moves in ways that can be used profitably in hard combat and which allow a student to improvise and adapt rather than merely try to rehash what he or she rehearsed earlier. Jiu jitsu provides us with a veritable ocean of moves upon which it is easy to drift forever without direction it is up to us to find common currents that can takes us where we wish to go to find land on the other side. I once said to a friend The underlying principles of jiu jitsu and indeed, all combat sports are as fixed and unyielding as the night sky, rooted as they are, in the unchanging strengths and weaknesses of the mind and physical body of man. The techniques of jiu jitsu on the other hand, change with the rapidity of the waters of a river, since they are the result of the restless minds of men, who endlessly seek out innovation, change and study in order to gain competitive advantage over each other. Techniques without the guidance of general principles are merely a grab bag of tricks principles without concrete techniques to enact them are worthless theories that will accomplish nothing. Find the balance between the two this is a huge part of your journey