Some of your improvements come from dramatic leaps caused by a new insight or mode of thinking, but in truth, most of our improvements are small, incremental improvements that accrue over time to produce dramatic results out in the future rather then here and now. Look for every little mechanical and tactical improvement you can. One small improvement may not make much difference, but a dozen accumulated over a year can make a very substantial difference to your performance with a favorite move.

What pace should you spar at? When you look at the great champions of Jiu jitsu you will see that some moves at a very fast pace, whilst others moved in a very pedestrian fashion. Many people think pace is the secret to exhausting opponents - so the faster the better. A moments thought however, reveals that very different types of pace are equally effective. Dorian Olivarez regularly exhausts even much bigger opponents with his speed, but Gordon Ryan also exhausted his opponents while barely moving. What really exhausts opponents is making them work in an inefficient manner for extended periods of time. When they are forced to carry bodyweight from mechanically broken stances, or forced to follow fast movement from positions where they can’t catch up - that’s what exhausts people. Different opponents move and hold stance in different ways. Some will be easier to exhaust via speed, some via weight, some via tension. We all favor one method. If you’re light and fast, speed makes a lot more sense as a method, if you’re slow yourself, weight placement makes more sense. Play around with each. Make sure you adapt their use to the opponent, and soon you’ll be able to use pace, or lack of, as a weapon

We don’t get many certainties in grappling but one certainty is that nearly every grappling exchange you will ever enter will begin with establishing a grip on your opponent. The better that grip, the better the opening of the exchange will go for you, and, like most things in life, a better start makes it easy to get to a satisfactory finish. Don’t go into your opening grips thoughtlessly. Have a clear sense of what you want to do and what grip will be required to get it done. Learn to fake an entry into one grip in order to attain the grip you really wanted. Learn how to neutralize an opponents grip. In general it’s a little safer to nullify an opponents grip first, before asserting your own. Good grip strength is desirable but not essential. Much more important is the endurance and placement of your grips. Grip training is often neglected because most people learn Jiu jitsu in terms of set moves and a grip in merely a set up to a move, so they tend to hurried over or even ignored, but this is a terrible mistake, as the success or failure of the move often comes down to your ability to impose a dominant grip prior to its execution

Don’t despair if techniques you’re working on don’t feel perfect. Keep two things in mind - first, almost everyone looks and feels like a klutz when they start on a new skill. How you start isn’t important - it’s how good you are when you finish that you’ll be remembered for. As long as you’re making progress everything is ok. Give yourself time and that progress will accrue into a really powerful skill. Second, your moves don’t have to be perfect to succeed. They only have to be good enough to exceed the defensive capabilities of your opponent at the time of application. Very often a far from perfect execution will be enough to do the job. So don’t be intimidated by a rocky start to skill acquisition. Time and progressive effort will work its magic and soon enough that seemingly hopeless beginning may well furnish one of your strongest techniques

When you’re hunting for submissions it’s never just about the pin - it’s about the pin AND getting your opponents limbs extended out and away from the torso. Pins are for points - but if it’s control to submission you seek - go the extra distance and get your opponents extended. That’s when pins start to convert into submission holds.

Jiu jitsu has a way of rewarding effort and showing indifference to sloth. The more you bring into a training session, the more you leave with. Enter the gym with an agenda of what you want to accomplish and you’ll leave with invaluable data that will either confirm progress towards your goals, or make you revise your beliefs in ways that enable you to adapt and change course towards your goals. In both cases you’ll be better for it. Show up with nothing and you’ll leave with a nothing more than a sweat. The greatest power you have is your self determination to work steadfastly and intelligently towards whatever goals you’ve deemed important - the more you make use of that, the faster you’ll progress.

Whenever you have a clear sense of what you want to achieve, the answers to questions come easier. In a confusing and uncertain environment, clarity of purpose is your biggest asset. After that it’s just a matter of time spent in experimentation and fitting solutions to puzzles.

There is no substitute for taking a keen interest in whatever field you wish to excel in. If you aren’t fascinated by what you’re doing there is little chance of you doing anything remarkable in that field. There are a thousand ways to get good at what you’re doing, but if you aren’t deeply interested in the endeavor you’ll never persist long enough with any of them to attain a high level. The more you study, question and experiment - the more interesting everything becomes - especially when done around like minded people.

The biggest sale of the year has begun at BJJ Fanatics! All my instructional videos 50% off!

They say the first step to recovery from a problem is to recognize that there is a problem - Jiu jitsu is no exception. The first step to deciding where to allocate your training resources next is a thorough and accurate inventory of your current skill set. Analyzing where you win and where you lose, what comes easily and what feels difficult. Where there are problems - that’s where you start doing the bulk of your work. It’s easy to maintain your other established skills with a reduced workload while focusing on the areas that need more attention. Make sure that thorough going self analysis is a fairly regular part of your training. The better you know yourself, the better you can allocate time and effort where it’s needed most

Victory in Florida!! @kingsway_hq had a very impressive weekend at the @adcc_official North American trials this weekend in Orlando this weekend! Dorian Olivarez @teamolivarez won gold at -66kg to confirm his place in the next ADCC World Championships with a truly outstanding display of grappling prowess. He was able to show his rapidly developing submission arsenal with a many finely executed submissions on the way to his gold medal. In doing so he showed very clearly he’s not just a wrestling phenom - he’s winning with positional control to submission! Ana Mayordomo @anamayor_bjj won gold at -55kg to confirm here arrival at the ADCC World Championships, again with many submissions on the way. She has had an incredible run of victories recently and capped it with a ticket to the big show! In addition, Danielle Kelly won bronze at -55kg with a very fine run of victories. Maka Vickers won bronze at 65kg. In a very impressive performance the youngest athlete of the entire tournament Joslyn Molina @joslyn_molina_bjj won bronze at +65kg at just thirteen years old! Congratulations to everyone that participated and especially these incredible young athletes! Well done also to @gordonlovesjiujitsu on a great coaching performance!! I can’t wait to get back and hear the whole story!

Heading back from Tokyo: It’s been wonderful being back here in Japan again - it’s truly a special place to visit. We did not get the result we were hoping for - Giancarlo lost a tight match to Rafael Lovato by decision. Both athletes scored a nice takedown each, but Mr Lovato was able to lock on a nice omoplata which forced a defensive maneuver from Giancarlo - it was the best attacking move of the match and earned him a well deserved decision victory. I will head back to Austin and check in with the team to review their outstanding work at the ADCC Trials this weekend and get people ready for an upcoming show in Austin. Thanks again to @onechampionship for putting on such a great show of grappling, MMA and kick boxing!

Victory in The UAE!! Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl had another extremely impressive submission win in a grappling match in The United Arab Emirates at the ADXC Grappling Event against a World and Pan American champion - winning via kata gatame in the third round. Congratulations Helena! Keep up with your incredible progress!!

One of the biggest sales of the year is on now at @bjj.fanatics All my instructional videos on sale at big discounts - 53% off! Early bird sale at BJJ Fanatics!

Working out in Tokyo: @giancarlobodoni was joined in training today Jiu jitsu phenom Tye Ruotolo @ruotolobrothersjiujitsu and his coach, the great MMA pioneer and catch wrestler Erik Paulson. It’s great seeing all the talent gather here in Tokyo in preparation for the big show at @onechampionship this weekend! Mr Ruotolo is having his second MMA fight. His dynamic style of Jiu Jitsu is very well suited to MMA. Between the grappling and MMA matches there’s going to be a lot of great action!

First workout done: @giancarlobodoni gets a first sweat in Tokyo, Japan in preparation for his grappling match at @onechampionship this weekend against the great American grappling icon @lovatojrbjj Alongside him as always is his brother Silvio. As always it’s great to see all the incredibly talented martial artists here at One - today we worked alongside @rodtang_jimungnon one of the greatest Muay Thai fighters of this generation - interestingly he did some grappling training next to us and showed he has a very good armbar!! As always it a true pleasure to be back in Japan. Tokyo has always been one of my absolute favorite cities and it’s looking better than ever!

Knowing what you want to accomplish in a workout is one of the great determinants of how beneficial that workout will be. Those who come in with nothing typically leave with nothing. Those who come in with a goal and plan to enact it come out with either success or a better idea of how to accomplish it tomorrow

I’m sure you’ve all had the experience of trying a new move and thinking to yourself “there’s absolutely no way that move will ever work effectively for me!” Have you ever had the opposite experience - where the first time you tried a move it seemed strangely natural and easy, at least relative to other moves? Your first impressions are usually quite accurate. We have a natural affinity towards certain moves. Recognizing and taking advantage of that affinity is an important part of constructing your game over time. When ever you feel that natural affinity make sure you invest some time in that move - given more time and experimentation, that promising introduction may lead to a signature move in your arsenal

Precision is a force multiplier in Jiu jitsu. In a game where a small adjustment can have dramatic effects upon performance, it pays to learn details that make a difference. There will be a trade off between your desire to implement the details that make a difference to performance and your need to initiate the move in a timely manner. There comes a point where if you spend too much time fixating on details you’ll be too late in the application of the move, but if you rush before the details are satisfactorily employed you’ll get suboptimal results. You must learn to find a balance between these two demands.

Know what you’re dealing with: When most people engage in Jiu jitsu they have a pretty clear plan of action as to what they want to do to their opponent. However, very few pay any real attention to the person to whom that want to enact that plan of action. It’s usually a good idea to do some basic reading of your opponent early in the match to try to get a sense of what they are looking to do and their capability to enact it. Rather than just try to impose your preconceived idea of what you wanted to do, read your opponents abilities and then make an assessment as to what would work best in such a person. Jiu jitsu usually works better when you take the other guy into account rather than just go with what you wanted.

Your vision is set up by nature to have an area of focus and this is surrounded by peripheral vision, which lacks focus but gains in breadth of vision. Your peripheral vision is not designed to give precise scrutiny, but rather to see just enough to convey important information such as a threat or opportunity out of your primary focus. Your vision should work the same way in Jiu jitsu as it does in nature. You’ll be focused upon your current move, looking for the information required to make it work, but keep your peripheral vision active as well, you’ll see looking threats and fleeting opportunities outside of the primary move you’re engaged in - and this information may prove vital. Don’t put one hundred percent of your attention into your current focus - leave enough to see emerging threats and opportunities and your game will improve immediately

Learning a move well will definitely help your game, but learning move linked to other moves in sequences that follow the lines of resistance you can expect from a skilled opponent will do a great deal more. It’s not moves that win matches at the highest levels - it’s embedded moves that work in conjunction with others to break through stout resistance.

The game of Jiu jitsu is the game of control that leads to submission. The single biggest means of undermining that control is movement. When locking an opponent up for a submission, focussed first on slowing or even better, stopping his movement. It’s difficult to finish most submission holds, particularly joint locks in the midst of movement. Take the time to at least slow movement down before you lock up to finish.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video MASTER THE MOVE: THE BUTTERFLY GUARD SWEEP SUMI GAESHI. When began Jiu jitsu one of my main mentors, Rodrigo Gracie, had a great butterfly sweep. I was greatly impressed by its effectiveness. At that early time in the US BJJ scene, guard play was mostly closed guard. Seeing someone initiate attacks very effectively from a seated open guard rather than passively waiting for opportunities from closed guard made a big impression on me. Moreover, sumi gaeshi is based upon inside position as such it combine extremely well with many aspects of the leg lock game. Every defensive reaction to it involves extending and posting limbs - which leads directly to submission attacks. As such I made it a centerpiece of my coaching. It creates a powerful dilemma between positional threats via sweeps and submission threats when they defend those sweeps. You will often see my students start with sumi gaeshi and then build their attacks from there as their opponents are forced into predictable defensive reaction to that strong initial threat. It is equally effective on the ground and standing, gi and no gi. All of my students had great success with it, as did many other outstanding athletes over the history of Jiu Jitsu. If you want a powerful attack from guard position that takes the attacking momentum in your favor every time - you can’t do better than learning sumi gaeshi the butterfly sweep in depth!! Link in my Instagram story

Whenever you add something major to your game there has to be a period where you forsake your previous skills in order to focus on the new skill. Given our limited attention spans, training time, energy levels etc this inevitably means that the more we focus on the acquisition of a new skill, the less we focus on expanding or even maintaining existing skills. It’s natural to worry that your tried and true skills will suffer or even be lost in the quest for new skills. There is some truth to this. Skills are perishable. If you don’t work on them they diminish. So by switching your attention to new skills, yes, this will come at the price of some diminishing of your existing skills. Don’t be concerned however. It is much easier to re-learn skills than to learn them from scratch. So if there is some diminishing of your previous skills set as you pursue new skills, ready assured that some periodization of focus in the future will quickly bring them back - and you’ll have the new skills as well! That’s the normal pattern of progress

Slowing things down - speeding things up: Learning to control pace is a big part of success in sparring. As a general rule, when you are in control, slow things down. If you’re winning, staying winning longer by slowing the action down so that your opponent must bear the brunt of the work. When neither of you is in control it’s often a good idea to speed things up as increased pace can get you past many defenses. Bear in mind bower that increases in pace will cost you in terms of energy expenditure, so be judicious in your use of fast pacing. If you haven’t got a positive result from faster pace within a suitable time frame, slow down and save energy. Play with pace as you spar. You’ll soon find that variations in pace can bring dramatic effects to outcomes.

Focus: The ability to concentrate your powers upon a task is one of the great determinants of your progress. There are a thousand things inside and outside the gym pulling your attention in every direction. It’s the people that can keep focused on goals and tasks that prevail. There’s a lot of things in our lives we have little to no control over - but your focus is not one of them - it’s one of the few things that’s totally under your control - use it.

When you enact a move on a forceful and decisive fashion, it immediately throws your opponent into defensive reactions. Most of these reactions are quite predictable, since only a few options make mechanical sense as a reaction to the initial move. This creates a simple means of closing down your opponent’s options at any time in the match in a way that enables you reliably predict the next move. If you continue this cycle the options for the opponent get fewer still - and that is when victory is at hand. Never just perform a move. Perform a move with your focus on the next in response to anticipated reactions. That’s the real skill of the game

Learn to see past the current move: Jiu jitsu is a very engaging sport. There is so much resistance to whatever move you’re currently attempting that it’s easy to get so caught up in the execution of that move that you can think of nothing else. You must teach yourself to see past that move into the next two or three moves. In a world where the majority of moves fail against resistance, victory usually goes to the person who sees the next moves even as they are executing the first, so that if the resistance proves too strong, they immediately go into the next move. Myopia is a fault to be corrected in life and also in Jiu jitsu - see past this move and have a plan for the next and you’ll bypass resistance more often than not.

Once you’ve decided that the application of a given move has an acceptably high probability of success - that’s the time to go in with full commitment. Most of the time it’s good to play with a relaxed body, but when it’s time to score or submit and you believe you have a real chance of doing so - this is not the time for half heartedness - go in with real commitment. Even the most well applied move has a minimum horsepower rating in order to be effective against a tough resisting opponent - make sure you exceed that level.

Keep developing your conceptual understanding of a skill and the context around it. There’s always some nuance that were it revealed to you whether under the pressure of live training, experimentation or advice from a peer or coach, could provide immediate performance benefits. When depth of understanding meets realistic live training they form a synergy that creates growth that will carry you to your goals

Developing finesse: When it’s time to learn a move, your first goal is basic function - can you apply the move successfully against resistance where success is usually measured with a score, preventing a score, escaping a bad position or submission or some other form of success? Once you’re functionally capable, the goal is to go further and sharpen the move to a level you you can do more than just be functionally effective with it - the goal is to express it with finesse. This is important because finesse almost always demonstrates more than style - it demonstrates efficiency. When you can perform a move with ease and grace it’s clear that you are not using strength get the move to work. Remember the goal is not just to make the move work, the goal is to make it work with maximum efficiency. This preserves strength and helps you last longer in a tough match so that you can exhaust opponents without exhausting yourself first. Don’t be satisfied with function alone. See function as the big first step in learning, but always go further and look to express that functionality with finesse

Breathing is among the most basic operations of the human body. We do it all day every day and it is so automatic we barely think about for years at a time - yet the second our breathing becomes labored or difficult it’s the immediately the ONLY thing we think about. Any time you are involved in stressful physical activity, breathing becomes even more important than usual. Your ability to complete an arduous task is heavily bound up with your ability to regulate your breathing throughout that task until completion. Typically when we are sparring in Jiu jitsu, our mind is focused upon the performance of technical skills - but never forget that breathing is itself a skill. In ordinary circumstances it’s a skill so basic we largely ignore it - but under heavy physical pressure it’s a skill so important that if you lose control over it, no other skill will make up for it. Sometimes when you’re sparring, particularly against a very evenly matched partner where you know it’s gong to be a hard physical battle - set some time aside to practice breathing as a skill. Learn to slow action and use breathing to stave off any encroaching oxygen debt. Experiment with different depths and cadences of breathing and learn how to recharge your batteries in the midst of action. It may not be the usual type of skill you work on, but it’s a truly important skill nonetheless

Strength is only as useful as your capacity to organize it effectively so that it supports effective action. Organized lesser strength will always defeat disorganized greater raw strength. Getting your movement organized into coherent action is central motivation for training. Regardless of your mode of training, engage with your skill development with this mindset and you’ll go far

Learning new moves vs refining existing moves: We all want to make progress as quickly as possible. Part of that progress is learning new moves. Over time this becomes essential. Be aware however, that if you have only a short amount of time in which to make progress, it’s often wise to focus on refining moves you already employ and use well, rather than try to learn an entirely new move or set of moves. Starting anything from the ground up is always innately more difficult and time consuming than modifying or adding to something already established - Jiu jitsu is no exception. You’d be amazed how much you can add to one of your favorite moves just by adding a new set up, or combining it with another move in a new combination. Simple additions like these can often get nearly as much performance improvement for your overall game as entirely new moves at a fraction of the cost of time and effort. If you’re looking for maximum “bang for the buck” in upgrading your game, start by refining or adding to what you already have.

Keep making projects for yourself: Everything you learn in Jiu jitsu takes time. Typically you start every skill you learn in a state of incompetence and work towards competence and then onward on the long path to mastery. Look at each one of them as a project. The more effort and thought you out into each project, the better the results. You can postpone a project any time to switch to something else, don’t worry, you can always return to it later. At any given time you should have a small set of projects that you’re working on - too many and nothing will be done on any of them. You should know exactly what are and how far you aim to take them. The worst times for training progress in my career were always times when I had no projects I was working on due to distractions etc. Take time to continuously find and start projects. Just a few at a time. If they prove to be a dead end street - abandon them. If they show promise, keep going

When did you feel like you started to develop that was distinctively yours? Self expression through technique is a big part of your development over the years. We each carry a unique body and personality when we enter the game - that’s certainly a big factor in the development of a personal game, but there are other important factors too. Was it a mentor or role model that influenced you a certain way? Perhaps a formative experience that helped shape your game? The emergence of a trend across the sport that you followed? Did you realize yourself that your game was crystallizing in a certain way? Or did your colleagues tell you that you were getting good in certain areas and this made you introspect and agree with them? I think all of those elements appear and play a role in our development over the course of years. Typically the first stages appear organically, but once you recognize them, you tend to reinforce them deliberately.

Thank you!!! I had a fun day teaching alongside some of my former students at B team/Simple Man Martial Arts this afternoon in support of Ezekiel Zurita, a local grappler who recently had to go through emergency brain surgery on the day he was supposed to get married. Over the last week the incredible generosity of all of you has made a truly impressive impact of his ability to cover the initial medical costs of the surgery. Even as we taught today we got the good news that he is breathing without a ventilator now and slowing coming out of a medically induced coma. Just a few days ago he was given no more than 50/50 odds of survival but things are improving now. Thank you to Trish Ryan, mother of Gordon and Nicky Ryan who got the ball rolling. As always, whenever things get crazy it’s always the Mom who sorts things out! . Thank you to Nicky Rod, Demian Anderson, Ethan Crelinsten and Nicky Ryan for organizing the venue and welcoming everyone into their school. Thank you to all the many people who packed out the venue today learning some Jiu jitsu and supporting Ezekiel - I know there are many other things you could be doing on a Sunday afternoon in Austin - thanks so much for coming on short notice! And thank you all so much who gave so generously over the last five days for Ezekiel’s Gofundme! Wishing you all the best!

It’s not the act of getting to a position of advantage that’s so tough, it’s being able to maintain and then use it profitably that’s the hard part. The highest rewards come from what you can do with the advantages you’ve created. Getting a good position is really just the start of the story. Make sure you put plenty of focus on how you use it as well.

It’s normal to worry that other people around you are making faster progress than you are. Some people appear so talented and always seem to learn faster than you. You feel the effect of their improvement every time you train but you rarely feel the effect of your own improvements. Don’t worry. The rate of your progress is almost never as decisive in determining your final level in Jiu jitsu as the training time you accumulate while still making acceptable progress. Imagine you had a truly exceptional team mate who made incredible learning progress more than twice as fast as you, but who burned out after two years of training, while you stayed the course and made average progress for six years. You will find yourself at a higher level than he ever achieved. Rate of progress is important, but even more so is the time you spend in a positive state of progress. Patience has won many races that seemed lost. The only thing that is unacceptable is zero progress - but that is rare. As long as you’re making satisfactory progress, the amount of time you spend in the activity will usually prove more important than how fast you’re progressing over a shorter period. So don’t worry too much about the people around you, focussed more on a sustainable program that will keep you engaged at a satisfactory rate for the long term

You’re in a sport where a single pertinent additional detail can make a real difference to performance of a skill almost immediately. Most often you need to experience a problem as a motivation to hunt for such details as a solution to that problem - sometimes you see that detail being taught and it just makes intuitive sense, either way, it can be a shortcut to better performance. So stay inquisitive and open minded, and of course, ready to test any new ideas under realistic sparring conditions - this will help ensure you keep progressing towards your grappling goals.

Let’s get together: Ezekiel Eze Zurita @buba_bjj is a jiu jitsu athlete from South America who has lived and trained here in Austin the last five years. He was a real fixture in local Jiu jitsu and helped us and other schools a lot as a training partner. Our ADCC camps would not have been the same without him. Sadly he has fallen gravely ill with a brain tumor which has been operated on over the last week. He has racked up considerable medical expenses as a result. Ezekiel is friends with Trish Ryan, mother of Gordon and Nicky and she suggested an open mat to help raise money for Ezekiel. I will go to B Team/ Simple man martial arts @bteamjj on Sunday 12 October at 12:30pm to teach a one hour class with open mat afterwards to help with Ezekiel’s medical cost - all proceeds to his cause. Thank you to Trish and Nicky for facilitating this - looking forward to seeing you on Sunday! Let’s help a good man get back on his feet! Link for Gofundme in my Instagram story

One of the biggest sales of the year just started at @bjj.fanatics All my instructional videos 53% off for the next few days!!

Grip: Every grappling engagement begins with grip. How you grip your opponent will affect the rest of that engagement. When you grip with power and authority it will immediately throw your opponent into a cautious and defensive demeanor. When you grip naively and weakly you’re setting yourself up to be immediately countered. Your grip must be mated to your purpose. Have an idea of what you want to accomplish and grip accordingly. Just coming and putting hands on opponents with no sense of purpose will be disastrous against a good opponent. Know what you want to do and know how best to grip to achieve that aim - follow this approach and the opening of every engagement will generally go your way

Come into a workout with a goal and a plan and you’ll leave with a result. It doesn’t matter whether it’s a good or bad result, either way it’s feedback for tomorrow’s session. Come into a workout with no idea what you’re doing and the session will however good as fate determines and it will have no relevance to tomorrow. One approach leads to certain progress over time, the other to frivolous, happy go lucky outcomes that are forgotten the moment you walk out the door

Every good business devotes time to periodically assess its inventory. You have to do the same yourself, only you’ll be doing an assessment of your skill inventory. Athletes who have a strong sense of what they’re good at, what they’re not good at and what they need to work on, typically do better over time than athletes who just randomly pile up skills over time. The ancient Greeks said it best - KNOW THYSELF. That’s the first step to continual progress.

When it’s time to solve problems - staying calm is half the battle - Jiu jitsu is no exception. No one ever became a better problem solver by working more frantically or emotionally. Stay focused on the task, but not so focused that you overlook potential solutions by being too narrow in your survey of possibilities. Make sure the task takes precedence over any else you might be feeling at the time. The more task focused you become, the less room you give for destructive emotions and feelings to take your attention away from what needs to be done

What’s next? Jiu jitsu is a game with very clearly specified goals - to pass an opponents guard, to get to a scoring position, to take an opponent down etc etc which we generally try to achieve via moves, yet the moves are subsidiary to the goals, but we are more likely to achieve those goals when we execute those moves well. This tricky relationship between goals and moves is always a difficult path to navigate in training. The only certainty is that you’ll face resistance every time you go to apply a move or fight towards a goal. As such, most of your attempts will fail in the face of that resistance. It’s vital then, that you always have a clear sense of what you will do next. If most attempts are bound to fail, have a strong next option, whether it be an adaptation or a completely different move, is essential to bypass resistance. Train your mind to think ahead, but not so far that you don’t apply the first moves forcefully, but enough that the first line of resistance doesn’t stop you in your tracks.

A study of Jiu jitsu is essentially a study of the strengths and weaknesses of the human body. The opponents body is the target of all our attacks and our own body is the means by which we make those attacks. We want to use the strengths of our own body to attack the weaknesses of our opponents body in order to maximize our chances. On a superficial level there are obvious and important facts about the body that initially guide us - the human body is well adapted to deal with threats from the front, but not the back. The upper body is much weaker than the lower body. One side is always (almost always) stronger and better coordinated than the other. As your study deepens you will uncover myriad other strengths and weaknesses more subtle than these. All of them are valuable to your study of Jiu jitsu.

You can always extracting more from a training session by having a clear sense of what you want to accomplish and a plan for how you will create the conditions necessary to make those accomplishments happen. If you fail to accomplish those goals, or do so in a way that is unsatisfactory, then you will need a post workout analysis that makes recommendations for the subsequent training session. If you show up to a workout with nothing, it’s very likely you’ll leave with nothing. But if you show up with a goal and a plan, you’ll either succeed or, should you fail, you have data that will help you succeed tomorrow - either way it’s a much better result that arriving and leaving empty handed

What was the first submission hold you ever finished when you began jiu jitsu? Why do you think it was that particular submission hold? Was it heavily emphasized in your coach’s program? Was it random? Was it just something that was available at that moment? Perhaps due to an oversight by your opponent? Was it a formative and memorable experience? I can clearly remember my first real submission success - an arm bar from guard. I remember it mostly because it was surprising. I was an atrocious student when I began, with no aptitude for submissions, so I just got on top of people and squeezed them 😂😂 It wasn’t until I got reprimanded by my long suffering teacher, Renzo Gracie, who admonished me for never playing bottom position and attempting real moves, that finally I started trying genuine submissions. When I got one to work it was truly a formative moment. In a second, I learned the move worked and that I could do it if I tried hard over time. Getting some early success is a big part of what makes us focus on a particular move or area of Jiu jitsu.

The most fundamental and obvious form of control in Jiu jitsu is control over movement. When you first begin you have to learn to control the movement of your own body, but soon your focus will switch to the real challenge - controlling the movement of a skilled opponents body. The better your grips and the better your positioning the easier this will be. When you get to a good position take some time to practice the skill of restricting movement. When you feel you are becoming good at this, work to the next level, which is to DIRECT an opponent’s movement by allowing a pathway to open - a pathway that you control. This is the kind of control you want to build towards

Your skills are highly perishable. All the hard work you’ve done to accrue them can be undone over time with neglect. The good news is that if you’ve embodied them well they can be regained much more quickly than you originally learned them. More importantly they can be maintained much more easily than learned - so if you’re pressed for training - don’t despair - you can maintain your level even with a greatly reduced training schedule. There is a big difference between less training and no training.

How well you react in a bad situation will be a direct reflection of the amount of time you’ve spent there previously and how much knowledge and skill that time allowed you to accrue. Training offense is fun, but training defense is a necessity, make sure your training program reflects this.

The game of Jiu jitsu swings constantly between offense and defense. A great sign of developing maturity and sophistication in your game is the narrowing of the two so that defensive responsibility is built into all your offense and offensive possibilities are built into all of your defense. The more you can merge the two, the better your game will become. Typically you practice them as separate facets of the game, but in actuality you will need to draw them close together

Many athletes are able to give one hundred percent of their effort in hard physical training and go to the point of exhaustion; but far fewer are willing to do the same with mental effort. As the saying goes, the hardest work is hard thinking. As necessary and beneficial as hard physical work is, its effect is greatly curtailed if you’re applying it in the wrong directions. Put time into your thought processes before and after training to check to see if that hard physical work is being applied in an efficient manner. Ask questions about the direction and efficacy of your work. Hard work is impressive but it’s well directed hard work that makes champions and that means taking some time to periodically think hard about the directions that work is taking you

How fast should I be going in training? That’s a great question. Obviously you want to move quickly enough that you can keep abreast of your opponents attempts at offense. You can’t allow a situation where you are moving so slowly that an opponent has an automatic speed advantage that you are always playing catch up. More importantly however, you want to move at a speed that doesn’t exceed your ability to furnish sound answers to the problems you’re trying to overcome as you spar your opponent. Sometimes this will be faster, sometimes slower, it will depend how fast the other guy is moving and how quickly you can perceive and act upon information around you. Learning to find this pace is a big part of your development in sparring.

The big Fall sale at BJJ Fanatics has started! All my instructional videos 49% off for next few days!

Frustration and longevity: A vital key to Jiu jitsu progress is a long term mindset. We all have expectations about where we want to be and often these clash with what actually transpires in training. Jiu jitsu generally rewards the patient and punishes the overly hasty. This doesn’t mean slacking off in training - it’s means tempering your expectations as to what you can expect out of the input you’ve put into training. In many cases you can definitely reduce the time required to get to a given level with good training protocols, but there is a certain amount of time and effort required regardless of how good your training methods may be or how passionately you engage with the sport. Keeping your expectations realistic a big part of your longevity because when there is misalignment between expectations and reality - this is the most common source of frustration and frustration is among the most common causes of quitting the game. Keep your expectations high - that’s crucial in the quest for excellence, but balance them with realism as to how quickly these will be attained and use them to elevate performance rather than plague you with feelings of frustration. As long as you’re participating you’ve got the chance to reach your potential, so don’t create conditions that might end your participation completely. At the end of the day you’ll be remembered much more for the height you reached rather than how long it took to get there.

Jiu jitsu is largely a game of problem solving under pressure. I can’t think of a single instance where our ability to solve problems is enhanced by getting more emotional or agitated. As such, it’s important to be able to keep your mental faculties in check as you train. Keeping yourself in an analytical mindset is a big help in avoiding the traps of emotional responses to problems as you’re sparring or competing. When the intensity of a match increases and things are heating up quickly, keep your mind cold and analytical - you’ll need it to help solve the second by second problems you’ll need to solve to determine winner and loser

In a game where the difference between success and failure can often be measured in inches and seconds, attention to detail will always be important. However, make sure you import and learn those details at a rate that you can manifest successfully in live sparring. Remember that time is a factor in application. If you’re delaying action in order to accommodate some aspect of mechanical detail - that delay might confound you as surely as inattention to relevant details. Finding a satisfactory balance between the need for precision and the need for timely execution is a huge part of your developing effectiveness on the mat

Give yourself some time: This is a game where the acquisition of skills is the single biggest key to your success or failure. Some skills come easier, some are more challenging - but in either case there will some period of time and some degree of effort required before the skill becomes robust enough to be a reliable means of scoring for you. So often people begin work on a skill and move on after some initial failures or difficulties. Give yourself some time. Instead of seeing failure as a reason to shift to another skill, use failure as feedback for another try tomorrow. I’ve seen athletes repeatedly fail with a technique but persevere and a year later be recognized as an expert with that move when they win a major tournament with it. Early failures should be expected. It’s not what happens when you first start attempting a skill that you’ll be remembered for - but rather what you do with that skill after you’ve spent months and years refining it

Possessing a strong defensive game is good. Possessing a strong offensive game is good. But being able to merge offense and defense seamlessly together is best of all. The better your opponents the more you’ll need to integrate offense and defense rather than see them as separate parts of your game. Strive always to manifest defense into all your offense and offense into all your defense and you’ll do very well in this game

The first line of defense is always awareness. Once a move has been applied upon you, you’ll need precise physical methods of defending it, but before it’s applied, awareness of the danger and subsequent positioning to avoid or negate that danger is 90% of the game. As they say in medicine, announce if prevention is worth a pound of cure - so too in defense. An ounce of awareness of potential danger is worth a pound of late escapes.

Experience teaches us that the majority of moves we will attempt against an opponent of similar size and skill level will fail. This realization can make you hang back from attacking or de-emphasize your first move in the expectation that it will probably fail, so focus on the second move. You can’t think this way. Even when you’re pessimistic about the chances of your first move succeeding, you have to go in with serious intent. Half hearted attempts at a move get strongly countered by a good opponent. You have to go in with sufficient commitment to elicit a strong defensive reaction and prevent giving up an easy counter. In addition that second attack of yours is only likely to succeed if there is a reaction to the first. So even in a tight match where most of your attacks are running into a brick wall - go in with commitment to the first attack to make that second one succeed

This is a game where every good move you perform is proportionately bad for your opponent, and every bad move proportionately good for your opponent. Therefore as your understanding of an offensive move grows, by extension you’ll understand more about its defense, since doing the opposite of what your opponent wants to do will generally result in the shutting down of the move. Deepening your understanding of one aspect of the game has positive ripple effects on other aspects of the game - particularly in the opposite direction of whatever you are learning about.

One of the great features of Jiu jitsu is the many choices it offers in the performance of a given task. What works well for one person may not be so suitable for another. That’s fine - the plethora of choices means that there’s a method for everyone. In time you’ll find the ones that work best for you. Bear in mind however, that a plethora of choices can lead to indecision and confusion - so make a few solid choices for each of the major areas of the game and work on them diligently, rather than making a new choice every month so that you never spend the time required to attain a high skill level. This will give you a unique game well suited to your body type and personality and also let you spend long enough with your choices to develop real expertise with them

As they say - organisms that learn by trial and error usually lose to organisms that learn by other peoples trial and error.

Garry Tonon ties the knot with his lovely wife Amanda! Part of the old NYC crew got together at Mr Tonons wedding here in Austin. Two of my favorite friends from the basement - Brian Glick and Jamie Crowder came down from the Apple to see the big occasion! Congratulations Garry and Amanda!

Every match starts with you in front of your opponent, but real advantage comes from being behind your opponent. Make sure always that the skill of getting behind your opponent’s elbows from any neutral position - top, bottom, left, right, standing or ground is a very high priority in your training regimen.

Don’t be despondent when a skill you’re working on doesn’t come easy. If skills were easily learned they’d have no value. What makes them precious is the fact that most people give up on learning early out of frustration. Be happy that it’s a hard path to skill acquisition. That means when you finally get there, you’ll be the only one in the room with the abilities that skill makes possible.

Tension and relaxation: Jiu Jitsu is a game that often requires maximal isometric tension to get a task completed. Submission holds are an obvious example. Lack of sufficient tightness in the lock is a common source of failure. However, maximal isometric tension comes at a heavy price in terms of fatigue. Some tasks are best performed in a state of relative relaxation. This allows for greater fluidity and endurance. Learning to correlate your tension level to the task at hand is crucial not only for success in the performance of whatever move you’ve allotted to the task, also to the match overall, because once you’ve pushed too hard on the gas for too long, it’s usually very difficult to recover inside the timeframe of a match. When you’re sparring make sure you’ve got your attention focused on more than your opponent. Keep an awareness of your own energy consumption relative to your opponent overall and also in the performance of the immediate task at hand - this is one of the most important determinants of outcome.

Ultimately your success and failure as both an athlete or a coach will be determined not by what you know, but by how you think. The methodology behind your thinking will overcome any current shortcomings in knowledge, but no amount of knowledge can make up for failures in your methodology of thinking.

Adding an entirely new technique to your repertoire is time consuming and difficult work. Refining or adding to an already existing technique in your repertoire is relatively easy. When you’re looking to add some new elements to your game in a hurry - refining and adding to what you already do well is the way to go. There will be times you need to make totally new additions, but if you’re looking for quick additions - refinement beats novelty

Victory in Las Vegas! Teenage phenom Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl won gold tonight here in Las Vegas with a very hard fought submission victory against her extremely talented rival, Sarah Galvao - daughter of the great Andre Galvao. Both athletes came out in excellent form, Ms Galvao had won brilliantly against the current ADCC Champion the night before and Ms Crevar had won a razor close decision against the great ADCC double gold medalist Adele Fornarino. It’s quite remarkable to think that these two teenage phenoms were battling for the biggest prize money in female Jiu jitsu history - a very bright moment for the future of the game. After a very intense first two rounds, Helena was able to lock in one of her devastating trademark leg locks and take a brilliant victory. In the men’s division our team fought on the tough side of the brackets against the great ATOS team, probably the most favored team in the event, packed with ADCC champions and medalists. We prevailed after an outstanding team performance and went into the finals. There we won 3 out of five matches, but in a rather perplexing final decision the teams were judged as a draw because one of the B team’s victories was judged a 10-8 round, apparently disregarding one of our athletes victories which was almost identically dominant but judged only 10-9. This meant a technicality was introduced whereby the team who won the last match was adjudicated the overall winner - so despite winning more matches we lost. We talked briefly with the judges over the apparent inconsistencies in scoring but it did not shed any light on the situation. Congratulations to all the teams who competed. There were many outstanding individual performances and the teams all showcased excellent use of technique and strategy. I am very proud of what our team did and would like to thank @giancarlobodoni @luke_griffithjj and @teamolivarez who had a particularly brilliant tournament and really showcased his potential. In addition I must say it was truly a great honor to work alongside @micagalvaojj @melquigalvaojj and @vagnerrochabjj and train with @diogoreisbjj Thank you all!

Getting ready for the weekend: We had a fun day getting acquainted with the production staff at @cjiofficial and seeing the arena - all the teams look really strong and ready to rock!

Counting down: The squad got together tonight in Vegas. @teamolivarez and @helenajiujitsugirl arrived along with a very distinguished guest Cyborg Abreu @cyborgbjj and @achillesrochabjj It was extremely impressive watching everyone training together! Thank you to Melqui Galvao and Mike Olivarez for helping run a great practice session! Tomorrow the team has some media obligations and then one more light session and then on to weigh ins and then the big show @cjiofficial

Now that’s a squad! The New Wave Warriors squad had a great workout tonight at a fine local school @ftcclv Luke Griffith and Giancarlo Bodoni worked out with @micagalvaojj @vagnerrochabjj and @diogoreisbjj under the watchful eye of @melquigalvaojj It was amazing watching such a talented room work together. I was extremely impressed by these young Brazilian super stars and feel very confident they will greatly elevate this sport out into the future. Tomorrow @teamolivarez Dorian and Helena @helenajiujitsugirl arrive to complete the squad and get ready for the big show this weekend @cjiofficial It’s great being back in Las Vegas - so many great memories of past events in both grappling and MMA. See you all soon!

When you HAVE control - USE control: If you manage to work your way into a controlling position, this is not the time to rush things. The great advantage of controlling position is that it affords you TIME - time to work and further solidify the advantage you’ve gained. If you suddenly gained $100 would just immediately frivolously gamble it away? Of course not - you consolidate it into your savings and use it advantageously in the future. So too with positional control. You worked hard to get - be judicious in how you use it.

When you know what you’re trying to achieve the adaptation of technique to circumstance takes care of itself. The Ancient Greeks implored us “know thyself.” In Jiu jitsu “know what you’re trying to accomplish.”

Lever and fulcrum: Insofar as Jiu jitsu is based upon the laws of physics and biomechanics, it has an objective side to it where answers to problems can be clearly correct or incorrect. Insofar as Jiu jitsu is played by human agents with great variation of body type and build and under chaotic conditions, the actual use of those objective mechanical laws will be subject to a great amount of subjective adaptation, adjustment and choice. Physics gives Jiu jitsu its structure, choice and interpretation give it its soul.

How good you are at a given move in real sparring is not so much a reflection of how good you are at that particular move, but rather how good you are at all the contextual moves that out you into a position to perform that particular move. Excellence in a single move would be meaningless in a real situation, not is it really possible in actuality because you need all the contextual moves to reliably get you into situations where you can actually perform the move in sufficient numbers to achieve excellence in the first place. Don’t just work the move - work the context as well.

One of the greatest attributes you can ever develop to further your progress is a strong sense of curiosity. This will do more to keep you on a path of continuous learning than anything else. Taking a genuine interest in the workings of the game;the what’s, why’s, when and how’s will keep you researching for a lifetime. Over time it will create a level of understanding that greatly improves your performance when allied with realistic training.

Opportunity for attack is always directly in front of you - it’s up to you to be able to identify them and act on them. Good athletes “see” more when looking at the same thing - great athletes do likewise but pair it with the confidence to pull the trigger on demand.

Any time you focus on new skills it must be at the expense of older skills. Skills do diminish without use so it’s rather sad to think that as we try to expand our skills set in new directions, our older game must suffer to some degree. Don’t worry, though it’s true that skills diminish without regular use, it’s equally true to that it’s far easier to re-learn a skill than to learn it ground up. So don’t despair about your established skills diminishing slightly as you pursue new ones. If you ever need to sharpen them it’s usually a fairly quick and easy process. Knowing This gives you the confidence to spend time pursuing new skills

One of the greatest weapons of the various grappling arts is smothering pressure. This lets you use time as a weapon. If you’re thinking in the middle of a match “when will this be over?” Typically the outcome will not be good for you. If you can make the other fellow have the same thought, typically the outcome will not be good for him. When you have an opportunity to apply heavy pressure - take it. It won’t have immediate effects on a tough opponent but it certainly will take its effect further down the line

When there is an opening - take it: They say good things come to those who wait - that may be true sometimes - but a lot of times in combat sports advantage goes to the one who pulls the trigger immediately upon opportunity. In your sparring train yourself to go as soon as you identify a gap to enter. Opportunity rarely gets better with more time and usually degenerates. So when it’s time to go - GO!

Many is the time you’ll be caught in a well applied move. Jiu jitsu doesn’t just reward you for how well you apply moves - it also rewards you for how quickly you recover when you’re on the receiving end of a well applied move. Even as it is taking effect you should be starting your counter. The earlier you start your counter the less work you’ll have to do and the less risks you’ll have to take. Awareness is your first line of defense, but once that’s been bypassed you’ll need to start an effective physical reaction. While it’s typically more fun to practice your offensive moves, it’s typically more necessary to practice your defensive moves whenever you’re coming up against really talented opponents.

Jiu jitsu is a sport heavily based on mechanics. The laws of mechanics are object and hold equally for all. Nonetheless, there are sufficient differences between our bodies and so many contingencies we have to cover when applying them that any working application of them will have to be quite adaptive so there will be a lot of variation in the actual use of those objective mechanical laws. You will always have to hold true to the unchanging laws of lever and fulcrum - but how you express them in game situations will vary considerably depending on the context. So think in terms of mechanics, but be ready to adapt how you actually apply them in the chaos of sparring

Have a plan but make sure it is an adaptable one that can cover all the main expected divergences that can occur from your starting position. There aren’t many certainties in Jiu jitsu, but one is that your opponent will do everything they can to resist, counter and subvert everything you try. So make sure any plans you make reflect this. In extreme cases you may even have to throw out your initial plans entirely. That doesn’t mean planning is worthless, it just demands that it be adaptable

A big part of good technique is having a clear idea of what you’re trying to accomplish with a given move. Most people only think in terms of the end result - “I want to sweep him.” That’s not very helpful. You’ll need to ask what each aspect of the move is trying to accomplish - that’s when everything starts making sense. That’s when means and ends start unifying and understanding emerges. Each aspect of a move has a purpose that contributes towards its final end. Once you think in these terms you’ll be able to work with greater clarity of purpose in the execution of the move overall.

Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj getting ready for @cjiofficial Training hard as always!

Efficiency: The better you get at the game the more you must adjust the metrics by which you judge your performances. When you first begin the study of Jiu jitsu the basic metric you use to assess your application of a given move is - did it work or not? That’s an essential metric to use, after all the most important thing is that you be effective in live sparring situations. However, as you go further into the sport you must go further than this. You must start assessing how much energy you expended to get the move to work. As a general rule you want to get maximum effect with minimal cost. This is important because everything we do in this game is done with limited resources and the most valuable resource you have is energy. If you’re expending too much energy to get effect, this will cost you as you go against better opponents who will drag matches on until you are depleted and then your technique becomes ineffective. So start to monitor not just how effective you are but also how efficient you are.

The work starts early: Very often athletes approach an opponent lackadaisically and then start there serious work for control and advantage once they’ve gotten into close contact. This is a mistake. Even before you begin contact you should be reading your opponent. You should be positioning yourself for advantage before you’ve even put a hand on him, and the second you establish contact you should be jockeying for advantage in grip. The earlier you start working, the less work you’ll have to do later. Make sure you begin your quest for advantage as early as you can. Your advantages can accrue and that’s how you go from advantage to domination.

Timing: Even an apparently perfect technique will be ineffective if applied at the wrong time. In fact timing is an essential part of what means to say a technique has been well applied and that a perfect technique with bad timing is a contradiction. Arguably the single greatest essential feature of live training as a superior training modality over drilling is its requirement of elements such as timing that are required for any live application but unnecessary when doing most conventional drills.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video MASTER THE MOVE: THE SHOULDER CRUNCH SERIES. Many years ago I began experimenting with no gi grips to make for more effective work from guard position. I was always a fan of underhooks as a means of control, but found that when using underhooks from guard position opponents could pommel themselves free before I could engage a technique. By locking my hands I could attain greater initial control. From this grip a large number of traditional Jiu jitsu guard attacks were possible - in particular sumi gaeshi variations - the butterfly sweep. As opponents learned to resist the sweep, many other excellent offensive moves became possible, leading to a complete series of attacks off this powerful grip. For many years my students have gotten tremendous results with this practical and effective series - I am confident you can too! If you’re interested check out the link in my Instagram story!

Garry Tonon lost a very closely contested fight against the very talented Russian MMA fighter Shamil Gasanov here in Bangkok this morning. Mr Gasonov fought an intelligent counter striking strategy quite different from his usual grappling based game to try to stay away from Mr Tonons dangerous submissions which had proven decisive in their first match. The first and second round were very close, both men had their moments. In the third round Mr Tonon was able to get takedowns and won decisively with an excellent round of grappling spending much of the round in rear mount fighting for a strangle. In the end the judges went with Mr Gasanov and he took the victory. Though I was rather surprised at the decision, especially given OneChampionships purported judging criteria of judging whole matches rather than rounds, it may possibly set up an exciting rubber match in the future as they now have one win each over each other. Thank you all as always for your support and interest in our athletes. As always it was a pleasure to visit Thailand and meet so many talented martial artists here. Now it’s back to Austin to get ready for the next set of challenges!

@garrytonon getting ready to make weight and compete at @onechampionship this weekend here in Bangkok Thailand against the very formidable Russian Dagestai wrestler/Sambo fighter @shamilcobra who has been on a devastating four fight win streak since they last met and who has never lost to anyone except Garry Tonon. This will be a very tough match at Lumpinee stadium

Work on your weak points, but never lose track of the idea that it’s your strong points that will bring you most of your victories. Make sure you constantly strive to first find your strong points and then work tirelessly to improve them and build new attacks off them. This will create the character of your game

What is your mindset when you spar? Do you see it as a match that you must win? An experiment for your beliefs about technique and tactics? Do you react to what your opponent does? Or play with an objective that you try to push towards? Your answers to questions like these will determine how you spar and how you spar has a huge impact on your development. Many people watch competitions - but often you as much or even more by watching great athletes TRAIN as that will carry over more to your experience of Jiu jitsu.

Jiu jitsu is a highly tactile game. When you practice a position it’s crucial you actively seek to develop a FEEL for the move. Advice articulated through language gets you in the ball park, but it’s the experience of feeling the move in operation that adapts it to your individual body.

There is no one thing that guarantees you will succeed in reaching your goals in Jiu jitsu; but there are MANY things that guarantee you WON’T reach your goals. Sometimes it’s easier to focus on avoiding the things that are guaranteed to stop you doing something and making sure you don’t succumb to them, rather than try to find some special element that will get you to your dreams. The things that will stop you are usually much more obvious and easy to see than the things that will elevate you - so focus on them. You know that skipping training, avoiding tough training partners, poor nutrition and rest, being satisfied with the same old routine long after it has ceased to be effective - all these things (and many others that just as obvious) will absolutely impair your ability to reach your goals. Just avoid them and you’ll typically do better than people who endlessly seek some element that is supposed to elevate them to the level they desire.

Position before submission? Sure. Even better - CONTROL before submission. Control has many facets, position is just one of them. It is a deeper, richer notion than position. There are many examples of control that fall outside the traditional understanding of position but are very useful for enabling submission. Control is the game

The single greatest vulnerability of the human body in combat sports is the back. Our bodies are well adapted to deal with threats from the front, but poorly adapted to do defend threats from the back. Make this simple insight one of the core elements of your jiu jitsu and you can’t go wrong. Whenever you don’t know what to do or which direction to go - navigate the shortest route to the back and your direction will be a good one. Even if you can’t get there, just the threat will open up doors previously closed to you. When in doubt - aim for the back!

The never ending journey: Every Jiu jitsu student has an idea of attuning mastery of a set of techniques. Yet mastery proves as elusive as the end of a rainbow. We certainly make progress and feel happiness in the good effects of that progress, but there is always the sense that there is something more that we don’t yet understand and ought to know. Even if you could somehow attain mastery, still you’d have to continue learning because as you age your body will change and you will need to learn to adapt your technique to the changes in your body. Forget mastery then. Focus instead on continual improvement and adaptation. Your techniques don’t need perfection, however that is to be understood, in order to be effective. They only need to be better than your opponents defenses. Study with the goal of improvement and adaptation and you’ll make the gains you seek without the frustration of a goal that nobody could achieve even in theory

At the opening of a match there are infinite possibilities for action and decision - but as you attain increasing control over an opponent his action and decision choices become more and more limited until they come down to the simple binary choice of submit or face the consequences. Train always with this sense of increasing control and limiting choice - it is the hallmark of Jiu jitsu

Even when you’re one hundred percent locked in to a finishing hold - keep a percentage of your attention on a possible next move should that submission fail. We are always told not to put all our eggs in one basket. That’s wise advice in life and it’s also wise advice in Jiu jitsu. Don’t stake everything you’ve got on that one submission. Be ready to move into a follow up if it becomes necessary. Never forget however, that you must genuinely try to finish with that initial submission. Don’t have a mindset where you’re so focused on the next move that you simply bypass the first - you’ll never finish opponents with that attitude. Put genuine effort into the first, but leave enough to have a follow up if it’s needed.

Keep them under pressure: pressure is the factor most likely to lead to decreasing performance levels in an opponent. Everyone looks good at the start of a match when they’re fresh - very few look good after long minutes of unremitting pressure. If you feel you’ve done a good job of applying pressure for time - that’s exactly when you don’t want to step off the gas pedal - keep it up.

Moving fast and slow: The majority of Jiu jitsu is fought at a relatively slow pace on the ground where isometric tension and control is the main feature. Sometimes however, especially in standing position and transitions from ground to standing, some speed and explosion is required. Make sure that your mind and body switches immediately to the demands of the different task. Don’t have the demeanor of slow isometric tension when it’s time to chase an opponent down. Just because most of the match is slow and controlled doesn’t mean there won’t be some very important instances where you need to explode to the next position. Be aware of the distinction so that you carry the right mindset and physical reaction for each.

Every time you get a defensive over reaction to a submission attempt you’ll get an opportunity for a positional move. There is a fascinating interplay between position and submission in Jiu jitsu. Keep alert within your mind to the possibility of using one to set up the other in BOTH directions. Submission specialists tend to follow a failed submission with another submission attempt. Positional specialists tend to follow a failed positional move with another - but the best route is usually to go from submission to positional attack and use the fundamental dichotomy between submission and position in Jiu jitsu to your advantage when attacking in sequences

Impatiently patient: A good learner must reconcile two competing demands. The first is to voraciously seek knowledge and develop skills. The second is to give the development of your skills sufficient time to mature before getting distracted by the next. It’s great to be a seeker of knowledge and skill. In fact that is in my opinion the single greatest attribute a student can bring to the table, but don’t let it turn you into a dabbler who tastes skills without devouring and fully digesting them. Finding a compromise between these competing demands to seek and to complete is very important for your development. Too much emphasis on one can leave you either with too few skills or too shallow skills

Sometimes when battling hard in a neutral position it’s natural to want to hang back to save energy. It’s ok to think this way, but be mindful that if the opponent is getting tired like you and do manage to break through into a dominant position you will have now put yourself into one of the best scenarios in Jiu jitsu - an exhausted opponent underneath your pin - where you can rest but he is still carrying your weight. This usually has a very damaging effect on your opponents morale and his fatigue management. When you’re sparring try to get an accurate read on the likelihood of you getting the positional breakthrough. If you think there is a decent chance - keep pushing hard even if you’re getting tired yourself - the reward will be worth it

If you can get your opponents center of gravity outside his base of support - he will fall every time. This is the sense in which Jiu jitsu has an objective “true for everyone” flavor. Every sweep then, is a simultaneous attack on your opponents base of support and the location of his center or gravity. If you have this simple directive in your head as you enter the move you’ll be able to adjust easily to the many second by second contingencies and you’ll encounter when doing it for real.

Balancing the demands for tension and relaxation: The game of Jiu jitsu is a lot like life - long periods of relative mild activity and then sporadic bursts of maximum effort. It’s important to match your degree of muscular exertion with that necessary degree of effort. People go wrong in two ways. Either they are tense through the entirety of the match and quickly get exhausted, or they are loose throughout, which gives excellent endurance but means when it’s time to complete a move you lack the necessary horsepower to get the job done and have to continue on. Learning to match tension to immediate task at hand is a big part of your development. Learning to match it in the gym first. Remember there is much more to Jiu jitsu than the techniques. Learning the background demands such as calibrating muscular tension with task is a crucial prerequisite to the application of technique. It is a skill that can be practiced like any other skill, but because it’s not a discrete skill that catches immediate attention it’s often overlooked.

Every time you step on the mat to train there should be a skill that you have in mind to train. Passively stepping on the mat to see what happens will rarely create the focus needed to gain skill. Go in with a plan and you’ll come out with the experience of repeated trials of a skill and the feedback you need to do better with it tomorrow.

Jiu jitsu is a game split between offense and defense. Over emphasis on one is always to the detriment of the other. As you increase in skill level you’ll need to bring the two together. All good offense has built in defense and all good defense has built in offense. A rookie separates them, an expert co-joins them.

A word of thanks: Four years ago we arrived in Austin after a team break up that left us with just a few remaining athletes and no gym to train in. A chance connection led us to Roka @roka just north of downtown Austin. The manager of the company, Rob showed incredible kindness and generosity to let us train in the gym that he’d built as part of his eyewear company. We trained there twice a day seven days a week. It must have been a crazy experience for the corporate workers to have a bunch of crazy looking grapplers shuffling in and out of the building every day as they did their work, but they showed truly admirable kindness in putting up with us for so long. Rob never asked us for anything. It’s exceedingly rare to meet someone who exudes such a generous spirit. We will always be thankful for the kindness that he and his company showed. From that rough start and by his kindness we are able to get a whole new team together in record time and have our best ever performance at the ADCC World Championships and beyond. Finally we have our own place now but I wanted to give my heartfelt thanks to Rob and his team for the great kindness he showed to ours.

We all go into action with a general idea of what we want to do, but usually we end up having to modify our plans along the way in response to unforeseen circumstances. It’s important to commit yourself to the outcomes you seek - but not the means of getting to them. Adaptability is a virtue in this game. Let your sense of direction be outcome centered rather than means centered that way you’ll have a goal to navigate to by have enough flexibility to cope with the rapidly changing circumstances you find yourself in.

You don’t need a vast array of different submission holds to be effective in the submission game. The two main considerations are these. First, one well applied submission will end a match, a dozen poorly applied submissions won’t even score you a single point, forget about winning a match. Therefore it’s better to have a few submissions you do very well than many you do poorly. Secondly, it better to have a few submissions that cover the full extent of the body than many submissions that cover only half of the body or less. Coverage and quality are the features you want in your submission arsenal - make sure you train with this in mind.

Keep them off your head: I’m sure you’ve heard the old cliche “he who controls the head controls the whole body.” Like most cliches there is a lot truth to it. Make sure you are disciplined about never letting an opponent get excessive control of your head for extended periods of time. Put up frames that make it difficult for him to get to your head in the first place and failing that, clear him off your head as soon as possible.

When you first begin Jiu Jitsu the big challenge is just to execute the moves satisfactorily. As you get better at this the challenge shifts because your opponents have the skills to recognize and resist even a well executed move. The new challenge becomes how to create openings for those moves such that the opponent will be too late or too out of position to defend even if he does know what to do. As the resistance level increases the primary concern shifts from basic execution to nullifying skilled resistance. This is when the game starts to get really interesting as elements of deception, subterfuge and anticipation start to become crucial.

Basement days: People often comment on the number of great students who came out of there. All of them were amazing people. They paid their price in sweat. Hard work isn’t a sufficient condition for excellence, but it certainly is a necessary one.

One of the best things about jiu jitsu is that our mistakes are usually immediately obvious. When a hold is poorly applied you can literally feel its feebleness and then unsurprisingly the opponent easily brushes it off. When a skilled opponent applies a hold even a beginner can immediately feel that they’re in danger. In this sense the game is self correcting. Errors are obvious and changes and adjustments to those errors have tangible effects for better or worse depending on whether the adjustments were in the correct direction or incorrect. As you gain in experience you won’t even have to feel the application of the hold - you can tell by looking whether it will be effective or not. Learning find that unmistakable feeling of effective application is one of the keys to progress. For most people not starts in drills and has to be transferred to more realistic sparring scenarios, but it can be found first in sparring and built on from there. However you find it, learn to recognize it and replicate it across all your skills. It is one of the great keys to your future success

The worst feeling in Jiu Jitsu is finding yourself in a situation where you have no idea what to do to extricate yourself. The second worst feeling is knowing what to do but being unable to actually do it. The first is a lack of knowledge. The second is a lack of embodied skill. Both are fatal to your prowess in a given situation. The first results is situational paralysis, the second in failed action. These horrible feelings of hopelessness point us in the directions we need to make progress - understanding of the situation and the embodied skills to actually make use of that understanding - one without the other rarely gets good results

Opening: When two athletes approach rather for the first time in a big match this is often the time of maximal tension and energy expenditure - DESPITE THE FACT THAT NEITHER EVEN HAS A HAND ON THE OTHER! Isn’t that odd. Normally we associate maximum energy expenditure with maximum force production - heavy hard muscular work. Yet it’s at the opening when you see sweat, muscular tension, early fatigue, labored breathing etc all before any physical has even started. This shows the incredible effect of nervous energy expenditure. This is very different from the muscular tension/fatigue you feel every day in the gym. I usually eschew all talk of mental energy and vague notions of the mind/body connection in combat sports, but it’s undeniable that excess mental tension manifests itself as excessive physical tension that easily result in fatigue and poor technique execution in matches. It can turn great players into average players very quickly. I wish I had some great advice to give you on how to control it - I don’t - nor has anyone else I’ve encountered despite legions of experts claiming to be able to do so. I think it’s one of the most deeply personal quests of an athletes career. Everyone has to find their own way around the problem. What works well for one may be useless to another. The only thing I can do to help is point to the wisdom of the ancient Greeks - know thyself

Getting ready: Matches are usually won by the mundane things. It’s those who do all the little things better than the other guy on time and under pressure who usually get their hands raised. Every time you practice you get a chance to build those habits that bring victory. Don’t rush them - one good performance of a move garners better results than a dozen mediocre ones. Get a good tactile feel for the move - what it feels like to lock it into place - that’s the most reliable path to victory

If you can significantly impair an opponents ability to move whilst keeping your own ability to move - you score and win far more often than not. Remember, it doesn’t do much good shutting down an opponents ability to move if you simultaneously sacrifice your own ability to move. It the asymmetry in movement capability that creates victory

Weight application is the fundamental notion from top position, but from bottom position it’s kuzushi or off balancing. This is how we use weight from underneath people. We use an opponents own weight against them by pushing or pulling their weight outside of their base of support, forcing them into a recovery that opens them to attack. When working from bottom keep a constant eye on their weight distribution in comparison to their base of support - then push or pull to stumble them - this is the basis of success from bottom position.

Whenever you’re in bottom position - elbow knee connection is the basis of your structure. The further they are apart the more open you are to an opponents attacks and the weaker your structural framing. Just as a good boxer keeps a tight guard when he’s under attack to protect himself, so too a good jiu jitsu player is always vigilant of their elbow knee connection.

Jiu jitsu has two major categories of finishing weapons - joint locks and strangles. Of the two, strangles are the more certain option as they will end a match regardless of whether your opponent submits or not. Moreover, they will work just as well late in a match as early, unlike joint locks whose efficacy suffers more as sweat, slipperiness and fatigue increase over the course of a match. Get good at both, but given a choice, generally go with strangles.

Remember always that you are in a sport where one move performed well can win a match, but a dozen moves performed in a mediocre fashion won’t score a dime. Learn to execute well. Train to work with precision so that you can employ the details that make execution more efficient when it counts.

Most athletes greatly overestimate how much physical tension in their muscular system is required to accomplish the task they’re currently engaged with. Don’t get me wrong - if you’re trying to complete a strangle on a tough opponent in a hard fought match you’ll need plenty of muscular exertion and tension (though I’d still argue it’s less than most people use). However, in many cases you’ll need minimal exertion and tension - so take advantage of that and relax in those moments. Extended tension is exhausting and leads to subpar execution. We’re at our best when the degree of tension matches the task at hand. Neither more nor less.

Most frantic or rushed action in Jiu jitsu can be traced back to simply NOT KNOWING WHAT TO DO IN THAT SITUATION OR SCENARIO. Understanding what we need to do has a wonderful effect on our actions. It immediately gives us a calm sense of direction and purpose - even when it’s not easy to physically get it done. Do everything you can to develop a sound conceptual understanding of the scenarios you play in and interestingly many of of the physical issues you experience in Jiu Jitsu smooth themselves out.

The best athletes I trained were also the best learners. There is no greater skill in Jiu jitsu nor in life itself than the skill of learning. How far you progress in any aspect of Jiu jitsu is directly proportional to your capacity to learn well. Carry yourself as a learner first and everything else second and you’ll far both in Jiu jitsu and in everything else.

Do you remember your first Jiu jitsu class? Mine was thirty years ago and I can remember it well. I think that everyone’s first class follows the same themes - initial confusion as to the various positions; skepticism as to whether the moves shown would really work, and then an absolute ass whipping that revealed they definitely DO work and all those confusing positions work like magic but you have no idea how. This leaves us with the all important time AFTER class - where two options swirl inside your head. The first is to say this was terrible and I’ll never do it again. The second is to say this was terrible and I’ll do it as much as I can until it becomes tolerably less terrible or I can make it just as terrible to other people! I guess we all chose the second option and here we are! 😂😂

Is Jiu jitsu an art or a science? It seems clear that is has both elements within it. Insofar as Jiu jitsu makes clear and frequent use of mechanical principles that are objective in nature - it is a science. For any given scenario there will be an optimal position for lever and fulcrum, it will vary from one scenario to another, but for that scenario there will be features that either align with the laws of mechanics or they don’t and hence are objectively true or false. Insofar as we accept this, there is an objective, scientific element to Jiu jitsu. There are also a great many subjective elements to Jiu jitsu. Elements of choice and self expression which vary widely from one person to another. Insofar as this is true, Jiu jitsu has an artistic element. The question itself is interesting. It frames Jiu jitsu as either an art or science, but ignores the possibility that it might be neither, but instead some other type of activity, which is my belief. Either way it’s clear it involves both objective and subjective elements and that a solid understanding of Jiu jitsu must involve both

Once you create pressure - keep pressure: Pressure is a key element in Jiu jitsu. Its effect is directly related to time. Ten seconds of pressure will have no effect on the outcome of a match. Ten minutes of pressure will crush the soul of even the toughest opponents. As much as we all appreciate a smooth and stylish game, at the highest levels it’s usually the question of who can apply pressure the longest that decides winner and loser.

When we talk about control over an opponent in Jiu jitsu there are two main elements involved. The first and most fundamental is control over his MOVEMENT. The second is the resultant control you gain over his DECISION MAKING. When you dictate how he can move, you also gain control over his decisions. Once you’re in control of those two elements, everything else falls into place. The control over the body and movement is obvious to the eye of an observer - the control over his decision space much less so - but it is this form of control that enables you to accurately predict and even determine his next movement - and that’s REAL control.

If you can form angles, you can create attacks. It’s tough to attack straight through the front door. You can do it but you’ll need either some kind of initial advantage or some serious horsepower. Much better is take advantage of the fact that the human body doesn’t cope well with threats from an angle. Change your orientation and you’ll positively change your success rate!

Every target you’ve identified on an opponents body will be defended prior to your attack by a well trained opponent. Therefore the first stage of any attack will generally need to be aimed at the obstruction and THEN at the actual target. Learn to read your opponent. How they stand and hold themselves will tall you a lot about their sense of defensive responsibility. Soon you’ll see the defensive roadblocks they’ve set in front of your main targets and remove them first.

When it comes to building your offensive skills, focus upon a smaller number of connected moves rather than a larger number of disconnected moves. The wider the scope of your moves, the less time you can devote to each to gain mastery. As you gain in number of moves, you lose in time devoted to practice and study of each. Don’t spread your offensive resources too thinly. Offense rewards depth over breadth of skill.

All the most successful people I met and trained in Jiu jitsu had an insatiable desire for knowledge and a tremendous willingness to do the physical work to transform that knowledge into skill. There were great differences among them all, but those two commonalities stood out as clearly as the sun and moon.

Give the class a direction at the onset and the work that follows has a sense of purpose and focus that makes skill development easier. Start with development understanding of the skill area you’re investigating. What are the respective goals of the two athletes? Why are they important? How can they best achieve them? What problems will they face as they attempt to do so? Then it’s time for action. You are measured not by how well you drill, but by how well you perform in sparring, so make sure your primary skill work is done in the mutual attempt to impose your will against resistance.

The start of every engagement is the time of maximum uncertainty. Both you and your opponent have every possible option available to you. With every additional element of control, starting with grip and building up all the way to full positional control, the number of options is stripped away until they are but a handful. At that point the number of options is so small that the next step is entirely predictable. That is when you not only control your opponents body, but even their decision space - and that’s real control - the great goal of Jiu jitsu

Balance and base: one of your greatest concerns in top position is keeping your base. In bottom position it’s upsetting your opponents base (Kuzushi). Almost everything you do from bottom position is made dramatically easier by first disrupting your opponents base of support. Position before submission? Everyone knows that, but just as important is kuzushi before attack. It’s easy to say the sentence, but hard to establish it as a habitual action, yet that is where success from position is almost always found.

From the earliest days I’ve always preferred to see a sense of calm professionalism before a match among my athletes. You don’t freak out and get emotional every day in the gym when doing Jiu jitsu - so why do it before a match? I respect that everyone has their own way of getting ready - the most important is to use what works for you. However, if in doubt, try to capture the same sense of relaxed calm you exhibit every day in the gym. Think in terms of make it more like every day actions rather than someone totally exceptional and different. Give it a try next time you’re getting ready

Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl wins gold at brown belt at the IBJJF World Jiu Jitsu Championships! Teenage phenom Helena Crevar showed her gi/no gi versatility at the @ibjjf world championships today, winning a gold medal in her weight division with another brilliant performance. She won half her matches via submission and then had a thrilling comeback from behind match in the finals that she won in the last twenty seconds. Congratulations Helena!!

Defensive responsibility: The game of Jiu jitsu is equally divided between offense and defense. When you first begin training you have no idea of the threats all around you and are easily caught unawares. However, as you improve you start anticipating and negating threats earlier and earlier. The more you do this the more successful you’ll be. As they in medicine - an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure - so too in jiu jitsu - the earlier you address potential threats the easier to deal with them. That’s means habitually doing the right things defensively without the need for prompts and reminders. In this game offense and defense can interchange very quickly indeed - make sure you’re defensively responsible throughout and you’ll be able to survive those fast interchanges much better and get just as quickly back into offense

Much of the game of Jiu jitsu is creating mechanical advantage, but almost as important is advantage based on the very nature of the human body. There is no doubt that among we humans the strength of our legs is far greater than the strength of our arms. You want this basic idea to be reflected in your Jiu Jitsu as much as possible. Whenever you can, seek to control your opponents head and shoulders with your legs. This immediately creates a situation where the stronger elements of your buddy as fighting one of the weaker elements of your opponent’s buddy. This disparity allows smaller, weaker people to defeat even significantly stronger people.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video MASTER THE MOVE: THE BACK CRUCIFIX. My students have always been well known for their expertise in back attacks. Usually in competition we focus primarily upon rear mount with arm traps because of the points structure that generally favors conventional back control, but in training or in situations where there are no points and the focus is on submission, we often make us of back crucifix attacks. Interestingly most Jiu jitsu athletes are very adept at defending more conventional forms of back control just because they have a lot of practical experience dealing with the position, but because they have much less experience dealing with back crucifixes they often struggle against this great attacking position. This video looks at a systematic approach to control, understanding the main lines of resistance you’ll need to overcome and navigating through the most important positional shifts you’ll need to make to hold down and finish your toughest opponents. Add some venom to your back attacks! Check out the back crucifix! Link in my Instagram story

A terrible mistake in Jiu jitsu is to think that fundamentals is a STAGE THAT YOU HAVE TO GO THROUGH before you emerge in the other side into advanced techniques. You never go through and past the fundamentals - they are a lifetime of study and ever increasing study and sophistication. Rather than pass through, you simply add depth of understanding to them and refine your performance of them. The very same things you worked in your first three months of Jiu jitsu you’ll be doing until your last day on the mats - just with greater precision, against better opponents and with a clearer sense of what you’re doing and why you’re doing it the way you are.

The goal or purpose of Jiu jitsu is submission, but the methodology of Jiu jitsu is CONTROL. Control comes in many forms, position, grip, balance/stance breaking etc. The type of control you seek above all others is CONTROL OF YOUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT. When you can stifle and control an opponents ability to move, submission will start to become a formality. Control first - submission second.

Hard work is a necessary but not a sufficient condition of excellence in combat sports. The world is full of athletes who worked very hard but have nothing to show for it. It’s always a question of how well directed that hard work is that determines how far you progress. Make sure you’re constantly asking yourself if what you’re currently on and the manner in which you’re working on it is really the optimal choice. Use success and failure as feedback to see if you need to change direction. Many athletes are happy to work very hard with their bodies in physical labor but surprisingly reticent to work mentally on analysis of their trajectory of learning and development. Yet it’s the latter that gives direction to the former and only the combination of the two takes you towards your potential.

The more that a move relies upon SPEED for entry, the more important DECEPTION becomes for successful entry and application. You can fake an opponent out and strike successfully before his reactions can catch up. The more a move relies upon CONTROL for execution, the less important deception becomes and the more important IMMOBILIZATION becomes. Movement is the bane of control, when you can control an opponent’s movement you needn’t be deceptive about your intentions. He can know everything you want to do, but if he can’t move, he won’t be able to stop it.

One of the most important things you can ever teach is where to put your attention. Everyone looks but not everyone knows what to look for, yet knowing what to look for and perceiving it as the trigger to action is among the most important determinants of success or failure in the game.

One of the surest signs of increased proficiency in Jiu jitsu is the speed and efficiency with which an athlete can transition from offense to defense and vice versa. This is a game of defensive skills and offensive skills. The two are usually taught and practiced separately, but in a match you’ll be expected to work seamlessly from one to another. The quicker and more efficiently you can make that switch the better will be your game

At the onset of a match there are infinite possible choices for the next move. Your job as you grapple is to reduce the number of possible choices by imposing control over your opponents movement. As their choices get more and more restricted, they become more and more predictable. The ultimate goal is to funnel their choices down to two - submit or face the consequences. This funneling of the decision space down to the last binary choice is the goal of all good jiu jitsu. Physical control leads to the most important control of all - your opponents decision making.

We are all given attributes in different sector and to different degrees. Some are fast, some strong, some tall, some short. We can have a certain amount of control over them in some cases, others, no control at all. But one thing that we have absolute control over and which has a far greater impact on the level we finally reach, is consistency. If you train consistently in a well thought out fashion it will be very hard indeed for even your most talented peers to keep up with you as time marches on. The short term always favors the naturally gifted, but the long term always belongs to the consistent. As long as your walking in roughly the right directions, how long you walk will always outweigh how fast you walk

As a general rule the more clearly you can articulate and identify the problems you face in any given enterprise, and in particular Jiu jitsu, the more clarity and effect you experience with your solutions. Take the time to study the problems in front of you and be as far reaching and experimental with your questions as you can. When the questions are good, the answers will be even better.

Break an opponents stance and you break most of the resistance to the move you plan to use. Attack the stance first, then the move. Make this your habit and moves that once seemed impossible become significantly easier.

Maximum tension has to be used sparingly in combat sports as it has many bad effects when overused - but when it’s time to use it - use it!! If your skill level get the effect you sought - excellent. If not, learn to release it quickly and move in. It’s not the tension that does the damage - it’s the time under tension. Use it like the gas pedal in your car. You wouldn’t press it to the floor the whole journey - same in Jiu jitsu. Most if the time you’ll be in a comfortable cruise, but sometimes you’ll need to make that engine roar

The basis of all your effectiveness in jitsu is your stance. How effective you are in any given scenario is a direct reflection of the integrity of your stance. When it’s time to attack an opponent, understand that it will be difficult as long as his stance is intact. So then, make his stance the first subject of your attack and whatever subsequent attacks you choose will be rendered easier.

One of the hardest things to learn is PATIENCE WHEN YOU’RE WINNING. Typically we feel a need to speed things up when we’re on a path to victory. It’s natural to feel that way. We think that the longer the time period between where we are now and execution of a winning move, the more opportunity for an opponent to escape. In fact you’re generally better off (time permitting) slowing things down a little getting the pre-requisites in order first. This games generally rewards preliminary control over speed of execution. So next time you’re getting into a potential finishing position, slow things down a little rather than speed them up and take note of your finishing percentages

“If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs…”
In a sport where the single most important skill is that of making sound decisions in minimum time under maximum pressure - the ability to maintain composure is truly key. Like everything else it starts in the gym. See every situation that induces fear, frustration and exuberance as an opportunity to practice holding your equanimity and it’ll be easier when you need it most.

When most people learn a technique, they engage in mimicry. They mimic what they’ve seen performed. The idea is not to COPY technique, but to UNDERSTAND it. Only then can the kind of second by second adaptation needed for successful implementation under match conditions occur reliably.

There is much about jiu jitsu that is deeply subjective and individual. Your style, your preferences, your favorite moves, your learning of implicit skills is- but there is one thing that is straightforwardly objective and per case you’re either correct or incorrect - mechanical efficiency. You can be an individualist about many things, but not mechanics. The laws of physics apply the same way to all of us. How efficient your game is has many elements, mechanics is one of the most important. Any deviation from mechanical efficiency will cost you energy and effectiveness.

Give yourself four things - a clear GOAL, TIMELY FEEDBACK to know whether you’re getting closer or further from that goal, and the TIME and RESOURCES to bring the first two closer to alignment, and you can build a skill into yourself or others to a level that can shock people.

Good teaching is just not about telling athletes what to do, in fact I’d go further and say that that is substantially less important than teaching what to care about. When a student knows what is important in a given scenario it’s easy for them to not just implement your advice but to adjust it, adapt it and ultimately improve it.

When it’s over - it ain’t over: One of the best times to impart information is after class. The sparring component of a class always raises problems and alerts us to weaknesses in our game. Nothing motivates us to listen more than an irksome problem, so this is often the best time to reach a student and create a memorable addition to their understanding of a move, a position or a scenario. It’s difficult to impart information to someone who has no perception of a problem, but easy to someone in a state of mental unrest in reaction to a problem that is thwarting their goals. Take some time after class to problem solve and you’ll often add far more effect in less time.

Hard work is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition of progress in Jiu jitsu. At the upper echelons everybody works hard, everyone is highly motivated, everyone is prepared to do the extra work. If you wish to distinguish yourself you’ll need to do something they aren’t. If it isn’t hard work, what is it? It is almost always either the development of a higher understanding of the game, a form of new or rediscovered technique neglected by most, or a better training method that embodies skill better than your rivals for the same amount of effort. Point your sights in those directions and you’ll soon stand out from your peers.

Today I went into surgery for my second hip replacement. I’ve had severe physical issues my whole career due to a crippled leg suffered from an early age. Typically when one part of a system is broken, it puts undue compensatory stress on other parts of that system and so I’ve juggled problems over the years. I’ve been holding off on this second surgery for around four years. I was going to do after we left Puerto Rico but when the team broke up I had to delay it in order to be able to build a new team. Now it’s time as I’m struggling to even walk and perform basic functions, let alone Jiu jitsu. I will be out of action for a while but I believe I can still be a help conceptually until I can get active again 🤗🤗 Thank you to Dr Davidovitch for his work @roydavidovitchmd

Typically it’s more fun to work on your strengths, but more beneficial to work on your weaknesses. When it’s time to make progress, you have to sacrifice a little fun in favor of benefit. Don’t worry, soon enough those skills that were difficult and not much fun to work on will improve so much that they’ll become new strengths - and hence fun to work on! What seems a struggle today will be within your comfort zone in some future tomorrow

One of the surest ways to increase learning rate in Jiu jitsu, and indeed, any activity where physical skill is the main driver of success, is to have a clear idea of what you want to achieve and accomplish in your training sessions. You want a proactive approach to training sessions rather than a spontaneous/reactive/laissez faire approach. The more focused your goal at the onset, the further you’ll progress towards that goal. Absence of a goal in a training session is like absence of a compass on a ship on the ocean - you’ll drift whichever way the winds and currents are running, rather than in the direction you want.

There are many skills to learn in Jiu jitsu, probably too many for several lifetimes in you wanted to study all the techniques in the game; but there is a skill that in importance for how far you’ll progress stands far above any Jiu jitsu technique you’ll ever learn - the skill of learning. THE SKILLFUL LEARNER INVARIABLY BECOMES THE SKILLFUL STUDENT. This is also the the skill that has the greatest potential to make your study of Jiu Jitsu benefit your life overall, as the skill of learning pertains to every aspect of your existence. The study of Jiu jitsu can be a case study of learning in general since its practice, even in quite naive forms, has many features built into it that embody good learning principles.

In Jiu jitsu the object is control. Fundamentally it is control over your opponents body, but the deepest form of control is over your opponent’s decision space. You are forcing him to make decisions with ever decreasing options and less desirable options. As the options for the body decrease, so to do the options for the next decision decrease. There comes a point where the number of reasonable decisions is so low that you can start making reliable projections as to what his next move will be - and that’s real control

There are an infinite number of ways to win. You don’t need to learn them all to get the victories you seek, just enough to get the job done against a wide array of opponents. Don’t spread your training resources too thinly. Better to spend a lot of time on a few techniques than a little time on many techniques. Every choice you DO make in training is made at the expense of the choices you DON’T make - choose wisely.

There are many factors involved in the application of a tight submission hold - don’t worry - it’s almost never the case that even the best athletes apply all of them in a single submission hold. Remember, the application doesn’t have to be perfect - only good enough to overcome the defensive abilities of an opponent in the time available. So instead of trying to remember everything at once, focus on what you believe are the most important details for that application rather than every detail you’ve ever been shown. As the old saying goes, better to go with good enough now than wait for perfection and apply a “perfect” after the opportunity has passed.

If you can guide people’s attention to a crucial detail in a way that they will recall under stress, and that detail is actionable within their current skill set - then you can trigger a significant performance in a very short time frame - more so than perhaps any other means.

Your structure is your strength: Show me a strong man in a weak structure and I’ll show you a weakling on the mat. Show me a weak athlete in a strong structure and I’ll show you someone who’ll shock you with their strength on the mat. Learning the architecture of strong structure is easy - learning the discipline of maintaining a strong structure under pressure for the entirety of a match is difficult. Do it so often that it becomes a habit and you’ll find yourself able to maintain and express whatever amount of strength much longer and much more effectively

The best teachers I had, whether it was in Jiu jitsu, philosophy, mathematics or physics or indeed any subject; were those who sought to build understanding of the subject in a way that was not needlessly complicated, nor overly simplistic. Then they let the students build from there and work independently so as to configure their approach to the subject in their own terms and according to their own understanding under the proviso that they could demonstrate its effectiveness. Keep true to this and you’ll run a good program.

Just as water will always reveal a hole in a cup, so too, pressure will reveal the holes in your game. The best place to first feel that pressure is in the gym rather than in a match. You have to put yourself against very good opponents or put yourself in very bad positions - both will create the pressure that reveals the areas you need to work on. Once you’ve identified those areas then it’s time to formulate a plan to create improvement, but it all starts with identification. You can only fix a problem when you’ve identified a problem.

Reflections on the WNO event last night: In recent years there has a general trend towards shorter Jiu jitsu matches. These are often seen as more exciting due to the higher pace and the need for both athletes to press the action in the time available. One of the few organizations still using long matches is @flograppling where main card matches are fifteen minutes long. As a general rule in Jiu Jitsu, the longer the match and the less intervention from the officials - the more the result will reflect the true relative skill level of the two athletes. In a very interesting twist from last night - both the co-main event between Luke Griffith and Victor Hugo and the main event event between Nick Rodriguez and Kaynan Duarte were matches were if they were in the shorter time format favored by many grappling organizations, the outcomes would have been completely different. Let’s say the two matches were scheduled to be eight minutes each. If that were the case, both Mr Griffith and Mr Rodriguez would have been decisively beaten as both of them were in real trouble early in their matches. However, the extra length of the matches allowed both athletes to turn the matches around and come out with decisive victories. Match length really does matter. For grappling purists - the longer the better - as it gives the most accurate assessment of overall Jiu jitsu skill. Of course for logistical and entertainment purposes I understand the need for shorter matches at many events, but there is a lot to be said for longer matches when it’s the best of the best and we have to decide who is the best grappler in the clearest possible way.

Victory in Austin TX! It was a great night for New Wave young guns @helenajiujitsugirl and @luke_griffithjj who both scored dramatic victories against champion opponents in the @flograppling WNO show here in Round Rock Austin TX. Ms Crevar took on the WNO champion Elisabeth Clay and won via strangle after taking her opponents back during a leg lock exchange. She is now the new WNO 145 pound Champion! Mr Griffith took on the great Brazilian champion Victor Hugo, one of the biggest and most skilled heavyweights in the world. Initially it was very tightly contested, but then Mr Hugo was able to get behind and perform a big lift to take Mr Griffiths back. Mr Griffith showed great composure and defensive acumen to survive a very challenging position. Mr Griffith picked his moment and created a nice reversal to a guard pass into mount and then to the back where he very nearly finished as time expired to take a fine victory against a great opponent who outweighed him by 50 pounds. In the main event Kaynan Duarte started very strong but Nicky Rod weathered the storm and off a takedown attempt secured the mounted position which we able to maintain through to the end for a fine victory against one of the best in the world. Now I’ve got to drive home - hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Going back in time: A young Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon getting ready for another match early in their careers (I’m not certain but I think this training session was in the days leading up to Gordons match against Ralek Gracie). You see a lot of the themes that a developing Jiu jitsu player must contend with in this photo. An empty local gym, no one but your friends and training partners see what you’re going through. You’ve got to find your own distinctive way to get to the top, at this stage in his career it was leg locks and back attacks for Gordon, though that would evolve over time as his career progressed. Perhaps most important, live training as the basis of skill development. You’ll forget most of what you’re told, but the ingrained reactions and habits forged in years of live training will be burnt into your nervous system in a way that will stay with you forever.

We all want fast progress, but never forget that new moves and tactics and even training methodologies take time to develop. It’s easy to be impatient and dismiss things that later turn out to be valuable. Rome, as they say, wasn’t built in a day, and neither is your technique. Understand that initial even the best moves will feel weak and lacking in potential. The initial deficiency is almost always in our execution rather than the move itself, particularly if it is a well known move that has a strong track record of success for other people at high level. Be impatient in your ambitions but patient in your schedule for them to be realized.

If you can keep moving even when you’re tired you’ll be ahead of most of your training partners. Most people stop when they feel encroaching fatigue. If you’re both tired and he stops and you keep moving, you’ll soon be in control of the action. The decision to stop is always just that - a decision. When you’re training train yourself to keep moving when you feel tired. Your mental resolve can be built and developed in a similar way to your other attributes. Start in the gym and work from there!

Keep an eye on the action: A workout is only as good as the feedback and lessons it furnishes for the next. Someone’s got to keep an eye on what you’re doing, sometimes it’s a coach, sometimes it’s a training partner, but most of the time it will have to be you. It is crucial that you learn to reflect on what happened during each workout so that lessons can be derived for tomorrow. Only when there is progression from one workout to the next is there improvement over time. Without that it’s just an eternal slogging match. So often I see athletes who are fully prepared to give maximum effort during a workout but settle for minimal effort on the post workout reflections which are key for progress.

When you look at some sports you see they favor a very particular body type. It would be difficult to imagine a talk and lanky gymnastics winning at high levels, or a short and heavyset sprinter, or a very short basketball player. A remarkable thing about jiu jitsu is the great variety of body types you see among the great champions, even within a weight class. This is most likely due to the almost infinite variety of techniques and tactics that can be employed by the athletes which can be modified to nearly any body type. It seems that Jiu jitsus heavy emphasis on techniques that can nullify size and strength discrepancies helps in this regard. A sport like basketball has a constraint based on the height of the hoop that largely precludes very short people - Jiu jitsu does not appear to have such an obvious limiting constraint. Jiu jitsu is an adaptive game that allows athletes to create niche areas of specialization that enable athletes of all types avenues to victory regardless of an opponent having what appear to physical advantages. So don’t think that your body is somehow less suited to Jiu jitsu than the people around you. Look through a line up of past champions and there is a very high chance you see someone who looks a lot like you!

Make the first threat a strong one so that your opponent must react. It’s the reaction that opens the door to a second and third threat; and with each successive threat defense becomes more difficult as he is always starting second to your initiation. That’s the pattern of good attacking Jiu jitsu!

Keep working diligently on your skills. There aren’t many things you can rely on in this world, but the ability to get difficult work done by applying skills that few people possess in a field that many consider important, is a notion that will never go out of fashion. People will come in and out of your life, circumstances will change, trends will emerge and then disappear - but your skill set will always be there for you when you need to get difficult work done. Never forget that skills are perishable. Once attained, they’ll need to be maintained. Set time every day to grow and maintain them and you’ll always have a trusted means of getting to your goals.

Action and reaction: The old master of Jiu jitsu and Judo strongly emphasized the idea of push and pull as the basis of grappling. “When pulled, push; and when pushed, pull,” is the classic statement of their approach. There is much wisdom in this. It’s easy to get so caught up in the application of technique that you can lose sight of the big picture. Every time you attempt a technique there will be resistance. By starting with pushing and pulling you get a resistance response - that’s the que you look for to enter into your move. That’s exactly when an opponent over commits to the response and can be scored on. Start everything with push and pull prior to your technique and everything seems to work more easily

Every move in Jiu jitsu has a counter. On the face it this might make you a skeptic about ever using a move successfully. If every move has a counter and your opponent knows roughly as much as you do, how will you ever succeed? Well, there’s a lot more to the game than who knows how much about whatever. Many other factors are involved, such as time, quality of execution, relative fatigue levels etc etc and it’s the sum of all these factors that determines the outcome. So when you go to apply a move, do so with commitment. Don’t hold back wondering if the counter will stop you. That kind of thinking never wins. If you do get countered it’s not a disaster, it’s just a temporary change of direction in the match. So go in with commitment and get on that winning path.

Most of your attempts a given move against someone your own size and skill level will fail. The question becomes - what should we do in the case of failure. Some will abandon that particular move and try some alternatives. Others will persist with the original move in the belief that the next time may be different and that previous failures are not indicative of failure on the next attempt. There is wisdom in both responses - there is no right or wrong answer here. I’ve seen both responses win matches and I’ve seen both responses lose matches. It will come down to your judgement based upon a number of relevant factors in each particular case. I will say however, that many people give up too quickly when they experience failure with a move - remember, it only has to work once to have a big impact on the match, so don’t stop trying it without a strong reason, especially if it’s one of your best moves.

Anyone can look good in a dominant position. It’s how well you deal with being trapped in bad position that will separate you from everyone else. There’s lots of strong hammers out there, but the real test is when you’re the nail. Make sure you work both sides of the positional game!

Take a little break in the action: Jiu jitsu can be a very exhausting game. In daily life what do you do when you’re exhausted? You take a break. Jiu jitsu is the same. When you feel the exertion level has been too high for too long - take a little break in the action. Obviously you can’t just get totally relaxed or get quickly crushed, but Jiu jitsu affords many opportunities to lower the intensity to a degree where you can recover enough to get back to a high exertion level that you can sustain until the end of the match. Most of these opportunities for partial relaxation occur after a positional change. After a hard fought takedown where you land in an opponents guard is a good example. A short break after the energy expenditure of the takedown allows you to go forward with sufficient energy reserves for the positional ground battle. Gaining endurance in Jiu jitsu is largely about this skill of learning where and when to take a little break in the action

If you can create a THREAT, then you can create a REACTION, and if you can ANTICIPATE that reaction you can always beat your opponent to the next move - and THAT’S how you take charge of a match.

Mentors: I was very fortunate when I began Jiu Jitsu that I had an excellent teacher, Renzo Gracie, and many excellent mentors, in particular Matt Serra, Ricardo Almeida and Rodrigo Gracie. As I progressed, those original mentors moved on to teach at their own schools, as I’m sure many of the mentors in your life did, but that doesn’t mean that new mentors can’t come in and have an important effect in your development. I had many mentors who were just visitors who stayed for a week or two, such as Ryan Gracie, Nino Schembri, Dean Lister, Samuel Braga and many others. If someone can give you an important idea that you can then research yourself, it doesn’t matter how long THEY stay, it only matters how long the IDEA stays. One of the greatest resources you will ever have in Jiu jitsu is the people around you, even those who are there only for a short while - make sure you use that resource to the greatest degree you can.

When we think of a path to victory we typically think in terms of an attacking move that slices through an opponent’s defense and gives us the win. That’s certainly a great way to think about it, but it will be difficult to get this approach to work every time against good opponents. Very often a different path to victory is required when an opponent has rock solid defense. Focus your training on becoming as difficult to score on as possible. If an opponent cannot score on you he will become frustrated and try all the harder. This almost always results in fatigue and frustration. Fatigue will always reduce an opponent’s ability to stop an attack. Get him tired enough and moves that weren’t working at all eight minutes ago suddenly start working very well. Frustration will get an opponent over extending into offense and forgetful of his defensive responsibilities. An opponent like this is much easier to attack than one who is in a more defensive mode when you’re initiating all the attacks. So instead of thinking purely about direct offense, spare a thought for making yourself as difficult to score on as possible, this will indirectly lead you to more submissions in the manner described

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video MASTERING THE MOVE: THE SIDE CRUCIFIX. The side crucifix is one of the premier finishing positions of Jiu jitsu. Jiu jitsu has always been conceived as a game of position and submission. Sometimes this has the unfortunate result of creating a gulf between position and submission. Positional pins control the torso, but submission occurs at the limbs - the control of each is very different and so as a result, many students struggle to go from position to submission. The side crucifix bridges that gap. It is a pin that directly controls the limbs as well at the torso and as such, enables you to smoothly transition from positional control into submissions. I have my own approach to the position which has proven very successful for my students - I’m confident it can for you also! If this is something you’re interested in, check it out! Links in my Instagram story

In jiujitsu, as in most things in life, if you can get off to a good start, you’ll generally find it easier to get to your final destination than if you get off to a bad start. Getting a good start in Jiu jitsu means approaching in a good stance and getting a good working grip that enables you to dictate the opening direction of the exchange. If you can consistently get a grip that enables you to transition into attacks better than your opponent, then your chances of getting into the advantageous positions that bring victory go up considerably.

Taking notes: How do you feel about taking notes after learning? Is it something you regularly do after class? If so, does it actually help you retain information? When I look at myself and my students there is a clear split on this subject. I took notes at every opportunity throughout my time in Jiu jitsu. Eddie Cummings was a prolific note taker, as was Brian Glick, but Gordon, Garry, Nicky, Nicholas, Giancarlo and most of the others never took a note in their lives and yet had no problem retaining information. There is some evidence in the literature to show that writing, particularly hand writing, does aid retention to a degree, but I’ve never seen any strong evidence of it in Jiu jitsu learning. In the case of myself, Eddie and Brian, we all came from an academic background and so I think we just naturally took notes at every taking from that and applied it to a different field of study. The other students did not have an academic past and so found other ways to order their information - both groups were successful in that regard so I don’t think there is a big advantage in taking notes. I think most people have a preferred way of retaining and ordering information and it’s best to use what you’ve had success with previously rather than forcing yourself to take notes just because you’ve seen other people do it.

Progress: In many sports it’s quite easy to discern how much progress you’re making as it can objectively measured by a clock, or the amount of weight you lift, or how far you throw an object. In combat sports like Jiu jitsu progress is not so clear. Sometimes when you’re training in a tough room it can feel like you make no progress for months on end. This is because everyone around you is going through the same program as you and making similar progress. As a result the students are like boats in a fog shrouded river where the various boats can see each other but they can’t see the river banks. The current carries them all at the same speed - they’re all moving but from the perspective of anyone on one of the boats they all appear stationary as they move at the same speed as each other and can’t see the stationary objects on the river banks that would show them that they’re actually moving. So too in Jiu jitsu. As the people around improve at the same rate as you it all seems like an endless slogging match with no forward progress. Rest assured that in the vast majority of cases you are moving forward, it’s just that it’s usually at the same pace as your comrades. Every so often you’ll get insights into your progress when you spar with someone who you used to spar with regularly in the past but who has been training elsewhere for an extended period of time. If you now do significantly better in sparring than you did in the past, then that’s a great sign that you’ve made real progress despite appearances

So much of this game is based on knowing the next move your opponent must make. When you know what the opponent has to do next, that’s when the game becomes easy. If you know your opponents has to get to his side to prevent your passing move, and you know also that the only way he can get to his side is to retract his elbow under his ribs, then you know that the smart move is to control his elbow even as you are in the act of passing. If you can kill the opponents next move before it can even get started your game takes on an effortless look and an opponent feels like he’s getting beaten before he even starts. This game of anticipation is not magic - it’s just recognizing the patterns of human movement as expressed in grappling. If you know the patterns - you’ll have an accurate idea of what’s going to happen next

When you first go in to establish contact with an opponent it’s good to have a general sense of what you want to do - this will give your attacks a sense of direction and purpose. However, it’s also good to have a realistic understanding that very often what we want to do and what ends up happening are often two very different things, so be sure to have an adaptable mindset which is not afraid to switch directions as much as necessary if you run into unanticipated barriers and obstacles to your initial plan. Have a sense of direction, but be ready to switch routes if the situation demands it

Try to stay relaxed when you’re sparring in the gym. It’s human nature to get tense in stressful situations but tension and tightness never helped anyone think more clearly or react more smoothly and efficiently. Staying relaxed as possible under pressure is a skill like any other - practice it more often and you get better at it. Next time you’re sparring be mindful of your levels of tension - self awareness is key to keeping it under control.

Just because you choose to START in bottom position in Jiu Jitsu doesn’t mean you have to STAY in bottom position. Threatening to get up from bottom is one of the best ways to enlarge the scope of your bottom game and prevent the match degenerating into stalling and passivity. It adds a whole new dimension to bottom game and greatly increases the threat level you present to an opponent

How long should you persist with a move when it feels like it’s been stopped? Every move has a counter. When you try a given move on an opponent and it gets stopped, there’s a brief time where you have to decide between persisting and hoping extra effort or a slight change in angle or direction might get you past that resistance; or switching off to a completely different move, or “bailing out” of the move altogether. It’s never easy to make that choice, especially given that it’s almost always made under great physical pressure. This is why it’s so important to practice your moves in complimentary combinations. Remember that every move has a line of resistance used by a given counter, if you have a secondary move that counters that line of resistance, the decision you have to make is much easier - stay on offense and switch off to the secondary move. If you think only in terms of single moves you’ll be bailing out much more often than you need to

If you can break an opponents stance, moves become easy - if you can’t - every move is difficult. They say position before submission. Every bit as important is the notion of stance breaking before moves. A move is only as effective as an opponents (lack of) ability to defend it - the basis of his defense is his stance. Break the stance first and the move becomes doable on even a very tough and experienced opponent.

Performance was never helped by being frantic. You can be fast without being frantic, but it’s generally easily to avoid degenerating into frantic action by slowing things down a little. This is true in both offense and defense. Human nature tends to make us all a little frantic when we feel we are on the verge of victory or defeat. This is never a help, only a hinderance in these moments. Take the intensity down a little without becoming docile and you’ll find that performance improves as you can make more precise movements and you are much less susceptible to tunnel vision.

Working out on a crowded mat: One of the most common sources of injury and frustration/annoyance in Jiu jitsu is working out on a crowded mat. Sometimes one pair will fall or roll into another. I’ve been knocked out cold three times in my career by people explosively falling/rolling into me from behind while training. I’ve seen people get broken noses, chipped teeth, even a fractured orbital bone from accidental impact. The problem is particularly bad when you have standing grappling going on right next to ground grappling so that the weight of two athletes can crash down on on the others - usually from an unseen angle so that you cannot brace yourself for the impact. Even if there is no injury, you can’t grapple if two people move right into your space. What’s need is first, a culture of situational awareness. Teach people about the potential dangers and build a culture that has people looking around themselves as they grapple rather than get tunnel vision and see only the opponent in front of them. Build a culture where they value team safety over scoring a point on a training partner. We all like to score a good move, but not at the expense of safety. Make sure you have some kind of established order in place so that students know when they infringe on another pairs space what to do. A simple approach I’ve always used in every room I coached is that if two grapplers in the course of grappling find themselves entering into the space of another pair, the entering pair stop and relocate, the other two remain in place. If it’s unclear who entered because both pairs were moving, both pairs stop and relocate. If you prefer a more traditional approach you can say that when it’s unclear who infringed on the other pairs space, the higher belts remain in place and lower belts relocate. This way you can have even a very crowded room full of athletes working hard and in constant motion - back in the basement it was common for us to have over one hundred athletes working out in less than 3500sqf of space, but this simple advice of building a culture of situational awareness and a simple criteria maintaining a safe amount of space between pairs of athletes worked well

Most people have a sense of when it’s likely they’ll be scored on and accept the score without further resistance. There is some good logic to this. If you fight too long against a score you can create a situation where your opponents score is amplified - usually by exposing your back to your opponent. So the conservative option is to take the loss and move on to the next battle. There is a middle ground between fighting the move you’re being attacked by to the bitter end and giving up too early. You want to make the opponents attempt to score as costly in terms of energy expended as possible and draw the action out as long as possible to give yourself more time to slow an opponent down and then counterattack. Time in these situations is the best friend of the defender and the kryptonite of the attacker.

There’s not a lot an opponent can do when take both his feet off the ground and apply a force to him. The question in your mind now should not be the move you’ve performed - it’s done its work already - now it’s time to consider what will happen in the aftermath of a successful move. With this much elevation the landing will be chaotic - so you know there’ll be a scramble the second he lands. Even as you’re completing one move you must be plotting the next in the context you’ve just created. Don’t perform a move and then try to figure out what to do next - figure it out BETWEEN the moves so that you’ll always be a step ahead and build momentum from one move to the next.

When you begin a match there are an infinite number of possibilities for both you and your opponent to choose. Every time you begin to grip and control each other, the number of possible actions drops. As control increases, the number of possible actions decreases. Your aim is to gain so much control that the number of possible actions for an opponent becomes first manageable, then so small that you can begin to predict his next action from the small number of alternatives left. Best of all is to have control combined with the threat of submission. This means your opponent will only be able to move in certain predictable ways to avoid that submission. In this way you can make his next move predictable. This is the highest goal. At this stage you are like a puppeteer controlling an opponent’s movement and knowing where he will be next one or two moves from now. The idea is to take your opponent’s possible options into a funnel. At the opening of the funnel many options can fit, but as you progress further into that funnel you can control and direct the water as it merges out the narrow end. When he is reduced to two or three known options at the end you can essentially read his future

When you go to apply isometric strength in Jiu jitsu, don’t apply your pressure instantly, you’ll burn out quickly that way. Get everything in position and exert your tension over time rising to a peak. Make very sure you keep breathing as you do so because you’ll need to apply that tension for a sufficient time to get the job done. This way you can apply strong tension without exhausting yourself. This game is all about the application of isometric tension from mechanically advantageous situations. Make sure that tension works against your opponent and not against yourself!

When you can absorb an opponents attack without being unduly off balanced, you will be in the best attacking position of them all - you still in solid stance and your opponent out of stance and over extended due to over committing on a failed attack. Just as an army that loses grasp of its strategy and tactics and pushes too far forward away from supplies and reinforcements and is now in danger of encirclement and destruction by a counterattacking enemy, so too, an athlete who keeps charging forward into an attack that has lost its way will find himself overextended and vulnerable to counters. Position may be the most well known precursor to submission, but counters from a strong defense against an overcommitted but failed attack from an over zealous opponent may be even better. Practice absorbing an attack and staying cognizant of opportunity in the immediate aftermath and you’ll find a wealth of new opportunities

A large part of what we call control in Jiu jitsu is the action of degrading your opponents athletic potential. The human body is capable of remarkable movement under ideal circumstances - but if you change those circumstances by say, trapping a leg off the mat, locking two legs together, pinning the head and shoulders to the floor or any other hold that compromises the body’s ability to move freely, then physical control over an adversary becomes much easier. When you go to restrain opponents don’t just put your weight in them. Ask yourself what is the first physical movement they need to make in order to begin escape - and take away their ability to make that first move. This is what makes control appear effortless when done well.

Some sports divide offense and defense very strongly. Some so strongly that have athletes responsible for defense and others for offense. In Jiu jitsu and most combat sports, you and you alone are responsible for both. When you begin typically there is a bias towards defensive skills first, and then as your game matures things swing the other way and your focus shifts most towards offense. At the highest levels however, the two become inseparable. ALL GOOD DEFENSE HAS BUILT IN OFFENSE AND ALL GOOD OFFENSE HAS DEFENSIVE RESPONSIBILITY BUILT INTO IT. The more talented your opponents the better their ability to counter you in the blink of an eye, thus the need for defensive responsibility when attacking; and also the better their ability to maintain an attacking momentum once they start, hence the need to break that momentum with your own counter offense when under attack. Don’t see offense and defense as opposite ends of a spectrum, but rather as the dual demands of good technique

When you can create dual threats at the same time you will greatly increase your success. A naive opponent can be defeated by any move. A good opponent can be defeated by a well executed move. But a great opponent will be defeated only by multiple moves working together in opposing directions so that defense of one will entrap him in the other. Learn to pair moves and you’ll double your effectiveness in a very short time

It’s much easier and faster to refine an existing technique than to learn an entirely new one. If you’re looking for fast progress, look for new applications of old techniques in your repertoire. Any given technique can be given a whole new life by the simple addition of a new set up or a new pairing with another already existing technique in your repertoire. It’s easy to dismiss your old techniques as passé but changing the packaging around them can quickly make them exciting and effective again

The narrower the focus of your attacks, the easier for an opponent to station all of his defenses in that area to stop you. As your attacks gain in breadth around the body, the more an opponent must stretch his defenses to cover all the potential danger areas. Make you can attack top half, bottom half and both left and right and it’ll never be easy for an opponent to cover all the bases.

A question I’m often asked is - how much physical intensity should I be applying to my moves when I’m sparring? I’ve seen some great champions train with great intensity. I’ve seen others train in a very relaxed fashion. I believe that in general excessive physical tension is detrimental to athletic performance. My general advice is to train at something close to the minimum physical tension/intensity to perform the task you’re working on - no more, no less. Now this means that sometimes you’ll be using a LOT of physical intensity because sometimes the task at hand is a big one. The problem is that most people have a hard time dialing back the intensity once they’ve accessed it. As a result they tend to keep the intensity higher than it needs to be and quickly become fatigued. So at all times in match, keep an eye on your intensity level and ask yourself if your current level of intensity is well matched to the task at hand. Most times for most people it’s usually higher than necessary. Learn to monitor it well and you’ll be much more efficient in your expression of Jiu jitsu

Many people have a tendency to push opponents away with their legs when in finishing positions. In the vast majority of cases you want to do the opposite - pull your opponents IN with your legs. For most leg locks you want to be tightly bound hip to hip, for most arm locks pull yourself hip to shoulder. Pull in with your legs like a hamstring curl - this will create a fit into your opponents body that will make escape more difficult and submission more likely

Great night of grappling in Las Vegas!! @ufcfightpass put on a great show tonight in Las Vegas with many very dramatic matches and submissions! @helenajiujitsugirl Helena Crevar continued her devastating run with a fine leg lock submission victory and won submission of the night! The teenage phenom stunned the crowd with a very fine submission sequence to showcase her ever increasing arsenal. @tazagarami had an action packed battle with the very talented Renato Canuto in a dramatic match that won the best match of the night award! Mr Canuto won on a score late in the match but both athletes shone! Congratulations to UFC Fight Pass for another great show! I hope you all enjoyed the action!

Workout in Las Vegas completed! @tazagarami and @helenajiujitsugirl completed their first workout in Las Vegas in preparation for UFC @ufcfightpass along with our good friend David Avellan @davidavellan and @sniper.bjj I always love time in Las Vegas - so many good memories of past MMA and grappling events! This upcoming UFC Fightpass grappling show has many great matches - keep your eyes open for this one!

The old cliche in combat sports is “he who controls the head controls the whole body.” Like most cliches there is a lot of truth in it. Nowhere is this more evident than in pins and passes from chest to chest positioning. If you can lock down an opponent’s head and shoulders whilst still being to move freely into the next position yourself, then you’re on track to win. Take every opportunity to wedge your opponents head in place with your head and underhook and you’ll be a menace from top position

It’s rare that the application of a single move is successful against an opponent your own size and skill level in a competitive match. Typically what brings victory is strings or series of moves applied in the context of physically wearing an opponent down or distracting him with some form of set up. Your training should reflect this fundamental truth. Learn your moves in sequences so that when things get competitive you’ll apply them in sequences

When you can pin with authority time becomes a weapon in your game. The longer you spend in a given pin the weaker an opponent becomes. As fatigue sets in, skill level drops. Thus can good pinning skills be the means to tip the balance of an even match as the game goes further on the clock

Whenever you attack with multiple moves in a combination or sequence, it is critical that the preceding move be done with real intention, even though you are not expecting it to succeed and to use it as a stepping stone to the next move,
Which you are counting on to be the actual winning move. It’s easy to merely go through the motions in a complacent or lackadaisical fashion with the first move, since your mental focus is on the next move This will almost always end in failure. The only way the second move will take effect is if the opponent reacts strongly to the threat of the initial move - THAT’S what opens the door to the second winning move. Without that perceived threat you won’t get the defensive reaction that will make the second move successful. So next time you’re working in combinations, don’t short change the first move, even when you know that’s not the one that will get you the breakthrough. Make the threat look and feel very real. That’s the key to getting a big defensive reaction that will make the second move work

Just as a musician seeks to constantly expand and refine his performance of his repertoire, so to a jiu jitsu athlete must constantly seek to expand and refine his repertoire of submissions. Each addition will add something to your game that will make the task of defense more difficult for your opponents. Keep studying, keep adding and as time passes your versatility and depth will increase in ways that improve your performance

Placido Santos @placisantos the world’s most famous uke got a well deserved brown belt after his double gold performance at The Austin Open. Placido is a fine example of balancing family life with jiu jitsu. Most of my well known professional athletes train full time with very few distractions. However, most people live their Jiu Jitsu lives under very different circumstances, seeking to train while prioritizing family and work, training when they can and doing their best to juggle their other responsibilities with their training time. I’m always greatly impressed by people who do this. Over the years I’ve had many students who reached a very impressive level while holding down very difficult jobs and raising children. Placido is a great example of this. Many of the professional athletes will tell you that some of their best and toughest training partners when getting ready for international competition are people who come in before or after working a full day at work and who will be going home to raising their family. That’s an achievement every bit as impressive as a full time athlete getting to the top of the competitive field. Well done Placido! Keep up the good work!

One of the best parts of training is having immensely talented visitors stop by and work alongside us. This week the great American wrestler Helen Maroulis @helen_maroulis came in for training. She is one of the greatest freestyle wrestlers of all time Olympic champion (the first American woman to win this title), three time world champion and a stunning ten time medalist in Olympic and world championships competition. She now trains Jiu jitsu in addition to her wrestling. It was truly fascinating to watch her game blend wrestling and her fast developing Jiu jitsu skills. Her wrestling style is very unique - lots of upper body controls and takedowns with footsweeps and truly superb transitions to the ground. It is very well suited to crossover with jiu jitsu. She taught one of her signature takedown variations to the squad and showed her teaching skills are as good as her competitive skills! It was a great lesson to the team to see someone who is already so accomplished still learning and moving in new directions. She is a true treasure for the grappling world!

Make an opponent work hard all the way through even when you know he is likely to score on you. It’s ok if an opponent scores on you. If he’s good that’s very likely to happen. The only thing that is unacceptable is that he scores easily on you and that you don’t contest it. If an opponent does score on you it should be a nightmare for him that has him seriously questioning whether it was worth the energy he had to expend getting the score. You’d be surprised how long you drag things out before you concede a score. When an opponent has to work like a dog to get a score on you and now feels like he’s gone much further into the red than he believed he would have to go - it’s going to be a daunting prospect for him to try any more offense. So if you feel you have to concede points make sure they come at a very heavy price in terms of energy expenditure to your opponent. In that way even a loss can come out as a partial win that can help steer you towards victory further down the line.

If a jiu jitsu student just focused on what he learned in his first year of training it would not be out of the question that he would be able to get to the top of the sport with these techniques alone. Such is the power of the fundamentals of the game. The fundamentals furnish the clearest lessons of the principles of the sport from which all other, more advanced and esoteric elements spring, and in addition, are the clearest expressions of those principles in action. It’s easy to overlook those early lessons as you go further into the sport, but as you go further still, you’ll look back on them in wonder and admiration

Some improvement through working hard. Others by working smart. But the best get there by doing both. We do the hard physical work in the gym, but that’s never the end of it. Then it’s time for the mental work outside the gym. That’s when study, evaluation and assessment is made. This creates the direction and focus of the next physical session, which turn provides new feedback into the cycle of skill development. That’s the path to your goals

Most people measure themselves by how well they perform in winning situations, but when you are up against your toughest opponents you’ll be measured by how well you handle losing situations and fight your way back into winning situations. Make sure your training reflects this truth.

It’s harder for an opponent to attack you when he has to continuously react to the threats you create for him. You can never let an opponent attack you uncontested for any length of time. Any attacks he launches should have to be done in the midst of defending himself from your attacks. This minimizes his set ups and the overall quality of his attacks. Seizing control of the proactive vs reactive narrative of a match is key to winning against opponents of similar skill level. When the attacking momentum is in your favor, your own attacks will come easier and his will be easier to squash

Do you bring a special gift to the game? I’ve always believed that everyone has some special attribute that they possess which, if used properly, will govern them a measure of advantage against their opponents. This gift varies wildly from person to person, but each of us must identify it and try to use it to maximum effect. For some people it’s an obvious physical feature, strength, reach, speed. For others it’s a mental attribute, toughness, determination, a calm demeanor in chaos. Sometimes it’s less obvious - an attribute such as patience isn’t always easy to see but can be of tremendous value in the long haul. Do you have something that you’ve always felt you did particularly well? Does it currently play a role in your game? If not, could it? When you look within yourself it may not be immediately obvious. For example I’ve always considered one of Gordon Ryan’s best attributes that contributes significantly to his success is memory. He has an astounding memory for Jiu Jitsu information and his ability to make Jiu jitsu an information battle makes this a serious weapon in his arsenal. We don’t ordinarily think of memory as a relevant attribute in Jiu jitsu but he made it one of his best. Tr hard to know yourself. The better you know yourself the better you can build a game around who you are and the better the armor of your jiu jitsu will fit your body.

A guiding principle of high percentage Jiu jitsu is to nullify first - attack second. You’re engaged in a game where the other fellow is always trying to attack you at the same time you’re trying to attack him. You don’t want to get into shootouts where it can go either way like a coin toss. Prudent athletes usually first negate an opponents ability to attack first and only then launch their own attacks. Identify the danger and remove it early - for example in the case of guard position, the feet are the essential connectors that enable an opponent to attack - so negate them first. Then you can begin your attacks without concern about what he might do as you attack. This will enable you to focus on what you want to do without distraction, making your attacks much more likely to succeed!

Keep searching for knowledge. There aren’t many certainties, but there are many refutations - so keep an open mind and seek experimentation at every opportunity. When you can transform that knowledge into a skill, that skill can transform your game and generate new questions and insights and create a virtuous circle between skill and knowledge. Keep everything honest with trial and error and you can move forward over a lifetime

Momentum: If you can string some attacks together in a sequence you’ll develop attacking momentum. This is an extremely important element of success at high levels where immediate breakthroughs and success are rare. It doesn’t matter if three moves in a row fail to go all the way to completion - just so long as they force extended defensive reactions. Once you build attacking momentum - see how long you can keep it. Don’t stop on your own accord. Stop only if you get stopped. That momentum can steer the whole match in your favor for a sizable period of time. It creates a reactive mindset in your opponent where he is no longer thinking about what he will do to you, but only what you’re doing to him. Switch rapidly between positional and submission attacks to carry the momentum more easily and in different directions to make it even harder to stop. Get a few sequences in your favor like this and you’ll set yourself up for victory later!

You have to work with what you’ve got: In my Jiu jitsu journey one of the biggest issues was always my own body. I began the sport late with a crippled leg. I always tried to live as active a life as my body would permit. Unfortunately when one part of the body is compromised, other parts have to take an added strain, which in the long term will always cause problems. Eight years ago I got a hip replacement and was able to resume coaching at a professional level. About four years ago my other hip started to deteriorate in a similar way. I was going to get it replaced, but when the squad broke up I had to start a new team from scratch and so I had to delay it. Recently my hip went into final decline and now doctors are urging me to get it replaced and also the crippled knee that was the root cause of the problems. This year I will have to do four surgeries to try and get a satisfactory body back. I started today with the easiest surgery - a bilateral inguinal hernia repair that I’ve been putting off too long. Then I will have to schedule the much more serious hip and knee replacements (after that I have to get lens implanted my eyes to get my deteriorating vision back in order). My last hip replacement took about six months to a year to fully recover from. The issue will be the more complex and generally less robust knee replacement, which in my case will be attached to a femur that already has a hip replacement on the other side of it. The doctors say that generally this is the end of any kind of Jiu jitsu type movement at high level. As such I will most likely have to make a reappraisal of my role in Jiu jitsu coaching. I hope that given enough time I can return to high level coaching but it may be that I have to switch focus to more recreational Jiu jitsu coaching. Despite the uncertainty, there is something of which I am very sure. If I do have to step away from coaching professional athletes, my students are without exception, truly outstanding teachers so I am extremely confident that they can represent what we espoused far better than I ever did and contribute greatly to the sports continued growth. Today, one operation down, three more to go!

You don’t have to be perfect in your execution of technique in Jiu jitsu - you only have to be good enough in your execution to be able to surpass the resistance of the opponent in front of you. So don’t hold back thinking that if you aren’t perfect you aren’t good enough to try. You aren’t perfect - but nether is your opponent. Don’t let your admirable desire to seek perfection in technique become a hinderance. Keep a healthy sense of not giving a damn and go for it!

Jiu jitsu is a game of progression towards two (mostly) correlated goals - position and submission. The highest goal is submission. Most of the time, the safest path to submission is along the road of position, since the better your position the more likely it is you’ll be able to submit your opponent and the less likely he’ll be able to do the same to you. Build a mindset of working forwards toward your positional goals no matter how many roadblocks and obstacles your opponent puts in front of you and you’ll be a difficult opponent for anyone. Don’t just work hard - work with a sense of direction. What’s your next position? How will you get there? What can your opponent do to stop you and how can you overcome this? As long as you’re thinking in these terms you’ll always be on the right track no matter how difficult things may seem second by second.

Taking a break from the action: It can be very tiring when working against a skilled opponent. If you keep pressing the gas pedal when you’re already tired it’s quite likely you’ll get to a level of fatigue where if you can’t finish your opponent you’ll lose on sheer exhaustion. Learn to take breaks when appropriate. When you’ve gotten to a position of advantage there is usually time to slow things down and recover your breath and dissipate some lactic acid. If you’re in decent shape even a short break can lead to significant recovery. Since you’re in a pin your opponent won’t find recovery as easy as he is carrying your weight. Once you feel sufficiently recovered , then it’s time to get back to work, but in a condition where renewed work won’t push you over an edge from which you can’t recover. If you had. A big project to complete at work over a month, you wouldn’t just keep working on it with no sleep, no food, no rest - you’d be completely frazzled long before it was complete. Instead, you’d take regular breaks for food, rest, sleep, even weekend does off to re-energize and that way you’d have the staying power to get the project completed. Your jiu jitsu should be the same.

The skills of Jiu jitsu are highly perishable. The fact that you’ve ATTAINED them does not guarantee that you’ll RETAIN them. Stop training and you’ll find that those precious skills can lose a step quicker than you’d like. The good news is that once skills are well learned, you can generally MAINTAIN them with considerably less effort than the initial learning process and in addition, should you ever lose them, you can generally RE-learn them much more quickly than the initial learning period. The lesson we learn from this? Don’t neglect the skills you’ve worked hard to gain. If you do, inevitably they’ll deteriorate to some degree. Even a basic maintenance program can keep them in good shape. If circumstances do create a time where skills deteriorate, don’t despair, you can recover them much more easily than you learned them

Whenever you get stonewalled in front of a tough opponent - change the angle and get underneath them and suddenly a whole new set of opportunities present themselves. Your opponents defensive stance always assumes your current position - change your position, angle and/or orientation and now it’s not so defensively sound anymore. You aren’t married to your current position/angle or orientation, so if it’s not providing you opportunity - change it!

The effectiveness of your submissions is directly linked to their mechanical tightness. Space creates a loose fit and a loose fit is fatal to a submission hold on an opponent who has any defensive skills. When you drill, aim to create the sense of a very tight fit around your opponents limb in order to feel what a good mechanical fit feels like and then seek to reproduce that as best you can in sparring - that’s where the true test of your tightness will be.

They say that tired men make mistakes - our experience in Jiu jitsu suggests there is a lot of truth to this. Add to it the notion that pressure also makes us prone to mistakes and you’ve a formula for overcoming even your most technically adept opponents. They might be very sharp in technique, but if you can get them sufficiently fatigued, frustrated and subject to severe pressure, that sharp technique will be rendered blunt in time. When you get a position that offers a chance to wear an opponent down - take your time there. Moves aren’t the whole story of victory and defeat - the physical and mental state of the opponent plays an important role in the outcome also - so if you have a chance to influence it - take it!

How fast you can execute a move isn’t that important in Jiu jitsu. Much more important is fast you are at going from one move to another. This is not determined so much by your physical speed as the speed of your decision making. You can make yourself appear faster by linking your favorite moves into series, or even complete systems. That way the decisions are made and ingrained long before you act and you’ll spring into action at the first sign of opportunity!

You are in a game that is built around lever and fulcrum. Even a slightly inefficient placement of the fulcrum or a suboptimal grip on the lever can mean a serious loss in force generation. This is a time when taking an extra second to make adjustments will pay you big dividends. Study and understand leverage and you can make your perceived strength double overnight, not because you got twice and strong, but because you got twice as efficient.

If you can make an opponent carry your weight on his head and shoulders for periods of time, you can make him fatigue faster than you. Remember, it’s not how tired you get in a match that counts - it’s how tired you get relative to your opponent that determines the outcome. It’s ok to be 80% exhausted so long as the other guy is 90% exhausted. It’s the disparity in fatigue that creates winner and loser rather than the fatigue itself. See the head and shoulders as one of the best areas to apply your weight and you’ll create a situation where he works harder than you over time - and that’s a true path to victory

All knowledge begins with curiosity: To achieve high standards in Jiu jitsu or whatever other domains you will need knowledge. The precursor of knowledge is curiosity. Building a deep sense of curiosity is one of the greatest catalysts to knowledge acquisition you can ever acquire. The day your quest becomes boring or tiresome is the day it dies. You can’t force curiosity, but you can inspire or arouse it. The best way is always to ask questions of yourself and others and experiment with answers. Students with a questioning disposition and a yearning for answers are always the ones who make the best long term progress. Cultivate within yourself a questioning mind and a rational means of searching for answers and you’ll never stop making progress.

Executing a move well is very important, but even more important is the ability to combine moves together well. Perfect execution can be stopped by perfect defense but it’s very hard to stop a series of moves where the defender is playing catch up after investing too much in defending the previous move when you’ve already moved on to the next. That’s how you beat opponents with very stout defenses. Don’t just learn moves - learn to string moves together and you’ll soon soba jump in your success rates.

Opening move: When you come to grips with your opponent at the beginning of an exchange there’s always a moment where both of you are searching for an opening move. Make sure your mind is thinking of more than an opening move - you’ll need to think in terms of precursors to that opening move because the move itself will be difficult to apply on a good opponent if you just go straight in with that move. Always think in terms of gaining some form of preliminary advantage prior to attempting the move. So for example, get an advantageous angle or grip, get him out of balance, distract him with feints or some other action that breaks his stance and focus - THEN it’s time to go in and hit that opening move!

Be a maximizer: When most people get out of a bad situation in Jiu jitsu they are happy to get back a neutral position and aim their sights accordingly; just as most people working their way out of debt are happy just to pay off the debt and stop there. The better goal is to escape a bad position and immediately get into counter offense. In the majority of cases it is no more difficult to escape into an attacking position or scramble than it is to get back to a neutral position. Sometimes it’s made easy by an opponent who over commits to the hold he has as you’re escaping (nobody wants to give up a good position that they’ve worked hard for and so they often hold on too long and get over extended and thus easy to counter attack). It all starts with mindset. If you only think in terms of getting back to neutral, that’s where you’ll stop. If you think in terms of escape directly into counter attack you’ll shock yourself how often you’re able to do exactly that with no extra effort or risk.

I am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video MASTER THE MOVE: THE ANACONDA STRANGLE. The anaconda is one of the efficient strangles in the game. It can be used from set positions or in the midst of a wild scramble. It combines extremely well with other submissions from front headlock situations and once you establish a threat with it, will make positional attacks much easier as well. Due to the fact that front headlock is one of the most accessible holds in the game, opportunities for its use are everywhere. Combine this with fact that it’s relatively easy to learn and requires no special physical skills and you’ve got a move that you can use very often and learn relatively quickly. As such it can make a real impact on your game in minimum time. If you’re interested - check out the link in Instagram story!

Only when you see failure as a teacher rather than a defeat will you be ready to build towards great success. In Jiu jitsu you will fail a dozen times for every success you have. You can choose to experience this as frustration that will make you quit today, or as a lesson from which you can build towards a better tomorrow. The choice is yours.

It ain’t over till it’s over: Very often when an opponent does a good job executing a move against us we tend to accept that he got us this time and accept the consequences and start again from the new position we find ourselves in. Good players don’t think this way. They keep countering deep into the move, fighting and countering every step of the way and only concede when the risks of further opposition outweigh the potential benefits of further resistance. The better the player the longer they can prolong the resistance and turn it all into a scramble from which they do not concede a score or even better, turn it into a win. What one athlete sees as a losing position can be another athlete’s opportunity to score. Most moves have a fairly long time delay between the onset of execution and completion. In that time an astute player can play a spoiler game that undermines the ability of the executing athlete to establish control at the end of the move. Here, Garry Tonon uses his leg as an elevator (yoko sumi gaeshi) to counter a takedown and create scramble conditions that will make it very difficult for his opponent to establish any meaningful control after the takedown and thus set up his own counter offense

There is a direct correlation between the amount of time you can maintain a dominant position and the likelihood you’ll finish from there. Don’t focus exclusively on the finishing move - that’s the last chapter of the story. Make sure you put sufficient focus on training the less interesting but no less important skill of riding and maintaining the pin, because that’s the best predictor of whether the finishing hold will actually work

We usually think in terms of attacking with a move that we select. This can certainly work. Once you get to a certain level of opponent it will start working less and less. You need some form of antecedent action that breaks your opponents stance/balance/concentration. One of the best such actions from bottom position and standing position is to attack your opponents balance. This will always create an immediate and highly effective cover for your actual attack. Make it a habit when you’re sparring to think in terms of attack his balance first and employ the move second - this will keep you being successful Mo matter what the level you are competing against.

Let the position do the work for you: When you get a good position in Jiu jitsu there is usually a small feeling of partial triumph in your mind. It natural to feel ant to extend that further and go on to something even better such as a submission. That’s a good mindset, but understand that there’s usually no need to rush it. The onus is on your opponent to escape. Let him do the work while you pin him down. You did the hard work getting to the position, now let him do the hard work trying to get out. When you feel him getting tired and frustrated, NOW is the time to go for the extra points or finish. Understanding who carries the onus of work is important for your pacing and tactics. Sometimes the right thing to do is nothing or very little, until a better opportunity arises, and when an opponent is tired and over extending himself to escape a bad situation, THAT is always going to be a good opportunity

There are few moves that fully encapsulate the ideals of Jiu jitsu technique than a well executed foot sweep. Foot sweeps rely on timing for their effect. When an opponents foot bears no weight it can be swept away in a fashion that completely floors even the biggest and strongest opponents. A big man falls just as easily as a small man when he slips on an icy floor - so too when his foot is swept by an adept opponent. Size and strength won’t protect you from a well executed foot sweep. As such the principle of maximum effect from minimum effort is beautifully demonstrated by these moves, along with the ideal of being to be able to overcome greater size and strength with lesser. Foot sweeps can be a little frustrating to learn when you start out because they either work brilliantly or don’t work at all. As with any difficult task, start with small goals. Get a partner stepping in a predictable cadence and try to disrupt his stepping pattern by brushing his ankle when his foot bears no weight between steps. Timing based moves always take a little longer for most people to learn so don’t give up early if your timing is off initially, keep working until you have one successful sweep. If you can do it once you can do it again. Then it’s just a matter of experimenting with stepping patterns and grips to generate the motion that makes footsweeps possible.

Your main submission holds must be sufficiently strong that at a minimum, they can elicit a strong defensive reaction every time you apply them. Of course it’d be wonderful if every submission you attempted was wholly successful, but that’s not realistic. Just so long as you can force a strong reaction that’s enough to get positive work done. A strong reaction will break an opponents stance and that’s enough to create and sustain an attacking momentum that at the very least will create a winning exchange in your favor and in some cases may lead to total victory. Train your mechanics. Develop a lock or strangle that any opponent MUST respect and even failed submission attempts will still be of value to you

It a lot easier to predict what an opponent will do next if you have him so thoroughly controlled that he has only two or three possible options for movement. Even more so when two of those three are bad options. We don’t have the ability to predict the future, but we do have the ability to restrict an opponents choices so severely that we can know with something close to certainty what his next move will be. Every time you get a really dominant position such as mount or rear mount, spend some time focused not on immediate submission but rather control of movement and in particular, gaining an understanding of preventing some forms of movement but allowing others. This is how you gain the ability to foresee an opponents next move in the chaos of competition. Play with different positioning of your body, different grips etc - each has a noticeable effect on your opponent’s movement. In time you’ll be able to have almost as much control of your opponent’s movement as your own.

If you can keep your mind calm when your body is in chaotic motion you’re already ahead of most of your competitors. When your body is exhibiting maximum stress symptoms prior to a match and maximum fight/flight response during a match, it’s very easy to let your mind follow the same path. When you’re sparring, practice your observational skills. Try to see opportunity and select moves in response to them. This can only be done from a relatively calm mindset and as such, is a way of controlling and disciplining your thought processes as you engage in maximal physical effort. Like any other skill, it requires practice. The good news is that every sparring session is a chance to practice it just as you would your moves.

One of the few certainties you can count on in this game is that your opponent will resist every move you attempt. You can either see this as a source of frustration or a source of opportunity. If you play Jiu jitsu one move at a time, that resistance will be a source of frustration any time you’re evenly matched against a tough opponent. Every move you attempt will be stopped in its tracks and you’ll have to move on to an another move which will probably get the same result. The other option is to pair all your moves in opposing directions, so that maximum resistance to the first move leads into the second move. This means that every act of resistance leads to an opportunity for the second move. This is the way of good jiu jitsu. Don’t think in terms of moves; think in terms of paired moves that work as a dilemma. If the opponent doesn’t react to the first move, he loses. If he reacts defensively to the move he gets beaten by the second. The day your mind makes this fundamental shift is the day you enter into a jiu jitsu you can use forever against even the best opponents

Training tired: There are going to be many days when you go to work out that you’re tired and drained before the workout even begins. If it’s so bad that it feels insurmountable then there is no harm in taking some time off to recharge. In less extreme cases you can still get a very profitable workout. First, how you subjectively feel prior to a workout can be changed very quickly through activity. Very often you can be yawning and feeling dull and a good brisk warm up can completely change your energy level. I’ve had workouts where I felt completely drained at the outset and after some drills and light movement went on to have some of my best workouts. If after the workout you still feel below par, lower the bar of the workout. Perhaps just work on a very specific skill in a specific position. This lowers the physical element of the workout but raises the cognitive demands. In this way you can get a solid days progress even on a day that didn’t seem promising when it began. Compound this over time and it can add a lot more progress over a year than if you’d abandoned all those days where you weren’t feeling optimal.

Whenever an opponent puts barriers in your path - frames, knee shields etc remember this: The more an opponent stacks his defenses in one zone to stop you, the more he must sacrifice defense in some other area(s). There are no exceptions to this rule. Your mindset when you run into stout defenses will determine your actions. Most people will turn it into a contest of will and hammer away at the defenses in front of them. If you’re stronger and in better condition this can work. If your technique is noticeably better than your opponent it can work. The artful player however, will instinctively look for another route through an area where there is no defense. This is always the most efficient way. When you see nothing but barriers in front of you ask yourself “where did he sacrifice his defenses in order to construct this defense?” If you know with certainty that the sacrifice was made, it’s just a matter of finding it

Just as we are all shaped over time by the friends we keep, so too is our Jiu jitsu shaped over time by the people you train with. All of them have something to offer that can help your progress, even if it’s not always immediately obvious. When you train with very gifted athletes it’s usually very obvious how they can benefit your game. When you train with someone with an unusual body type or some exceptional physical attribute such as strength or flexibility, again it’s obvious how this might help your progress. In the case of less gifted training partners you will find that if you dig a little there will be some aspect to their game that presents an interesting challenge that will benefit your game in some way. You will encounter partners who are awkward and stiff, well, so are some of your opponents, so spend time training with them to get used to the different feel of them. You’ll have partners whose game overall may not be well developed but some attribute they possess makes them very proficient at one move - practice defending that one move. Everyone always offers something that can be of use - it’s up to us to find it and make use of it

I’ve seen champions with every type of body and every type of personality. I’ve seen champions who favored bottom position and champions who favored top position. I’ve seen champions who were supremely confident and champions who were terrified before every match. I’ve seen champions who used a vast array of moves and champions who used only a small number. Success is not limited to one type of body, one type of personality or one way of playing the game. Getting to the top is much more about working with what you have already got and finding the adaptations you need over time through experimentation to be successful than it is about changing yourself into a supposed ideal outside of yourself.

One of the last things most people learn in Jiu jitsu in pace control. You can’t drill it, can’t learn it by watching someone else, can’t get a realistic appraisal of it in flow rolling since the intensity doesn’t match what you can expect in a real match - you have to figure it out in competitive sparring. Just what constitutes a good pace varies widely according to the match length and the opponent. Some opponents favor a brisk pace in which case you may want to slow things down, others prefer a slow pace working predominantly out of static positions, in which case you may be interested in speeding things up and creating scrambles. You’ll have to experiment and find your own preferred pace but also be able to adapt pace according to different match lengths and opponents. As always it starts in the gym. Experiment during sparring with pace. Don’t focus only on technique, spare a thought for the pace in which you apply those techniques in sequences. Once you’re cognizant of the issue you can start learning, but until you’re cognizant you’ll never make progress in this crucial area

Momentum: Every competitive match has ebbs and flows between times of offense and times of defense. Part of this is physical - you get into a good position and it’s be physically difficult and demanding for an opponent to escape so you’ll be in command for a while. Part of it is psychological - when someone gets a string of moves on us we tend to go into a defensive mindset that prioritizes survival over offense so we keep ourselves in a reactive/defensive orientation until there is a break in the action. You have to take advantage of these ebbs and flows when they’re in your favor as a fisherman takes advantage of the tides. When the momentum is your favor and you’ve got an opponent on the run it’s time to press the action - keep going! Don’t stop when all the momentum is in your favor - that gives the opponent a chance to recover and develop his own momentum. Learn to read the momentum of the match and when it favors you, extract maximum benefit by pressing your attacks with confidence

Attacking a problem rather than running from a problem: When I began jiu jitsu I trained the same way most people do - I found some favorite moves and positions that I had some natural talent for and spent most of my time working on those. I also discovered many positions and moves that I had no natural talent for and avoided them like the plague! As a result my white belt game was a lopsided and disjointed affair where every match in training was a case of me hoping that I got to my favorite positions and hoping that I didn’t get out in any of my least favorite positions. This approach does not get good long term results. I discovered early on that you’ve got two choices with your problem areas - you can either hide from them as I was doing, or you can actively attack them by studying the problematic elements and training hard in that specific area - this is the way of long term progress. Any hard sparring session will immediately tell you where your current weaknesses are. Then it’s up to you to make the choice. Do you turn away from them or towards them. One path is easy but limiting. The other is hard but will unshackle you from your current limits.

Hammers and nails: If there is one certainty in this sport it’s this. Some days you’ll be the hammer and some days you’ll be the nail. Everything is easy when you’re the hammer but it’s hell when you’re the nail. As a result most people tend to unconsciously (and sometimes consciously) bias their training towards offensive skills (hammer) and sacrifice training time on defensive skills (nail). This is not good. I don’t care how good your offense gets, as you go against better opponents you will find yourself in bad positions. You don’t want the realization that you ought to have spent more time working on defense to happen in the middle of a tough match as you are exhausted underneath a strong pin with no idea what to do next. Make sure you allocate a large percentage of your training time to defense, especially in your early days of training. It may not be pleasant, but like a bitter tasting medicine, it will be the thing that saves you when you’re in trouble.

Good times bad times: I’ve had Jiu jitsu workouts were I felt on top of the world, where every move seemed to work perfectly and new ideas sprung to my head and even new moves seemed easy to perform. I’ve had other workouts where I couldn’t do a single move correctly, stumbled around like a fool and couldn’t figure out a solution to any problem I faced. Most workouts were somewhere in between those extremes. I imagine your experience is similar. Don’t get too upset about bad workouts, they come and go. You’re not judged by any one workout, but rather the average of all your workouts over long periods of time. So when you have a day where nothing goes right, don’t get despondent. Just do a little self analysis afterwards to see where you can improve tomorrow and have faith that it’s the totality of your workouts that count, not the best ones or worst ones.

The greatest need for precision in Jiu jitsu is probably in the application of joint locks. This is the clearest case of the use of levers and fulcrums and blocks/wedges in the game. As any engineer will tell you, the difference in force generation between properly using the full length of the lever with a well placed fulcrum is far greater than a hackneyed application where you use them inefficiently. This is a case where a little extra time to set things properly pays big dividends - so don’t rush the finishes at the expense of precision with your joint locks.

All your grappling techniques from neutral positions begin with push and pull punctuated by movement. As soon as you come to grips with an opponent make the habit of push/pull/move. From the reaction you get you will be able to read your opponent by touch and feel in a similar way to blind main reading braille. When you can read your opponent’s energy and direction through your hands you can apply the appropriate attack rather than some preconceived attack that may not be suitable at that moment.

There are a thousand ways to make a move better - but there is one thing that NEVER makes a move work better and always makes it worse - PANIC. Your first duty in a dicey situation is a mental duty - stay calm - only then do you get physical and start performing moves. Jiu jitsu is a game of decisions. You find yourself in a given situation - you make decisions as to how to act. Decision making is never aided by a mental state of panic. The first prerequisite of making decisions is a mind calm enough to make a rational decision in the first place. You can practice this every day in sparring. Don’t just train your moves - train your mind to remain calm as you spar - because every move is preceded by a decision and you’ll need a calm mind to make wise decisions

Happy New Year to you all! Thank you so much for following along the crazy story of my students progress through Jiu jitsu. Wishing you all the best for your progress throughout 2025 towards your jiu jitsu dreams. Remember always that small incremental progressions over time is what builds a deep game that will prevail against many types of opponents in many circumstances.

You can learn to direct your bodyweight and make top position far more effective. I’m sure you’ve had the experience of sparring with an opponent who didn’t seem particularly big or heavy who nonetheless felt extremely heavy whenever he was on top. This is because he knows how to maximize the use of his body weight. In this way a smaller athlete can feel considerably heavier than a less skilled bigger athlete. There are three keys to this skill. The first is learning to direct your weight through stance. Here I am using a tripod stance to direct my weight in a way that takes very energy but which directs a large percentage of your weight straight into an opponent. The second is learning to use the best parts of your own body to impose that weight on to your opponent. Shoulders, forehead, knees are good candidates. The third is choosing the best parts of your opponent’s body to impose your weight. You’ll want to choose weaker, softer areas of the body or some area that can be used as a lever in your favor, such as jawbone, the diaphragm, floating ribs etc. When you can direct your weight through a hardened part of your body into a weaker part of an opponents body, you’ll be using your top pressure very effectively

I’m going backwards!! Probably one of the most common sentiments among Jiu Jitsu students is that they are getting worse as they’re trying so hard to get better. This is understandable. There are in fact many times when you actually DO get worse in this game. Any time you’re trying to learn an important new move you will begin with a low skill level. When you try to employ it in sparring it will feel like a disaster. As you spend more time trying to improve your skill with this new move, you will have to sacrifice training time with your old established moves and so they will dip in effectiveness as well, creating a temporary period where your overall effectiveness may drop slightly. Don’t be upset. PROGRESS IN JIU JITSU IS NOT LINEAR. progress in this game resembles progress of the stock market. There is a general upward trend over time but this is punctuated with many fluctuations up and down that make progress seem like chaos on a daily basis. Those downward fluctuations can be rather depressing if you obsess over progress day by day. It is very important that you look at your progress the same way a good investor in the stock market looks at progress. They don’t get upset at the wild fluctuations day by day. They take the long view and measure progress not in day or weeks but in years and decades. This how you must be. Like a good investor, only your investment is not in companies, but in yourself and your development; and just as a company can start small but gain great value over time to become a powerhouse despite many ups and downs along the way, so too can you become a jiu jitsu powerhouse if you stay the course and don’t become despondent at temporary fluctuations as you try to progress

The threat of submission will always create predictable reactions from your opponent. Your job is to know those reactions and have a plan worked out ahead of time to each of them. When you know what the next move is going to be ahead of time it’s a huge advantage.

When it’s time to destabilize an opponent don’t just go into it with a preconceived notion of what direction you want to take him. Read where his weight is first and then make your decision where to take him. When his weight is on his heels - take him backwards. When his weight is in his toes - take him forwards. Best of all, use push and pull to get him resisting so you can feel the weight transfer between heels and toes and then make your decision

In a game where sometimes you only have to perform one move successfully to win there will always arise a question as to whether you should persist with a move that has failed several times in the past during a match or switch to another. I’ve seen very tough matches won with both approaches. Some athletes just hammer away with the same move until an opponent goes down with exhaustion. Others switch immediately in response to failure and use an approach based in technical diversity and slickness to win. There is no right or wrong to this. Athletes with a wider repertoire of moves will probably favor the idea of switching to another move. Athletes with a narrower repertoire will probably the persistence approach. You will have to make up your mind based upon your skill set and what you see unfolding in that particular match. For example sometimes you can just instinctively feel that despite some failed attempts, you have what it takes to score with the first move if you persist. Other times you feel that move will never work on that opponent on that day, in which case persistence is clearly the wrong approach. Which approach you favor will determine your whole approach to Jiu jitsu. If you favor persistence as your tactic, train for excellence in just a few moves. If you favor switching attacks, you’ll need to train to develop a broad enough repertoire to make it in competitive sparring.

Every pin in Jiu jitsu is greatly improved by the addition of elbow control. Remember that the basis of the bottom athlete’s defense begins with his elbows - if you control them, you negate his defenses before they can even begin. In addition, control of the elbows is the single best set up to upper body submissions out of the major pins. So don’t just settle for the pin - go the extra distance and control those elbows!

Much of competition success arises from endurance. Pressure takes a heavy toll on even well trained athletes and before long their mind and body will be looking to take a break. If you can keep going when the other fellow wants to stop you’ll win even if he has a better developed skill set than you.

Pressure over time adds massively to the effectiveness of every move: Every move you perform in this game is done against the resistance of your opponent. The stronger he is, the stronger will be that resistance. Pressure over time will fatigue and weaken an opponent. Later in the match moves that weren’t working at all will suddenly start working just because the resistance level has fallen dramatically. Learning to apply pressure over time is thus one of the most essential elements of effectiveness. Only when that pressure has been applied long enough will it become realistic to get your moves working against your toughest opponents. Remember always that you only have to get a good move to work once to win - if you can exert sufficient pressure long enough, the chances of you getting that move to work late in the match is very high.

When the action is fast there won’t be time to problem solve. Your success or failure will be determined by the habits you build over time in the gym. If you’ve been neglectful in the gym, so too will you be on the stage. If you’ve been diligent in the gym, you will be successful on the stage. It’s so easy to walk into the gym and do enough to sweat so that you can tell yourself that you were good and did your workout. If you want to be as good as you can be, you’ll need to hold yourself to a higher standard every day and build the habits that will make you shine against the best.

When your opponent is faster than you, you will need to maximize body contact with him in neutral positions. Body contact always has the effect of slowing things down - the more the better when the other guy has a big speed advantage. Best of all is when your body contact covers both upper and lower body - half guard for example - this will slow down even the quickest opponents. Just as the fastest sprinter will be dramatically slowed if you shackle a heavy lead weight to his ankle, so too the fastest grappler will be slowed down if you connect a big percentage of your body to a big percentage of his body. Make yourself into an anchor and the match to slow to a pace that suits you better.

The closer you get to a match the simpler your understanding of what you want to do to win must become, until by the time you step on the mat you can reduce your game plan to just one or two sentences. Have a general sense of what you plan to do. Anything too specific will often get shredded in the opening minutes of a match where there is so much chaos and unexpected events. A very broad idea of what how you want to engage will survive the shock of combat, but an overly detailed managerial plan will often get derailed in the opening seconds by something you could never have foreseen.

Stay the course: Whenever you’re matched against a very tough opponent who is close in skill level and size to yourself, there will inevitably be times in that match where you are losing. In this ADCC finals match against the very tough Lucas Hulk Barbosa, Giancarlo was at one point caught in a pin straight into a very tight kata gatame stranglehold. If you began watching the fight at that moment you’d assume that Mr Barbosa would easily win. Yet just a few minutes later and the fight joke match had turned around and Giancarlo won via stranglehold. In grappling as in life - a lot can happen in a short time. Some of it will be very bad and some of it very good. Never count yourself out when things get bad. Remember always that no matter how bad things seem now, you’re never more than a short sequence of well executed moves from turning it around in your favor. Train your mind to weather a storm and you’ll be amazed how often you can go from seeming disaster to triumph

Once an opponents body leaves the ground he has VERY few options in terms of resistance to any sweep or takedown you’ve used. You can’t always completely take someone of the floor when sweeping them, but when you can it adds a whole new dimension to the move and make the chance of success much higher. Most of your opponents resistance is predicated on some kind of contact with the floor which they can use to build a base of support - when they leave the mat completely and all contact with the mat is lost, building some form of resisting base is out of the question. So if you can lift them off the mat, do it. It often takes a sweep from good to great.

All grappling control begins with grip. If you can reliably break an opponents grip whenever he is taking a potentially controlling grip upon you, then he will find it almost impossible to exert any kind of meaningful control over you. This is a wonderful skill to have, but be aware that over reliance on this skill can make you excessively defensive in your overall game. Use it when needed, but don’t prioritize defensive grip breaking over your own offensive gripping. Remember, you don’t win by constantly frustrating and escaping an opponent, you win by exerting your control over him. So yes, develop the skill of grip breaking, you’ll definitely need it against tough opponents, but don’t make it the centerpiece of your game or you’ll become excessively defensive.

Consolidation: Jiu Jitsu is a game of action and consolidation. There are brief bursts of action where both athletes strive for a goal. When one of them attains that goal it’s often beneficial to stop in a control position that is sufficiently immobilizing that you can consolidate your gains. This will allow you to recharge your energy levels and figure out potential next steps. Don’t move the whole match. Move to consolidation positions, stop and reconfigure, and then move on to the next - that’s the pattern of Jiu jitsu

Everything you do in Jiu jitsu you do from a given stance. The better that stance is, the better your results. Your stance will change according to the scenario in which you find yourself. These scenarios will typically change often, sometimes second by second. There won’t be time to ponder whether you’ve changed correctly or not. Your stance must be automatic. If you’re thinking about stance you won’t be able to think about how to beat your opponent. The more tasks you can put In automatic, the more bandwidth you free up for problem solving - stance is one of those skills that has to be on automatic. That doesn’t take from its importance - in fact nothing is more important, as all those other tasks are dependent on a solid foundation and that foundation is always your stance. One of the best things you can ever do is watch elite Jiu jitsu athletes in matches and stop focusing on their moves and instead focus on their stance and how it changes from scenario to scenario. Try to carry what you see over into your own training - you’ll soon notice good results

When you can move effectively under an opponent’s bodyweight, even tight pins will have little effect on you. Keep your elbows and knees close together and movement will disrupt your opponents base to a degree where he has to let go of his position.

There is an unmistakable feeling when a move is performed well in Jiu jitsu, whether it be drilling or sparring. It is a feeling of efficiency. Of the maximum result from the least effort with no waste. Likewise, there is an unmistakable feeling of clumsiness and inefficiency that comes from a poorly executed move. For most of us we begin with that feeling of clumsy inefficiency and have to work upwards from there. Your goal in drilling is to work towards that feeling of relaxed efficiency. You’ll know it when you get there. If there’s any doubt, you aren’t there yet.

Work behind your head and your hands: It’s never a pleasant feeling to have to try to attack an opponent while he is attacking you at the same time. Everything rapidly degenerates into a dogfight where the faster athlete typically wins. Instead, you want to be able to control the outset of every exchange so that you can attack without being interrupted by your opponent’s attacks. This means shutting down his offense prior to launching your own offense. The best way to do this is to make food use of your initial defensive tools - your head and your hands. If you can preoccupy your opponents hands he won’t be able to grip and if he can’t grip it’s going to be very difficult for him to attack. If you can keep your head checking his head he’s going to find it very difficult to close distance in a way that enables him to attack effectively. Intelligent use of head and hands will negate much of your opponents initial offense at the start of each engagement. Once that’s done you can focus on your own attacks without interference

The more you attack with angles through the side doors, the more your opponent’s defensive reactions will open up the front door for a direct attack up the middle. When you get advantageous angles, even if the attacks fail, you’ll get a good result insofar as the opponent has to move and react so much to counter the threat that they inevitably open themselves up to a simpler, more direct attack. Next time you’re in front of an opponent, make the move to angle your first move - you’ll be impressed by the results.

If you can follow an opponent through all his evasive turns and twists and stay in good position for long periods of time, THAT’S when your finishing percentages really start to increase. The longer you can hold opponents in a compromised position, the more likely they’ll break mentally. Remember always that in most cases submission starts as a mental state. If you can break the mind, the body will follow.

Put enough pressure on an opponent from chest to chest position and he will be happy when you finally pass just to feel relief from that pressure. Precise technique is good, but precise technique combined with physical pressure is great. When you get tight to your opponent in passing position make him feel your weight by directing it precisely on to his jaw and diaphragm and you’ll double your passing effectiveness

Your whole body working in unison on the attack - your opponents whole body as a target: Your mind focused only how to continuously press the attack into final victory - your opponents mind focused only on how to survive. That is the spirit of jiu jitsu that will make you stand out from the crowd.

The reward of good position is submission. You can get submissions from anywhere if you’re creative and your opponent lacks defensive skills. But when you’re matched against the best, you’ll be far more likely to to get that submission if you preface it with the pressure over time you can create from good position and the asymmetry between your ability to attack him while he can’t attack you.

Identify the elements that are stopping you from performing a move you want to execute and get them under your control prior to execution. This will make it significantly easier to execute that move. Identify the obstacles to move - then remove them - now the move can be performed much more easily. A classic example is strangulation. The toughest initial resistance always comes from your opponents hands and arms. If you can remove them from the equation early, suddenly strangles that seemed impossible become very doable.

The more you threaten an opponent with sweeps and reversals from bottom the more they must extend and post out their hands and feet to stop you. The more they extend themselves to do so, the more vulnerable they become to submission attacks. Play this dilemma constantly from bottom position. Threaten the sweeps, attack with submissions as they post. Threaten submissions to force them to retract their posted hands and feet and their lack of base will make them easy to sweep. Play in this fashion and you’ll always find success.

The positional game of Jiu jitsu has many subtleties but its overall nature is very simple. It prioritizes two positions above all others - the mounted position and rear mounted position. These positions get the highest scores in the sport. Whenever you are sparring in Jiu jitsu, make the attainment of these two positions a priority. Remember always that if you don’t have a definite goal in mind, you will drift aimlessly. Your positional goals are two fold - mount and rear mount. When you see the positional game through this simple lens you always know what direction to aim yourself and what the next step is.

If you can make an opponent carry your weight through the head and shoulders for extended periods of time whilst denying him the ability to do the same to you, you will exhaust him to a degree that the end of the match will look like a formality. When your opponents are in bottom position they want to carry your weight on their legs - you want them to carry your weight on their head and shoulders - the longer the match, the more this respective battle for weight carrying will determine the outcome

The biggest sale of the year is on! All my instructional videos at 50% off for Black Friday sale! Link in my instagram story

Whenever you’re in a tough match you’re going to get tired. I don’t care how much conditioning work you’ve done, what diet you’re using, how much sparring you’ve done - if you’re in a match against someone your own size and skill level and neither of you accepts the idea of losing - you’re going to get tired. That’s ok. It’s normal to get tired under those circumstances, in fact there would be something wrong if you DIDN’T get tired. It’s ok to be tired in a match SO LONG AS THE OTHER GUY IS MORE TIRED THAN YOU. Fatigue is normal and totally acceptable as long as you aren’t worse off as your opponent. Just as it’s ok to have only ten dollars in your wallet when you live in a world where everyone else has only one dollar, so too it’s ok feel exhausted when the other looks like he’s ready to expire. It’s all about relative endurance - how much do you have left in the tank relative to the other guy? So don’t panic because you feel fatigue building inside you as you grapple - just make sure it’s building up faster inside the other fellow and all will be well.

Attack one side of the of the body - your opponent will always concentrate his defenses on that side - but he can only do this by sacrificing defense on the other side - that’s exactly when you switch sides and attack the undefended side. Use this simple pattern and success will find its way to your doorstep often.

We all have a tendency to want to rush the finish. You’ve done so much work to get there and there’s always that concern that the longer you wait the more opportunity for your opponent to escape at the last moment and force you to start all over again. In most cases however, you will generally do better by slowing things down rather than speeding things up. Most of the major submission holds have an immobilizing/pinning element to them - use this to slow your opponent down and also be sure to slow YOURSELF down. Small errors in the use of levers and fulcrums and wedges are much more likely to make the move fail than an overly slow pace. So when your mind is racing with the thought of imminent victory - SLOW DOWN - precision is more important than pace in these situations

Most of your time in jiu jitsu is spent among many people - your teachers, your training partners and friends - but once you step on to the mat to engage an opponent you are alone. Make sure every day you train that you build an unshakable faith in your technique and your ability to manifest it through your physical fitness and strength, because that loneliness will test your confidence like nothing else. Whatever doubts you have about your skills and fitness will amplify in that time before the match and the only thing that silences those voices of doubt is the fervent belief that you’ve done the work required to build the skills and conditioning required for the test you’re about to face.

Keep pushing to be the best you can, but don’t despair if your technique isn’t perfect. Remember, your technique only has to be good enough to beat the fellow in front of you. If he isn’t perfect, your technique needn’t be perfect. As your aspirations rise, your technique will need to rise with it as the opponents in front of you get better and better - but by then you’ll have trained longer and consequently your technique will have risen in proportion to balance everything out.

Commitment: There is always an open question about how hard you should commit to a given move when executing it. You need a minimum level of commitment to get a move to work against a tough opponent and that minimum is often very high. If you go in too relaxed you simply won’t be effective. However, if you are at maximum intensity for every move you’ll be exhausted before long. You have to find a happy medium between intensity and relaxation. The more relaxed the better your endurance but the easier for an opponent to fight his way out of your moves. The more intense your execution the more likely you’ll succeed on first try, but the more likely you’ll tire when a skilled opponent recovers from a series of high intensity attempts. My advice is to develop the skill of relaxation for the majority of time of a match, especially when in neutral positions interspersed with brief periods of high intensity action when you feel you’ve got a good chance to complete a move successfully. Don’t pour your resources into a hopeless project - if the opportunity doesn’t look promising, don’t go in with all your energy and needlessly exhaust yourself. Learn to vary your pace and intensity according to demand and learn to recognize real opportunities from bogus ones and you’ll soon find a satisfactory balance between intensity and relaxation in your game

If you can slow down an opponents movement as you work a submission hold the chances of success rise considerably. The ideal would be to totally stop movement, but that is not likely on someone your own size and skill level. Seek to slow or impede movement as much as you can - the more the better. Excessive movement always loosens connection and tightness of connection is one of the core themes of good submissions. So before you go to apply your submissions, focus on inhibiting your opponents movement as much as you can.

Few things in life are born fully grown and mature. Jiu jitsu is no exception. Every new technique you learn will begin as weak as a child. If you judge it according to the standards of your mature techniques you’ll abandon it before it ever gets a chance to grow in strength and effectiveness and you’ll have lost a chance at overall improvement. Understand that techniques enter your game as we enter the world - weak and in need of nourishment and support. Give them time to develop and they will grow strong enough to win your toughest matches for you. Even the most powerful lion was once just a harmless cub. If you dismissed the cub you lost the chance to develop a lion.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video MASTER THE MOVE: THE AMERICAN LOCK. The American lock is one of the first moves beginners are taught and universally considered a foundational move of the sport. If you watch any beginners class you will often see it being applied successfully as the basic versions of it are easy to understand and apply for most people. However, there is a dramatic shift when you go into more advanced classes or competition Jiu jitsu where the success of the classic American lock noticeably drops off. This video is about understanding why this drop off occurs by pointing out the central problems of the classic American lock and then showing very clearly how changes in the way you perform it can make it far more effective against skilled opponents. Once you understand these nuances the American lock can become a much more effective part of your game. We also look at how the American lock can combine with other locks and play a crucial role as a set up to some of the highest percentage attacks in the game. Traditional American locks are applied from top position, but some of the most effective variations are from bottom position. We look in detail at how these can become an important part of your bottom game arsenal. There few better feelings in Jiu jitsu than taking a move you learned as a white belt and which you’d overlooked for years and getting it to work on your toughest training partners and opponents - make it happen by taking a new perspective on the American lock and see what it can do for your game! Link in my Instagram story

Any time you can make Jiu jitsu a battle between the strength of your legs versus the strength of your opponents arms - you’ve put yourself on a winning track. Most of the best submissions in this game prioritize legs versus arms - that’s how smaller, weaker people beat bigger, stronger people. That’s how you can realistically control your most powerful and explosive opponents.

Pins and submission: The biggest scores in Jiu Jitsu come from the most dominant pins. Never forget however, that the highest goal of the sport is submission victory. The pins themselves focus their attention upon your opponent’s torso, but submission occurs at the neck, arms and legs - the limbs. When it comes to submission, pins have little value until you can ISOLATE A LIMB. If submission is your goal you cannot be satisfied with the pin. You must go beyond and isolate a limb in addition to whatever pin you have. Carrying this mindset at all times is what separates those who use pins to score and control versus those who use them to finish.

You’ll never use your offensive skills to their full potential if you’re afraid to take a risk - and the single best way to lower the perceived risk of using any given move is faith in your defense. If you believe your defense is so strong that an opponent has no way to breach it, you’ll take any risk simply because you believe that you can get out of any bad situation that might arise from a failed move. However, if you doubt your defensive skills you’ll always be reticent to take a risk because you believe that if things go awry then you’ll get into trouble that you can’t recover from. So work your defense as hard as you do your offense - ironically it will make you a much better offensive player

Have you ever taught a friend who has absolutely no background in a jiu jitsu a move? It can be an interesting experience. You have to explain many things that we all take for granted but which are not intuitive or obvious to a complete beginner. The first thing you learn is to be patient. You can’t expect immediate success from a total beginner. Instead you lower your expectations and give them extra time to make up for their inexperience. Now contrast this experience with your own experience when you’re trying to learn a new move. When you come to learn a new move, you become a beginner again, at least in that one specific area. So take the same mindset you had when you taught your beginner friend. Lower your initial expectations and give yourself some extra time. Don’t just give up because you don’t get immediate success. It’s rare to get immediate success with a new move. Go back to your beginner mindset and be happy with even moderate success or even the sense of potential for success in the future. Budget extra time for your development - you’ll probably need it if the move is totally new to you. Having realistic expectations about rates of progress and a belief that you don’t have to excel today when you’ve got tomorrow will keep you involved in the development of a new move rather than stop trying the minute you experience difficulties or failure.

When you start to master the use of a submission hold make sure you learn not only how to attack with it, but also how to defend it. It is irresponsible to learn only the offensive side of a submission hold without the defense to that same move. Just as an assassin who makes use of a particular poison must also carry the antidote lest he fall victim to his own poison, so too a good submission hold exponent must be equally good at stopping the same hold being used against him. Interestingly, the more you learn about defending a hold, the better you become at applying it, and vice versa. Every hold has two sides to it - offense and defense. To maximize your knowledge, learn both - to ensure you never get hanged upon your own gallows - learn both.

The more Jiu jitsu is done in the context of fighting, the more control of distance becomes a top priority. You want an opponent either too close to strike you or too far away so fighting Jiu jitsu tends to favor either minimal or maximal distances. The more Jiu jitsu is concerned with pure submission grappling with no strikes, the more it favors the middle distance where you have sufficient space to maneuver into submission holds and positional attacks but are not so far away that you can’t be constantly at grips with your opponent to initiate your grappling attacks.

The more you put an opponent into constrictive, debilitating positions, the more you want to slow things down. Any position that puts an opponent under stress through weight, breath restriction, misalignment or any other form of physical disadvantage/hardship is a position you want to hold for time - the longer the better. Time spent in these situations will exhaust an opponent and sometimes even create panic reactions that open them to new attacks. You may have to move quickly to get TO these positions, but once there, SLOW THINGS DOWN. Let time work in your favor now

Whatever advice a coach can offer an athlete during a match is insignificant compared with the advice he offers over the months and years prior to the match. It’s better that your voice be heard subconsciously inside the athletes head as automatic reactions from years of training rather than shouted out in the midst of a chaotic match. The more the athlete follows his own creative vision in a match and the more the coach realizes that the best time to influence a student is king before the match rather than during it - the better the result.

Immobilization is the key to submission. The more freely an opponent can move, the more difficult it will be to bring sufficient pressure to break or strangle an opponent. Don’t just focus on the breaking mechanics. Make sure you practice immobilizing him as best you can prior to the application of hold.

I had a blast today teaching in Boston at my student @placisantos He is the proud teacher at his new school @5stonesjiujitsu and is doing a fine job of growing his school and teaching the ways and methods of Jiu jitsu. I just completed another instructional video with @bjj.fanatics with Bernardo Faria and Micheal Zenga and we stopped by Placido’s school afterwards. Congratulations Placido on your success with the school! Now it’s back to Austin!

Not all victories are good: I remember an incident when I first began jiu jitsu. I tied a smaller opponent up in a pretzel with a poor rendition of a cradle and squeezed as hard as could on the smaller fellow white belt. He tapped presumably out of discomfort. I was happy to win. To my surprise, my teacher Renzo Gracie rebuked me and said quite correctly that it was a poorly conceived move that only worked because of my size advantage and the inexperience of my partner. It taught me a valuable lesson very early. There can be victory that has no merit. Only victories that can be replicated and would work against someone your own size and skill level are worthy of merit. It’s not just winning but winning in a way that sets up more future wins against increasingly capable opponents that should interest us.

The more an opponent can keep his hands together and in front of him, the stronger his arms feel. The more you can separate his hands and out one of his hands behind his back, the weaker his arms will feel. This game isn’t just about making yourself stronger. It’s also about making your opponent weaker, and the single best way to do that is force him into a biomechanically weak position such as a hand trapped behind the back. Develop a knowledge of the innate weaknesses of the human body and look always to put your opponents into those positions which express those weaknesses and you’ll make significant progress in your quest to level the playing field of strength on the mat.

The gentle art…well…most of the time: Often Jiu jitsu is described as a gentle art where the smooth flowing technician effortlessly defeats the brute. This may be true when there is a massive skill discrepancy but is not true when you’re more evenly matched. For most of the time of a match you want to be as relaxed as you can be to get work done. This is important for your endurance. However, we need to be realistic and say that there will be certain times where something close to maximal effort for brief periods is required. You must be able to transition efficiently from longer periods of relatively loose and relaxed states to shorter periods of high intensity tension. When you’re trying to finish a submission, a sweep, a takedown or a guard pass - it’s time to grit your teeth and increase the workload and tension. Just make sure when you push yourself into redline you don’t stay there too long. Use your strength when necessary - but don’t use it too long. Keep it gentle most of the time but when it’s time to push - PUSH - just don’t push too long and you’ll be able to navigate the need for tension and strength at certain times in Jiu Jitsu

Next: When you have a hard match in training there is that moment when you have to select your next partner for the next round. What choice should you make when you’ve just had a hard competitive round? If you’re getting ready for a competition this is the time to immediately look for an equally tough next round so that you develop the mental fortitude to work through fatigue and still be effective. If you’re working mostly on skill development it’s probably better to take an easier round so that you can slow things down and work on a particular area that you wish to improve in. Let the mission you chose at the start of class guide your decision rather than what you feel immediately after the round and you’ll stay true to your program rather than what you feel at the moment.

Your opponent will always seek to gain connection to you and his primary connectors are his feet and hands - therefore make it your mission to control his feet and hands as much as possible at the onset of every exchange. This will aid you in your attempts to gain connection on your terms rather than his - this is crucial against good opponents as typically the athlete who gets good connection first tends to outperform the other over the length of the exchange.

Nobody has ever arrived at a complete knowledge of even one move of Jiu jitsu. You don’t need to. You only need to know enough to get the job done against the opponent in front of you. As your opponents get better, you’ll need to know more. Keep researching as a higher belt as relentlessly as you did when you were a white belt and you’ll always be adding to your knowledge and evolving. Complete knowledge is unattainable but that won’t stop you from striving to get as close to completion as this life permits you.

Use your head: Admonitions to use your head usually mean that you should think more - but in jiu jitsu you’ll often want to understand it more literally. You should use your head as you would your arms and legs to control your opponents movement and assist in the action of pushing, pulling and setting wedges around your opponent to inhibit his ability to move. Most beginners are shy to use their head as part of their attack. Good players use their head whenever they can to push and pull and block - the more the better. Once you get even halfway past your opponents legs and settle into chest to chest or chest to back positions, a big part of how effective you’ll be at controlling your opponent’s movements will come down to head positioning

The most well known adage of Jiu jitsu is quite possibly the least used. The day you begin Jiu jitsu you are told - “push when you are pulled, pull when you are pushed - work in accordance with action/reaction.” It seems so obvious, so simple. Yet actually doing it consistently on the mat while under pressure is the hardest thing. A coach says and students say “yes, yes, I know that.” They know it as a sentence but they don’t manifest it as a principle. Knowing something and doing it every time are two different things. Next time you’re on the mat don’t focus on moves - focus only on the principle of action/reaction and you’ll see it’s not easy to apply it throughout a match. You may hear it uttered often, but it’s easily forgotten under pressure. Make sure it remains in your consciousness at all times when sparring - that’s when it counts

In some team sports you have separate teams for offense and defense. In Jiu jitsu you go out on the mat alone - you are responsible for both offense and defense. Good offense will take you a long way when you first start out because many of your opponents at lower level do not have very sophisticated defensive skills and a good offense will get you many quick wins. However, as you go higher everyone has good defense and it gets harder to harder to get quick breakthroughs with your offensive game. As the skill level rises, defensive skill becomes more and more the determinant of who wins and who loses. You’ll need strong defense to stave off a skill d opponents attacks and stay in the game long enough to wear a tough opponent down and get late wins. I know defense is not the most glamorous part of Jiu jitsu and doesn’t garner much interest in comparison with exciting offensive techniques, but let me assure you time invested in this skill early will pay big dividends later in your jiu jitsu journey.

Loss: We humans are programmed to abhor loss more than we treasure victory. You’ll forget most of your good days on the mat but you’ll never forget your worst ones. You have to learn to use this psychological trait we all have positively. Loss can strongly provoke us to analyze and analysis gets us asking questions and seeking solutions - which is the basis of all forward progress. In this match a young Gordon Ryan lost to the great Leandro Lo in an exhibition match shortly prior to the 2017 ADCC world championships. He lost mostly due to tactics rather than technique. The loss forced him to assess what he needed to change. It motivated him to improve his positional game, top game and standing game and showed him that it’s not enough to just be good at bottom leg locks and back attacks. You’ve got options when you react to loss. You can laugh it off and keep doing what you’re doing. You can get frustrated and quit. However, you’re serious about maximizing your growth you can ask yourself what went wrong and then start experimenting with solutions so that the loss creates a positive evolution in your game.

Many will watch - few will see: We are given countless opportunities to watch Jiu jitsu. Every time you go to the gym you can watch teachers, friends and training partners engage in sparring. Every competition you attend you’ll see dozens of matches in a day. We all have the tendency to “zone out” and watch mindlessly until the only thing we see is the result. This is a wasted opportunity. Each time you observe a match it’s a chance to train your mind to observe events and make sound decisions. Don’t just watch - interpret the action as it unfolds and make assessments as to what the athletes are doing and what they could be doing better. The better you get at this skill, the better your game will become. Good jiu jitsu is largely the skill of sound decision making under stress. This is a skill like any other and thus requires practice and one of the best forms of practice is interpretive observation of matches. Make it a habit and soon your improvement will show itself in your game.

When you can turn your opponents offense into your offense you add a whole new dimension to a match. It’s one thing for an opponent to stop your move - it’s quite another for him to turn your move into his score. When you can strongly counterattack an opponents moves he will go into a passive state where he becomes reluctant to initiate moves at all for fear of your counterattacks. When you can put an opponent into that passive mindset victory is almost assured. Make sure you don’t limit yourself to moves that stop an opponent but also add some where you aggressively counterattack and turn his offense into yours - success in this regard will greatly enhance your ability to take charge of a match.

Gain a little knowledge and a move that wasn’t working well can become one of your most effective weapons overnight. The single best trait you can possess in Jiu jitsu and in life is a restless curiosity that makes you ask questions and seek answers in the areas and subjects that are important to you.

Anytime you’ve gotten a grip upon your opponent where they can’t even think about offense, but must focus solely on escaping that grip before they can move on - you’re winning. Hunt for those grips aggressively and use them aggressively and you’ll create a situation where your opponent is more worried about what you’re doing to him than he is thinking about what he should be doing to you - if you can maintain that you’ll be winning far more often than not.

Your opponents hands and feet are the primary means by which he can form connection to you. If you can control his hands he will struggle to make effective connections and if he can’t connect to you he can’t control you and if he can’t control you he can’t submit you. Hand control is a big part of this game. When you train always be cognizant of your opponents hands and nullify them as much as you can whenever you feel they can cause issues for your next move.

When you play a tight game you have to find a delicate balance. If you play TOO tight then neither of you can move. That’s no good. If you play too loose, your opponent simply isn’t immobilized enough for your technique to be effective. You have to be right enough to inhibit your opponents movement but loose enough to move yourself so that you can advance to the next position. The key is to make one section of your body tight enough to immobilize your opponent in the relevant areas, but the rest loose enough to move and advance. Here you see Gordon Ryan playing exceptionally tight with arms, head and shoulders in a bodylock pass, but keeps his legs loose enough to move through/around his opponents legs and pass efficiently. It’s rare in Jiu jitsu that total body tension is desirable. Most of the time you tighten one area of the body but keep the rest supple enough to move effectively to the next goal

In a good training room you can make solid progress just showing up every day and following along - but if you want great progress you must bring a clear set of personal goals with regards skill development to every class aligned within a long term plan to acquire the skill set required to attain your career goals. Don’t just show up - show up with a purpose - if you can maintain this over years you’ll outstrip the room

Vision: Your eyes are your first line of defense and the initiator of most offense in all combat sports. They identify threats and opportunities before they materialize. They are the early warning radar that informs all of your decision making. The key is to develop interpretive vision. LOOKING at something doesn’t guarantee that you’ll SEE what is happening. You have to see and become cognizant of threat and opportunity. This requires interpreting what you perceive. Different athletes will interpret the same sense data differently based upon their knowledge and training - that’s fine, just so long as you’re effective with what you’re doing. The main point is always to really think about USING your eyes. Don’t just LOOK - SEE and READ what your opponent is doing - the earlier and better you can do it the bigger the edge you’ll have in a tough match.

The higher you go in this game the more you replace “position before submission “ with “position OR submission.” The threat of submission elicits defensive reactions designed to stop that submission, but which often do nothing to prevent an immediate follow up positional attack. So too, a positional attack elicits a defensive reaction designed to stop that specific positional attack but which does nothing to prevent a subsequent submission attack. Position and submission are two very different skill sets. Defense to one does little to defend the other since they are entirely different categories. Thus one of the most profitable dilemmas you can create is the threat of submission followed by positional attack and vice versa. Rather than simply seeing position and submission as a sequential pair with one antecedent to the other - see them a dilemma pairing that breaks the rhythm of your attacks in a truly effective way.

We learn attacks as a single move, but the key to successful application is to apply them in clusters: Every time you go to apply a move you must have another in your mind to follow up that move should it fail. Just as a good general never commits all his forces into battle at the same time, but always keeps a reserve to exploit the openings created by the first push, so too, the good jiu jitsu player has a follow up mapped out even as he is committed to his current move. Don’t let this way of thinking reduce your commitment to the first move - you have to really make the opponent think the first move is the real attack and really try to defend it - that’s what will create the openings for a second or third move. Tunnel vision is never the right perspective for good jiu jitsu. Keep your mind thinking in terms of the next move while really trying to apply the first move and you’ll be very successful in this game.

There’s always more than one option: It’s easy to get tunnel vision in the intensity of a match where it’s always so difficult even to get one move to work. It’s not easy to think in terms of three or four moves together when even one seems damn near impossible. Yet that’s exactly how you must learn to think if you are to beat your toughest opponents. In the space of a few seconds Gordon Ryan went from a triangle variation to juji gatame armbar threat to American lock finish combined with triangle control. That ability to put all your effort into the move you’re executing, yet leave some room in your tactical mind for the possible application two more more appropriately selected follow up moves is the key to getting past tough defenses

A perfectly executed attack is highly like to succeed against an opponent your own size and skill level. However, a perfectly executed attack is unlikely to occur against an opponent your own size and skill level. Under the pressure of match conditions there will almost always be imperfections that reduce the mechanical efficiency of the move below the levels required for success. Therefore just as important as mechanical efficiency in execution is CONTINUITY OF EXECUTION where you seamlessly go from move to move in a way that lowers resistance level until an imperfectly executed second or third or fourth move can get the breakthrough. Each move will subvert the opponents ability to defend the next. Three decently executed moves in a continuous attack will often outperform a single move executed extremely well against a very strong defense.

Right before the action starts: Understand this: Your opponent is always tougher and more difficult in some ways than you anticipated he would be and weaker and easier to deal with in other areas than you anticipated he would be. Don’t put too much stock in your anticipations and predictions, there will always be some surprises - some will be pleasant and some unpleasant - they never play as important a role in the outcome as deliberate focus on the second by second action and navigating past the problems you encounter to get to your goals.

Making an opponent carry your weight for extended periods of time is the single best way to degrade his skill set over the course of a match. Your ability to manifest skills is directly correlated with your physical condition. Fatigue lowers skill execution. An opponent who has a very high skill level in the opening minutes can realistically be reduced to several levels lower in skill level if sufficient pressure over time is brought to bear on him. Using your weight as a weapon is thus a big part of your development in Jiu jitsu. Practice it as a skill in itself while sparring as often as you can.

In this game of Jiu jitsu sometimes learning a single new detail on a move can take it from useless to one of your best weapons. Every time you drill you get a chance to learn some new insight on a move. Don’t just drill mindlessly. Drill with an enquiring mind that identifies problems, seeks solutions and then tests them in sparring.

Understand where the human body is strong and where it’s weak and you’ll go far in this game: We tend to think of people as strong or weak per se, but each one of us is only as strong or weak as the positioning and posture of our body at that time. For example, the arm of the strongest man is made weak when it’s put behind his back. The fastest man is made slow when his ankles are tied together. Take every opportunity to put your opponent into a physically compromising position and those impressive physical attributes of his will be severely degraded to a level you can manage easily. Deepen your understanding of these positions of weakness and soon you’ll be able to exploit them to your advantage on the mat

When you can stop your opponents movement you are close to victory. When you can let them move but only in the directions you want - you are even closer to victory. When you can funnel their movement in the directions you want and have a trap already prepared at the end of the funnel - victory is yours already.

When we first learn a move in Jiu jitsu our primary concern is mechanical efficiency. When it’s time to apply it in live sparring however, it’s equally important to execute with a sense of commitment. Remember that timidity has spoiled the execution of moves as often as mechanical deficiencies. You must execute with confidence and authority, so be sure to build this attitude into your drilling once you feel you got the mechanical aspects to a satisfactory level. As your confidence grows with a move start applying it with an increasing sense of authority and elan. The spirit in which you apply moves is as important in real world application as the method.

Somewhere between push and pull is where the magic happens: An old adage of martial arts is to pull when pushed and push when pulled. There is much wisdom in this. Any time you push or pull an opponent you will get an opposing reaction. Learning to read that reaction and capitalize on it is a huge part of your development. I would have no hesitation in saying that a big factor in what distinguishes beginner from expert in Jiu jitsu is this ability to play between pull and push and use the opponent’s reaction to advantage. Don’t just put your hands on people for no particular reason. Use them to initiate pull and push. When you feel the response, that’s your opportunity - that’s when you push when pulled and pull when pushed - that’s when doing so will stumble an opponent and take them out of balance and create the openings you need to win.

The more explosive and powerful your opponent is on bottom the greater the need for a wide base of support to prevent being unexpectedly turned over. However, that wide base often comes at the price of control. Since your hands and feet are wide apart on the floor there is nothing holding your opponent and hence a lack of control. Your goal will be to find a satisfactory relationship between your need for a wide base of support and some kind of controlling grip that maintains enough control to get the job done while maintaining that wide base. Trapping your opponent’s head between an underhook and your own head is often the best choice. This does a good job of keeping a satisfactory compromise between width of base and physical control over the opponent.

You can only USE a position if you can HOLD a position: Gaining positional advantage is a big aspect of Jiu jitsu. “Position before submission” is the mantra repeated by many. How successful you will be in using the dominant positions of Jiu jitsu is directly proportional to how long you can hold these positions against strong resistance. Submissions take time to be applied. Time in position is fatiguing to that opponent. The more fatigued they are and the more time you have to set up and control the execution of the submission - the more successful you’ll be. So when you first start getting into good position - make a habit of seeing how long you can hold the position. Don’t always be in a rush to finish. Each passing second in good position is money in the bank for you. So next time you work yourself into a good position set an internal clock in your mind and let it run. Be confident that each passing second is to your advantage and will greatly help when it’s time to build your submission skills.

If you can generate enough horsepower in your sweep you can take anyone over - but if you can break their balance and stance first you can sweep them with no need for extra horsepower. The stronger your opponents stance and balance the more power you’ll need to sweep them. If you can degrade that stance and balance first there will be little resistance when you initiate the sweep. Don’t just perform the move - start with the precursor and THEN hit the move - and understand that the precursor is always the breaking of their stance.

Pressure before submission: The difference between trying to apply a submission on a fresh opponent who is at peak strength and explosiveness versus an exhausted opponent who has been worn down physically and mentally via unrelenting pressure over time is as different as night and day. THE ROAD TO SUBMISSION IS BEST PAVED WITH PRESSURE. Everyone is difficult to submit when fresh, but very few can maintain that when exhausted. Learning to make opponents carry your weight in mechanically inefficient ways for time is the best form of pressure for most people to develop and feeds well into your submission game.

When two people clash in a contest they both want to win, victory will go to the one who wins a long enough sequence of little second by second battles until he gets a potentially fight winning scenario and carries it through. In the midst of all that there there will likely be times where you lose a sequence of battles. That’s when you have to be able to hold yourself together and stay in the fight. As long as you don’t get finished and there is time on the clock recovery and reinvigoration is always possible no matter how dark the situation may appear at the time. Remember always that wars are won by winning a series of battles. You’ll win some and lose some, but when you can string together enough wins in a row to break an opponent mentally or physically, the war is won

If you can pin the head and shoulders as you navigate past the legs there is very little an opponent can do in response. All forms of control are valuable, but none can surpass control of the head and shoulders, especially when you’ve got their back on the ground and are past one of their knees. Try to trap their head between your head and your under hook - this controls both head and shoulders and confers real control.

If you make an opponent think your doing one thing and then do another, you’ll always have an advantage. There is more to combat sports than technique. Technique must be housed within tactics and among tactics, surprise and subterfuge are king. Whenever you’re sparring, try to sell your opponent the idea that you’re about to attempt something different from what you actually intend to do. If an opponent has any skills and experience he will quickly ascertain what you’re attempting and counter; but when you can fool him as to what’s about to happen his defense will be in the wrong direction and by the time he corrects himself you’ll have gotten the breakthrough. Subterfuge is a skill like any other. If you don’t practice it you won’t be good at it. So incorporate it it into your daily training like everything else you want to excel at and you will see for yourself how much it adds to your game

Anticipation: Imagine how easy combat sports would be if you could see two seconds into the future in every match. Knowing what your opponent is about to do next before he does it would be tantamount to a superpower. Well, in a grappling situation you can often do this in a very practical way. Learn to listen and read your opponents body as you grapple. Many of your opponents will unknowingly convey to you their next move. Some will sharply inhale before they try to explode out of a pin. Some will tense up right before they go to exert themselves. Most will move in ways that can only lead to a very small set of possible options given the circumstances and thus be very predictable. Most people are blind to these reads because all their focus is on what they’re doing instead of observing what the opponent is doing. If an opponent is telling what he’s going to do next - don’t ignore him! The ability to discern what an opponent will do next is a huge advantage. It’s up to you to use it. Next time you’re on the mat don’t just fixate in yourself and what you want to do. Learn to observe and read your opponent so you can take advantage of what he offers

The worse your situation on the mat the more you must play with a compact body with limbs retracted, elbows and knees close to your torso. Just as you would shutter your windows and hunker down in a hurricane, so too must you hunker down in a threatening situation in Jiu jitsu. The worse it gets the more compact you get. When you get good position then you can open up and extend yourself. But when times are bad it should be reflected in your posture.

The best time to attack is when an opponent is in the middle of executing a move. Most people work in steps. When they execute a move there is a clear beginning, middle and end to that execution. When they complete the execution there is a consolidation period where they return to their stance and a mindset of defensive responsibility. However, in the midst of execution of a given move they are preoccupied with what they want to do and are not so defensively responsible. Moreover because they are moving, any interruption of that movement tends to have a more dramatic effect on them than usual. Thus if you can attack in the middle of their execution of a move, this will be highly disruptive and easier to initiate. Most people tend to get defensive when they see an opponent executing a move and concern themselves only with shutting it down. Switch your mindset to attack and you’ll discover that this is a time of opportunity rather than of fear

I’m filming a new instructional with my great friends at @bjj.fanatics in one of my favorite cities - Boston! I always love New England in the fall. It’s quite the change from Texas and reminds me of New York. My super talented student for so many years in New York City - Brian Glick - is also filming right next door so we are laughing all day recounting crazy stories from the old days in the blue basement! We will wrap up tomorrow and then it’s back to Texas! Wishing you all the best from Boston!

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video MASTER THE MOVE: THE STRAIGHT ARM BAR UDE GATAME: THE FASTEST ARM LOCK. The straight arm bar (ude gatame) is one of the best moves for a Jiu Jitsu player to learn. While it doesn’t figure as highly as more well known submission holds in success rate, it is much easier and faster to enter into and creates big defensive reactions in opponents that open them to other attacks and gives you the attacking initiative in a match - which is the surest pathway to victory overall. In this video I look at classic ude gatame, my own style of ude gatame, the link between ude gatame and other submissions and positional attacks - all organized into a simple system of attacks designed to present solutions to tough resistance until a breakthrough is achieved. Every jiu Jitsu athlete has to find a set of moves that defines their games and is responsible for most of their success. Ude gatame is one of the best candidates for this! If you want a fast and relatively easy to learn attack that can transform your game in a short period of time - you couldn’t do much better than developing a strong straight arm lock! Links in my Instagram story

When you have attained a position that allows you to relax while at the same time puts your opponent into maximum physical and mental stress - take your time! This is exactly the opportunity to make the clock work for you. The most productive use of time in jiu jitsu is when you’ve created this asymmetry in work rate - that’s exactly when you can exhaust a tough opponent whilst preserving your own strength and endurance. Learn to differentiate those times when you have to get to work and those where you can rest - that’s the key to both to extending your own endurance and reducing that of your opponent

Angle is advantage: It’s tough to win by charging in through the front door. Slip around the side and everything gets easier. The human body is set up to deal with frontal threats but poorly adapted to deal with threats from the rear. Take this to heart. Every degree of angle you get towards the back makes your job a little easier. Make it your habit to get angles early and often and tough matches will get a little easier

All of your opponents defense is based on the integrity of his stance. Without stance there is no effective defense. Therefore, whenever attacking - begin your attack with an attack on your opponents stance and only then launch the attack itself. Breaking through a strong door is so much easier when you unlock it first

There are few clearer examples of lever and fulcrum being used to effect in Jiu jitsu than the classic arm bar juji gatame. Whenever you’re employing a move where it’s obvious where the lever and fulcrum are and how they’re used - take the extra time to GET TO THE END OF THE LEVER and SET THE FULCRUM PROPERLY. This is truly an instance where a small adjustment can double the effectiveness of the lock at virtually no cost to you. Oftentimes in Jiu jitsu delay can cost you - but not in this case. Take that little extra time to set the fulcrum and get to the end of the lever and you can immediately go from a good lock to a great lock!

You have two types of strength. The first is your raw strength as measured by objective tests such as the ability to lift a weight. The second is your perceived strength. This is the strength that an opponent will feel on the mat. This is a mix of your raw strength plus your ability to use leverage and positioning to maximize your use of that raw strength in the performance of grappling tasks. Thus an athlete who performs at a very ordinary level in raw strength measurement can feel shockingly strong on the mat due to excellent use of leverage and positioning. Obviously developing your raw strength to a solid level is very much in your interests, however the increases you get there will be relatively slow and taxing compared with the dramatic increases you can get in your perceived strength as a result of using levers and fulcrums and body positioning more effectively. Next time you go to secure some kind of submission hold or pin on an opponent, take the time to get to the end of the lever and position the fulcrum properly. Next time you’re pinning an opponent take the extra time to adjust your position into a more nuanced hold down that really shuts down your opponents ability to move effectively under you. Don’t be satisfied with the first grip you get. Make adjustments until you can feel the mechanical improvements. In a matter of minutes you can shift the mat strength you bring to an opponent up a level that will shock you.

When you’ve got ‘em on the run - keep ‘em on the run: It’s not easy to get moves working on an opponent in strong stance. Once you do get a strong attack going it will temporarily break the opponents stance and open him to attacks that previously were having no effect. So once you get that breakthrough - keep attacking because that’s exactly when subsequent attacks are most likely to take their effect! So often athletes perform a good move and get a result but then immediately back off just when possibilities were opening up. So next time you get an opponent in trouble - keep attacking so you can keep him in trouble long enough to get a decisive result.

Your first concern in Jiu jitsu is developing the minimum physical capacity to perform the moves fluidly and effectively. It does not matter how much knowledge you possess if your physicality is so limited that you can’t exhibit that knowledge as skill. Once you’ve attained that prerequisite, the next goal is to develop refined technique. If your technique is far enough ahead of your opponents then you’ll never need tactics since the technical disparity will overwhelm them. However, at championship level everyone has good technique so then you’ll need tactics in which to embody your technique and gain tactical advantage to atone for technical stalemate. Physicality, technique and tactics in that order as you start out on the long road towards your jiu jitsu goals

Every time you establish a threat you change your opponents thinking: An opponent who feels no threat from you will approach you with full confidence and have no concern for what you will do to him and focus upon what he will do to you - this will be a difficult opponent to contend with. An opponent who feels a genuine threat from you at every moment of a match will approach you with a spirit of timidity. He will be focused primarily upon what you might do to him rather than what he must do to you - this will be an easy opponent to contend with. Make sure then, that you establish a genuine threat to your opponent at every opportunity - it will have a massive effect upon his disposition toward you and therefore upon the outcome of the match.

The more contact you have with an opponents body, the more control (provided you’re in good position) you’ll be able to exert, but the slower your movement and progress will be. When you less contact, you’ll generally have less ability to control an opponent’s movement, so you’ll be required to make bigger and faster movements to get to dominant positions. Contrast say bodylock passing with toreando passing. In a bodylock you have maximal contact, so you’ll have excellent control but it will come at the price of speed. You’ll have to inch around your opponents guard step by step, often delaying to overcome resistance. In toreando passing you’ll have to substitute speed and movement to make up for the lack of control and so your passing will have a totally different look to it. Make sure you can play both games. It’s natural to favor one over the other, but different opponents present different challenges and quite often an opponent who is very resistant to one style of Jiu jitsu is surprisingly vulnerable to another. So make sure you can play both the slower close contact style and also the faster distance based style - they look and feel very different but seek the same goal.

The single most accessible part of your opponents body that is a viable target for submission at any moment in a match is the head from front headlock situations. In any hard fought match it is inevitable that your opponent’s head will be exposed at some point (and usually several) to a serious attack from front headlock. These attacks are not only readily available but also highly effective and intimidating to an opponent. Make sure you have at least one good submission attack out of front headlock that you trust can get the job done against a tough opponent. This will make you dangerous at all times and give you the ability to snatch the initiative of a match at any time regardless of what has transpired previously

Momentum: A successful attack creates momentum in your favor. Some of that momentum is physical. Once your opponents position is compromised it takes time for him to recover. In that time you can launch a second, third and fourth attack which build increasing momentum in your favor. Another aspect of momentum is psychological. Success gives you confidence to attack again and often creates a negative effect in your opponents mind where now he becomes more concerned about the danger you present to him and often shifts into a more defensive mode. Once you establish a positive momentum - keep it going. Don’t attack and then stop. This will cause you to lose that momentum and let your opponent get back in the game and reassert himself. Make sure you compound one success upon another to maximize its effect on the match

Physical pressure requires sufficient application time to have an effect upon an opponent. If you can maintain it long enough you can exhaust an opponent physically and break him mentally. But how does one keep that pressure on long enough for it to take its effect? POSITION. If you can stay in a dominant position - the best are those where you are past your opponents legs and on top of him either chest to chest for chest to back - then you’ll have a much easier time riding an opponent while he has to carry your weight on his head and shoulders through his arms. This is truly exhausting for even a very well conditioned opponent. Get your position and then USE your position to make an opponent carry your weight in mechanically inefficient ways for time. If you can do this victory will be a constant companion for you.

Most good athletes in combo sports have a small set of SIGNATURE MOVES. These are moves that they use very frequently which they seem to be able to apply on anyone at any time. The Japanese in their wisdom even coined a phrase for this important idea - tokui waza - favorite move. You need your own signature moves if you are to maximize your progress. They form an essential line of progress for your overall game. As soon as you become known for a signature move your training partners will develop defenses. This means you’ll need to increase the sophistication of your application of those moves. As your opponents defense evolves, so too must your offense. This is one of the best ways to ensure continued progress in your game. It’s ironic that a very specific skill can be disproportionately responsible for your progress of your total skill set. Always keep your mind active first in deciding upon your signature moves, and then second, tirelessly striving to improve and add to them so that you can break through even the toughest defenses so that you can write your signature on every match!

Every piece on a chess board has a distinct character. They move in different ways and can attack and defend differently. They have each have their respective strengths and weaknesses. Each has its limitations. As you become more knowledgeable of that character you use the various chess prices more effectively. You learn to match the capabilities and character of the piece to the task at hand. The submission holds of Jiu jitsu are similar in this regard. Each has a unique character. Each has its own strengths and weaknesses. In order to maximize your effectiveness you must learn to match the submission hold to the task at hand. The deeper your understanding of the character of each hold the more success you will have when using them. Just as you have favorite pieces on a chess board, you will have submission holds that you favor. Just as some chess pieces are more powerful and versatile than others, so too, some submission holds outperform most others. The Queen, Rook, Bishop and Knight are ranked in power just as rear strangle, guillotine, heel hook and juji gatame arm bar stand highest in the ranking of submission holds. Just a a chess expert knows his pieces as well as he knows himself and does not ask of them anything above or below what they’re capable of, so too must you know your submission holds and apply them as expertly and appropriately as the chess master.

Lock one of your opponents leg in place and you’ve got a great situation from which to attack - lock both of his legs in place and you’ve near total control of his movement that makes it possible to choose the time and method of your attack at your leisure.

Do you ever get lost in Jiu jitsu? Not sure what to do next? Which move to select? Where to go next? There’s only one answer that’s ALWAYS the right answer to any question in this game - GET BEHIND YOUR OPPONENT AND TAKE THE BACK. If you engineered a game that only consisted of back takes from everywhere and nothing else you could have a stellar career on that alone. Make sure a SIGNIFICANT part of your training revolves around this skill - it will never point you in the wrong direction and in almost every case get moving in the right direction regardless of where you are and how confusing your situation might be.

Damn! You never know who is going to show up in this town! Great training today with @georgesstpierre @izaakmichellbjj and @lexfridman What a trio! Every aspect of martial arts covered with these guys!

When you go out on to the stage your mind will tell you that this is something completely new and different that you’re experiencing. Everything looks strange and unfamiliar and you’re being scrutinized by strangers. Your training takes place in a small gym , among friends and you know the people you grapple as well as you know yourself. Now you’re facing someone you’ve never grappled before in an environment that looks nothing like what you’re used to. This is the time to remind yourself that despite appearance and feeling - this is the same as what you do every day. The differences are superficial. The same truths you live by every day in the gym are true here too. The laws of physics, the principles of biomechanics and the canon of Jiu jitsu techniques and tactics don’t change with the scenery. They are as eternal as the sky. You trust them every day in the gym - in this moment where doubt and fear is all around you - trust them now more than ever and if you can apply then better than the stranger in front of you - victory will be yours

It’s always good to see old friends in town. Georges St Pierre began training with me so long ago and was always an exemplary student who personified the ideal of starting from nothing and through constant investment in himself and the self belief that small incremental success builds over time he became the best. He was an innovator who helped change the sport of MMA into its modern form. The time I spent on the mats and arenas with him will always be a highlight of my career

When you watch Jiu jitsu don’t look at THEM - actively observe and decide what YOU would be doing in their stead. Most people watch Jiu jitsu for entertainment. Take a different path and watch for growth. Every time you watch you get a chance to practice the single most important aspect of the game - sound decision making under the pressure of time.

Every time a move fails after a strong attempt there are two ways your mind can go. The first is to doubt your effectiveness and sense that you expended a lot of energy without result. This will make you reluctant to attack again since you’ve told yourself that your last attempt resulted in failure and fatigue. The second is to feel that you almost won and that your opponent will be much more nervous on the next exchange and that he burned a lot of energy defending himself and that if you try again this time you can succeed and thus you redouble your attacks. The same action and result can produce two very different psychological reactions. The first leads to increased timidity and withdrawal. The second to increased activity levels and offense. Make sure always you keep your mind directed in the positive direction that increases your activity and pushes you forward into the action of the match by controlling your inner dialogue after a setback or failure. As the old Stoics noted - your reaction to events is more important than the events themselves - this applies as much to Jiu jitsu as everything else in your life.

Good times Bad times: Nicholas Meregali sustained a severe injury at the 2024 ADCC. Sometimes an athlete has to make a split second decision in a high risk situation. Mr Meregali was thrown with a forceful uchi mata and opted to post his arm to save position. This can definitely work, but it can also generate kind of impact that results in severe injuries. Over the last week the extent of those injuries became clear - completely torn labrum, rotator cuffs along with joint separation and torn biceps. Today he underwent surgery in Brazil as part of the long process of building back. Jiu jitsu and life sometimes slams us so hard that it’s difficult to conceive of coming back. Be assured that no matter how bad it seems, time and industry can get you back to where you were and beyond. Remind yourself of the old saying that when find yourself having to start over again with your morale at rock bottom - you aren’t really starting with nothing - now you’ve got the benefit of knowledge and experience to better guide your return. No matter how dark things seem in those times, remember some of your past successes and how there were times those once seemed impossible to you but you achieved them nonetheless. You can do it again. Nicholas, remember that in the last two years you’ve beaten by dominant submission this years ADCC absolute champion, over 99kg champion, under 99kg champion along with winds over the absolute, under 99kg and 77kg silver medalists - keep your head up brother. When you get back you can remind everyone what you can do.

“I’m tellin’ ya bro…there ain’t no way these two bums win gold medals…”

It’s a game of details and insights: Sometimes you can work on a move for months with little progress and then a single detail or insight that you pick up, sometimes by accident, sometimes by experimentation and sometimes by instruction, can transform it from mediocrity to excellence. It stands to reason then, that the most valuable asset you can have in this game is a curious and restless mind that constantly seeks knowledge. Without that curiosity you’ll settle wherever you are and accept that level, but when your mind pushes for insight that brings improvement you’ll never be caught on a plateau for long.

Old friends: One of the best aspects of the grappling game is the friends you make over the years. Two people I’ve known a long time from the good old days with @georgesstpierre fighting in Las Vegas are @crissangel who was always a very gracious host when Georges would fight in Nevada and big @thefrankmir who lived and trained in Vegas through this legendary career. Both of them came to watch Gordon Ryan prepare for ADCC when we were training at @10pvegas It was great seeing them again and reliving crazy stories! Frank and I discussed his outstanding MMA Jiu jitsu and his version of the American lock from guard, nowadays often called a “Mir Lock” came up - then two days later at ADCC 2024 the outstanding Australian ATOS athlete @adelefornarino won gold using exactly that lock! It was great to see it action again! I wonder if Frank was watching! 😜😜

In Boston working with some of my favorite people in Jiu Jitsu on a new video! Thanks always to @bernardofariabjj and @michaelzenga and the worlds greatest uke @placisantos of @bjj.fanatics for all the help they give to my students and for expanding the learning of Jiu Jitsu students around the globe!

One of the more remarkable aspects of the recent ADCC World Championships was the performance of some of the older competitive athletes. In a young persons game three athletes over forty years old had outstanding performances and came away with a silver medal each - an incredible performance. All three of them have always been among our toughest rivals and they showed just how effective Jiu jitsu technique combined with good tactics can level the age playing field and create very impressive results! @vagnerrochabjj @cyborgbjj and @lovatojrbjj came out with all guns blazing and battled their way through to the finals! Here I am congratulating our long time rival Wagner Rocha who took a silver medal in the ultra competitive 77kg division. Well done fellas!!

Big Dan Manasoiu had an outstanding World Championship performance at ADCC this year, winning a bronze medal at 99kg. He had two fine submissions victories, a points win and his only loss was to team mate Luke Griffith. Very few big men play guard offense like Dan - he moves like a lightweight into leg locks from underneath - very unusual for such a big man. He showed that in the bronze medal match with a beautiful classical entry into an inside heel hook to win in seconds against a very tough opponent. So often heavyweights are taught to play a different game from smaller athletes. While this is often sound advice I’ve seen some big men who can move in surprisingly supple ways to and perform moves usually expected of the lighter divisions. As Dan showed, you can never completely compartmentalize athletes based on body type - there’s always someone who can surprise you!

Luke Griffith showed the world just how far he has come when he won silver at the ADCC World Championships last weekend and came within inches of gold in a dramatic final where he took down and got to the back of the great Felipe Pena. He won his first three matches via submission. He has a very fluid style for a heavyweight and seems to grapple like a much lighter man. With this silver medal and a recent submission victory over the double gold medalist of ADCC Kaynan Duarte it’s clear that’s he’s arrived as a heavyweight contender. It’s incredible to think just a few years ago he showed up at the local Renzo Gracie Austin gym, unknown and alone as a purple belt who’d just lost his first match at European ADCC trials and now he’s fighting for gold against the best of the best - it’s an inspiration to us all that if we have the focus and discipline what seems impossible can be made possible. Well done Luke Griffith - you made your family, team, fans and South Africa proud.

Helena Crevar became the youngest athlete ever to win a medal and get to the finals in the history of ADCC World Championships competition. It was an incredible journey for the seventeen year old phenom. Winning a silver medal and very nearly taking the final match shows she is very close indeed to the top of the game already and with a lifetime of improvement still ahead her potential is vast. Much of the credit for this success must be given to her parents who have given her tremendous support from her origins in the sport. Every day they come to watch her train, transport her to and from the gym and come to every match, even small local shows to give encouragement. Great credit too must be given to Helena’s early coaches in Las Vegas who have her a strong foundation in jiu jitsu. A good lesson for us all is that it’s not your chronological age or years in the sport that counts in this game, it’s the hours you accumulate in training and skill development that determine your level - you can amass many more hours in fewer years if you’re prepared to work hard, and nobody has put in more consistent work than this athlete. Congratulations Helena Crevar!

Giancarlo Bodoni made history at ADCC by becoming the first 88kg athlete to win two gold medals in successive events. I’ve always said, it’s extremely difficult to become a world champion, but it’s ten times more difficult to STAY a world champion. The moment you get to the top you immediately become the most studied athlete on earth. Everyone knows your moves, your tempo, your pace etc. They quickly develop a game to counter every aspect of your game. Even on a psychological level staying at the top is tough. You’ve already been declared the best, maintaining the resolve to continue hard training needed to repeat what you’ve already done becomes a real challenge. The key is to keep evolving. This requires a genuine love of the game and learning every aspect of it - especially the new skills that you’ll need to keep sufficient adaptation and evolution to stay ahead of the pack. Giancarlo did that in fine fashion. He started work the day after his last gold medal and worked hard every day of every week up to his next gold medal - that’s how you stay at the top!

I saw with my own eyes every day how much this man had to go through and overcome for this event. His physical condition was so bad three weeks prior to ADCC that I counseled him to pull out. He could not complete a ten minute round or work two consecutive days. I sent a text to the promoters telling them to prepare an alternative athlete for the superfight. Somewhere inside himself he found the resolve to push through and fight two of the greatest ADCC champions of all time back to back. He did what he has done his whole career - win. Gordon has had better matches, better displays of technical mastery, but never a better display of overcoming adversity to push through into victory. I saw what your situation was throughout this camp - the world only saw the result. Never has there been a bigger dichotomy between what you had to work with and the result. Well done, brother, well done.

Victory in Las Vegas!! We had a truly great time at the ADCC World Championships this weekend here in Las Vegas. It was a very dramatic event with many upsets and unexpected turns. When the dust settled we walked away with the three gold medals, two silver and a bronze. Gordon Ryan won both his super fights first against Felipe Pena and then against Yuri Simoes - to defeat two such great ADCC athletes back to back under extraordinarily difficult health circumstances was truly a great achievement. Giancarlo became the first 88kg ADCC athlete to win back to back gold medals with all matches won in dominant fashion. South African phenom Luke Griffith won silver in 99kg division with teammate Daniel Manasoiu winning bronze in spectacular fashion with three submission wins out of four matches. Teenage grappling sensation Helena Crevar won silver in the women’s -65kg division and gained a place in history becoming the youngest medal winner of all time in her debut - a truly incredible achievement. There were so many outstanding performances from all the teams and their top athletes - watching it all unfold was an unforgettable experience. Thanks to @adcc_official for another amazing event and thank you all for following the ups and downs of our athletes as part of ours and your jiu jitsu journey!

One of my favorite aspects of ADCC is the being among the gathering of all the outstanding athletes and coaches of the event. This sport has so many remarkable people involved - when they all get together it’s an amazing synergy to be around! The first person I ran into today was none other than the legendary Xande Ribeiro! He has had an incredible career in ADCC stretching back to his great debut in 2003. He will be inducted into the ADCC Hall of Fame this weekend - nobody deserves it more! @xanderibeirojj

Team New Wave had a great workout with our friend @coachcasey10 at his gym in Las Vegas @10pvegas Getting those last workouts in is always a special feeling. It’s always Good to see teammates in a new environment - it always adds something special to the workout!

Settling down in Las Vegas: Team New Wave arrived in Las Vegas in preparation for The ADCC World Championships this coming weekend. I have so many memories of this place going back so many years. My coaching career began in MMA and so many times we traveled here to Vegas and stayed at the MGM Grand as part of the UFC days - great times great memories. Now it’s the very different game of grappling but it’s the same excitement in preparation. Vegas has been the premier town for all combat sports as long as I’ve been in America and I’m thrilled to see that grappling has grown to a level that it now stands alongside the other combat sports in this great city!

Given enough time, a tough opponent will always find the weakest aspect of your game and exploit it. You can’t go far in this game with a weakness that opponents can find and exploit. It’s up to you to identify the weaknesses in your game and begin a program of improving them. It can be mentally hard to do this - but it’s never as hard as the frustration and disappointment of getting repeatedly beaten in one area. So take an honest inventory of your game periodically and ask where the holes are. Where do you struggle? Where do you lose most often? Once you get the answers you can make a positive effort to rectify the problems. Remember always that positive progress in Jiu jitsu comes in two forms - developing strengths and removing weaknesses. Both are equally important but we all tend to focus on the first above the second - don’t make that mistake.

I always loved the painting by Jacques Marie Gaston Onfrey de Breville Young Napoleon Studying. There is much here for a student of Jiu jitsu to consider. The painting illustrates the themes of potential through study and knowledge acquisition. Young Napoleon sits alone at a desk, unknown and inexperienced, but the light throws the unmistakable silhouette in shadow of the powerhouse that he would one day become. It speaks of the power of knowledge and study to transform an unknown student into a world dominating force. Napoleon studies alone, his only partners are the voices in the books of the great generals of the past whose craft he learns from. This represents well the path you too must follow. You’ll have friends and acquaintances, but ultimately it’s you and you alone who must provide the energy and resolve to walk the long road to your future self. You’ll need to find inspiration and education in the work of the masters who came before you, but adapt them to your own purposes and needs, after all it’s YOUR shadow on the wall, not theirs. Have faith if you immerse yourself in that study long enough, your future self can throw a far greater shadow than you thought possible

Attack the whole body: A theme common to all combat sports is to attack different locations of your opponents body in order to break through defenses. The moment you go to attack a good opponent he will throw up his defenses. If you can make him believe that an attack is directed at one location and then launch the real attack at another location you will be able to bypass his defenses. It sounds simple in theory but you’ll be judged by your ability to apply it in practice - so make sure you practice diversion into attack every day in sparring. Make a habit of beginning your attack at one spot and switching off to another as seamlessly as possible. This will make your game unpredictable and nuanced in ways that get good results!

When you gain momentum keep momentum until the next goal is reached: Tough matches in Jiu jitsu involve a lot of time in deadlocks with little action. Then there is typically a burst of action followed by another deadlock. In situations like this - if you build offensive momentum and get your opponent on the run - keep going until you score. So often athletes will make a good initial attack and then stop themselves when it runs into resistance. This is exactly the time to renew the attack and sustain that momentum until you get to a score - then you can rest and go on to the next stage. Even if you’re feeling yourself burning energy - remember that in most cases the other guy will be burning more and will often end up conceding the position if you can maintain momentum long enough.

Every second of a jiu jitsu match offers a vast array of possible choices for your next move. Which choice you make is a highly individual thing - but once you made your choice - don’t second guess yourself. Go in decisively with the choice you’ve made. Moves performed with commitment usually do well - moves performed half heartedly rarely work. Make a decision and go with it!

Specialist in offense - generalist in defense: When it comes to defense in Jiu jitsu, a little knowledge goes a long way. As long as you can see danger emerging, you can start your defensive protocols before the danger becomes too great and get to safety fairly easily. Due to the fact that you never know how your opponent will attack, you need to have at least a rudimentary knowledge of many moves - just enough knowledge to identify a threat and defend early. Offense is a very different thing. Then it’s better to limit yourself to just a few moves and build very extensive and deep knowledge around them, much deeper than your opponents knowledge of how to defend them. This way you’ll be able to break through their defenses even when they know what’s coming. So build breadth of knowledge across many moves for defense and depth of knowledge among a few moves for offense to build a strong overall Jiu Jitsu game

Each move in Jiu jitsu has its own character: The various moves of Jiu jitsu each have a character to them which you must know so that you can align your actions with that character. For example, the armbar (juji gatame) from S mount is a move performed over a relatively long time. It is done from a very dominant position. If you went for the arm bar and failed it would be a considerable loss since you’ve lost a great position. As such it’s a move where you’ll want to take your time and methodically work from step to step with grinding pressure all the way to maximize the chance of success and minimize the potential for positional loss. When assessing the character of a given move you’ll need to take into consideration aspects such as execution time, degree of control, potential loss in case of failure, ability to go into follow up moves should the initial move fail. Soon you’ll know the strengths and weaknesses of all your main moves and you’ll be able to make good decisions as to which one you should select for a given situation.

Precision: Jiu jitsu can seem like a wild game at times. Often your opponents are moving erratically and explosively and it’s tough to get any semblance of control over them. It’s natural to want to fight fire with fire and go just as hard and erratically right back at them. That’s ok for a while if you want to tire them out - but recognize that at some point you need to apply moves in a technically sound fashion with a sufficient degree of precision to make them work against tough resistance - so make sure you build those technical nuances deep into your game so that no matter how wild it gets out there you can call upon your knowledge to end it in your favor

Your first responsibility in top position is to maintain your balance/base. Without that you have nothing. Learning to ride your opponents moving bodyweight is in some ways akin to learning to ride a bike, a skateboard or a wave - you can be a taught what to do but at the end of the day you’ve got to get on that bike or board and spend time just getting used to the feeling of instability until you can ride for long periods of time. Prioritize balance above all - only when that is secured do you move to your offense.

There is always two simultaneous battles going on in Jiu jitsu. The first is the battle to negate your opponent’s moves, the second is to impose your own. Over emphasis of one over the other always creates problems. If you ignore what your opponent is doing you’ll be be fighting for survival every time your opponent attacks before you and it’s only a matter of time until you get caught. If you fixate only on negating your opponents moves without any thought on imposing your own, your game will be too cautious and defensive to be effective and you’ll never be a threat to an opponent, only an annoyance. Get your tactical sense in balance. Start with negation and then move immediately to imposing your will - that way you will have a game that respects your opponent’s ability but doesn’t undersell your own.

Better to have one move that you can apply from a dozen different positions and scenarios than a dozen moves that you can apply from one position or scenario each. Why? Because when it’s time to complete that move against tough resistance you’ll have twelves times more experience to draw upon and twelves times the training history.

Every so often you’ll make a big leap in progress in Jiu jitsu - but understand clearly that this is the exception rather than the rule. Most of your progress will be incremental and barely perceivable among the hard sessions you endure. Remember that many things that happen gradually right in front of your eyes will be difficult to see day by day. Do you notice the passing of the seasons? It happens so slowly you don’t even notice until one day it’s hot and the trees are in full bloom where your last memory was of the leafless cold winter. So too with your jiu jitsu progress - it’s happening in front of you but it’s only every so often that you get the perspective to actually see it clearly.

Just as it is easier for a soldier to escape being taken prisoner if he attempts his escape as early as possible after capture, so too in jiu jitsu - the earlier your escape attempts begin, the easier the escape overall. The longer you delay, the further you get taken into the lock and harder it will be to extricate yourself. Knowledge is a powerful tool here. If you have enough knowledge to recognize an emerging threat early you can respond early - and it’s the early responses that have the best chance of success

One of the most valuable things you can ever bring into your grappling game is a favorite starting position that you can readily get into and from there negate your opponents offense and commence your favorite attacks. You will need a favorite starting position on your feet, from bottom position and top position. In a world of chaos it’s extremely valuable to have a base camp position that makes you secure and gives you strong base of operations into your offense. Moves are never performed in isolation but rather always in a context - when the context is something that your very comfortable with it elevates your game and performance

Follow through: In the application of some Jiu jitsu moves there has to be sufficient drive that you will follow through your opponent as a golfer follows through the ball when he drives it. This is often seen in the case of driving takedowns and most joint locks. To make the moves work against resistance you have to be able to go past the point where the move starts to take effect and keep pushing through for a successful completion. Obviously you’ll want to be cognizant of safety when doing this to training partners. Real world application of some moves requires this follow through beyond the point where the move starts to take effect towards the point where it can’t be stopped

Would you rather have one hundred superficial friends who are fun to be around but are only around for the good times or three friends who are there in good times and bad and who will back you up no matter what when everyone else has left you? We all have this choice in daily life. We have a similar choice in Jiu jitsu. Would you rather have a passing knowledge of one hundred moves that are fun and trendy and which you can use to highlight reel the white belts in the gym or extremely deep knowledge of three very high percentage moves that you can trust to work even in your toughest opponents? History is quite clear. Most great champions have a smaller set of favorite moves that they develop great expertise with and which they can use in any situation and on any opponent. Deep knowledge of a few outperforms superficial knowledge of many. Having a solid friend in bad times is a great thing - having a move that you have total confidence in even in the toughest match of your life is similarly great. Make sure you find those trusted moves - they will benefit your jiu jitsu as a true friend benefits your daily life.

Surprise: One of the most powerful weapons you can ever make use of is surprise. An attack that has no warning and hence you have no time to put defenses in place or a technology that you have no clue how to fight against will always be a devastating attack. Tactical surprise is all about concealing your intentions prior to attacking. Your opponent may know what your weapons are but if he has no warning he won’t have time to put his defenses up. Technological surprise is the use of a new weapon that an opponent simply has no idea how to fight against. Learning new techniques that your training partners aren’t familiar with and learning to cloak your intentions when using the techniques they are familiar with is a huge part of being effective in sparring and competition. This is why it’s important to keep adding to your repertoire and to develop your skill in the use of feints, misdirection, change of pace/rhythm and all the other means of obfuscating your real intentions. Remember it’s not all about technical prowess - tactics are just as important - and among the tactical elements that bring success - few are more important than the ability to surprise an opponent

Your first line of defense in Jiu jitsu will always be anticipation. When you can see danger arising before it fully materializes, escape or avoidance will be easy. When you have to dig your way out of a fully locked submission or pin, it will be an ordeal. This is one of those times in Jiu jitsu where a little knowledge goes a long way. If you have even a passing familiarity with a given move and can recognize the warning signs of its imminent application, you’ll be able to avoid/escape it before it becomes a serious threat. The worst traps are those we walk into in a state of ignorance. Normally Jiu jitsu requires very deep knowledge and skill to get a move to work, but to avoid a move requires only superficial knowledge - so if you want to build your anticipatory defense take heart that you don’t need a vast amount of knowledge about many moves, even a superficial knowledge of those many moves will usually suffice to give you the awareness to be a difficult target. Photo @jordanhfoto

Most of the time I’m always telling my students to relax as they grapple. We all have a natural tendency to tense up a little more than necessary once the action starts and this can lead to premature fatigue and lower the quality of your movements. There is however one time when tight and tense body tension is appropriate - when you’ve locked in a submission hold and you can feel it is well set. NOW is the time for some serious isometric tension in your muscles. Don’t forget to breath and if the hold should prove ineffective due to slippage, back off the tension and switch to something else rather than hold on grimly and squeeze with all your might with no result other than exhaustion. So yes, most of the time, incline yourself towards a more relaxed disposition, but when you’ve got him in your sights - put some tension on and keep it in king enough to get the job done!

Your arms and legs are the connection to your opponents body - but your hips are the source of your power. The arms are the transmission but the hips are the engine. The stronger your hips the stronger your game overall. Understand that dexterity that allows your to place your hips with precision in the most mechanically advantageous leverage points will outperform raw strength - this is the real means of exhibiting the power of your hips.

Everything begins with your stance: There are myriad different scenarios in which you’ll find yourself in Jiu jitsu. Understand this - for every scenario there is an appropriate stance that minimizes the effort you’ll need to expend to get work done and maximizes your ability to negate an opponents attacks and assert your own attacks. Learning to unconsciously get to and hold that stance and seamlessly switch to another when the scenario changes is one of the core skills of the game. The single most obvious difference between watching a beginner versus an expert is in there ability to find a solid stance that changes in the appropriate way during the second by second action of a match. Your first challenge will be learning the stances. Your second will be developing the discipline required to maintain them throughout the entire duration of a match no matter how tired you get and whatever your opponent does to break your stance and the last lifetime challenge will be to do this automatically with less muscular tension so that your strength derives from the efficiency of the stance itself rather than constant, inefficient muscular exertion. Trust in your stance and understand that it is your stance that is the basis of your endurance and mat strength rather than your raw strength and conditioning

There will be many moments in Jiu jitsu where you feel like you’re seconds away from losing. There will just as many moments when you feel like you’re seconds away from winning. Remember this - no matter how bad a situation may seem when grappling an opponent - you are only one move away from total escape and a chance to turn it all around. Conversely, no matter how good your current situation may seem, one mistake that allows an opponent to escape and you’ll have to start all over again. Let this simple insight give you hope and encouragement when things are bad and make you circumspect and watchful when things are good.

When you know ahead of time where the problem will arise as you attempt a given move - nullify the potential problem first - then do what you originally intended. When you go to strangle someone you know already that his hands will be the first line of defense, so begin by trapping the hands and then strangle so the problem is overcome before it begins. When you go to break someone’s arm or leg, you know already that the first line of defense is the other arm or leg, so trap/control that secondary arm or leg first and remove the problem before you start. Attack the anticipated problems first and the main objective second and you’ll break through the toughest defenses.

Opportunity doesn’t wait: The best attacks in Jiu jitsu are a marriage of opportunity and good technique selection to match that opportunity. A big part of your journey towards Jiu jitsu excellence is learning how to be fast enough to take advantage of opportunities within the appropriate time frame, but slow/poised enough to execute well and stay within your energy expenditure limits. Jiu jitsu doesn’t require that you be the fastest fellow in the room - but it does require that you avoid procrastination. When the opportunity presents itself - go!

Build from one advantage to another: One of the central tenets of Jiu Jitsu is that every attack should be preceded by some form of prior advantage that makes the attack more likely to succeed. You must put this principle into operation from the very start of every engagement you make. Don’t just come in and lackadaisically grip your opponent and see what happens. Have a clear sense of what you want to accomplish and how you’re going to do it. Maneuver into positions that give you small measure of advantage before you even grip and then build from there. A series of cumulative advantages and resultant gains will soon lead to a big advantage, but understand that you start small and work your way to big. Don’t dismiss those small early advantages - they may not seem like much but they add up to something big.

If your opponent is out of balance then being under their weight is no impediment to you. If you can interrupt their balance there is nothing they can do to you until their balance is recovered - and in that brief time there is a LOT you can do to them. Once you get a grip on your opponent, step one is to attack their balance - everything else you plan to do becomes easier when you start with this.

Committing to a move: In jiu jitsu moves that almost worked don’t count. A move has to be taken from start to completion if it is to have an impact on the match. Timidity is thus not a virtue when performing moves against resistance. Even if you are using a move to set up another, there has to be sufficient commitment to its application to get a real reaction out of your opponent to set up the following move. Going into a move half heartedly actually makes you quite vulnerable to a counterattack since you have to sacrifice your defensive elements in order to enter into offense. If the opponent is not threatened by your move he can simply counter attack in the middle of it and easily score. So when it’s time to go - GO!! Enter the move with positive force and elan you’ll have a much better chance of success. Don’t hang back and second guess yourself - now is the time to believe in the skills you’ve worked so hard on and go in with commitment

When you can bind up an opponents head and arm with your legs you put yourself in one of the very best control/submission positions in the sport. Any form of head/arm control is good, but performed with the legs it’s even better due to the strength discrepancy in your favor. There are many situations you can readily use this - side pins and turtle situations are the most common.

There are many forms of physical control in Jiu jitsu - positional control, balance control, grip control - the list is long; but the single most important form of physical control is control over an opponent’s movement. If you can achieve this, victory is just a matter of time. What you will find is that control over an opponent’s movement is really the sum of all the other forms of control added together. It is the final ideal of control that you must seek.

Sometimes the game feels like an upside down topsy turvy game of twister leaving you with no idea where to go next. Whenever you feel like this you need to make use of default options. This is the choice you make whenever the next step is unclear. The default option in Jiu jitsu is almost always THE BACK. You can never go wrong by choosing the back as your next goal In Jiu jitsu. The back is always a correct answer to every problem in the sport. Like a pole star guiding lost travelers in the night to their destination - make the back your pole star and navigate your way to there from everywhere and you’ll never lack direction in jiu jitsu again

Your whole body versus their one limb: One of the essential principles of Jiu jitsu is to create temporary physical advantage by seeking to use their strength of your entire body against a single isolated limb of an opponent. The idea is simple but profound. An opponents whole body may well be stronger than your whole body - but one of his legs or one of his arms is certainly not stronger than your whole body. If you can create a temporary strength advantage over an important part of your opponent’s body - a knee, an elbow, a neck - then you can overcome an overall strength disadvantage by creating a temporary localized strength advantage in your favor and you can hold it long enough to end a match. This is one of the theoretical underpinnings of Jiu jitsu - make it the centerpiece of your approach to the game

Any hold that utilizes your legs against your opponents arms, shoulders and head will be a winning formula. No matter how much bigger and stronger your opponent is, his arms are not stronger than your legs (if they are you should be fighting him with a shotgun rather than empty handed 😂😂). Have faith in one of the most foundational principles of Jiu jitsu - the lower body is always stronger and possessed of greater endurance than the upper body - so as much as possible fight your fight pitting your legs against your opponents arms and more often than not you’ll prevail

The back is the single biggest positional target on the human body - and the best - aim for it it every chance you get. Whenever there is confusion or lack of direction in your mind as you engage in a tough match - seek the back is always the answer.

As a student of Jiu jitsu, never lose sight of this fundamental truth. More than anything else you must become a student of the strengths and weaknesses of the human body and mind. Every problem you face in the sport, every mystery you have to solve and every barrier you have to overcome will come down to learning how to maximize the strengths of your body and mind and exploiting the weaknesses of your opponents body and mind. An artists medium is paint and canvas, a sculptor uses stone and chisel, a physicist the language of mathematics - a martial artist’s medium is body and mind.

I am very pleased to announce the release of my latest instructional video for BJJ Fanatics MASTER THE MOVE: ARM DRAGS. This new series MASTER THE MOVE is based around taking a single important/high percentage move that can have a significant impact on your game and exploring every aspect of it so that you can quickly develop the kind of depth and proficiency you’ll need to get it to work against your toughest opponents. Remember always that the pattern of offensive excellence in Jiu jitsu is always to show great depth of skill with a few trusted moves that you can use successfully even when opponents are expecting them simply because your knowledge and skill in executing them is greater than an opponents ability to stop them. MASTER THE MOVE is based on this key insight. Learning to develop your arsenal of favorite moves is the most important phase of developing your offensive game. My students have gotten great results with arm drags in top level competition. We have a quite different approach to arm drags both on the ground and standing that complements very well the more classical approaches. They’ve worked very well for us - I’m certain they can work extremely well for you too! Links in my Instagram story

Start with a plan: Every time you come toward your opponent from a neutral position there are myriad opportunities for both of you. One possible approach is to let your opponent initiate and react to that. Many athletes do very well with that approach. I generally prefer to see athletes take a more proactive approach, particularly in matches with a shorter time limit. Map your plan out BEFORE you make contact and you’ll have an immediate sense of direction that will put you in the drivers seat from the start. Of course you’ll still need to be able to adapt and improvise in response to rapidly changing circumstances since we never know exactly how an opponent will respond to our moves, but as a general rule it’s better to have an opponent of equal size and skill level reacting to you than rather than you to him, especially in matches of shorter duration

Happy Fourth of July! Wishing you all the best from Austin Texas! Keep working towards your goals. Remember always that even a single insight or item of knowledge added a day, even a single step closer to your goals, even a minor addition or refinement of your repertoire, performed day after day will compound over time and take you to something great no matter how unpromising you may feel today. Time and continuous, planned effort can transform you - keep going 🇺🇸🇺🇸

Some moves come naturally…others…not so much: I’m sure you’ve had the pleasant experience of learning a new move and everything just felt smooth and natural from the start and within a short timeframe you were applying the move successfully in sparring against good people. I’m equally sure that you’ve had the unpleasant experience of learning a new move and feeling like it’s damn near impossible for you to even demonstrate it satisfactorily forget about employ it on a fully resisting opponent. Don’t get too discouraged by this. I’ve had plenty of moves that initially felt absolutely hopeless when I first learned them. My experience was that typically persistence brought the level of these difficult-to-learn moves up to a satisfactory level. They never felt like a favorite move but they were good enough to get reactions out of opponents and lead into my favorite moves - and that’s good enough to make the struggle to learn them worthwhile! Remember - a your execution of a given move doesn’t have to be perfect to be effective. It only has to be better than your opponents ability to defend it. An imperfect move often slips past an imperfect defense

Whenever you’re operating underneath an opponent you will need space in which to move effectively under their bodyweight and pressure. This will require you to emplace frames with your arms and legs, and in particular your knees and elbows, so that your torso can move freely inside that space you’ve created. Building the habit of forming frames is a huge part of the bottom game. Make sure you adapt your frames to the moment by moment changes in your opponents body positioning - a frame typically works well in one scenario but is often ineffective in another - so keep them moving and changing in accordance with the changes you see unfolding in front of you

Vary your pace: People often ask if there is an optimal pace for their game. If you look at world champions you will see that there is great variation among the best. Some are blindingly fast, others very slow moving - both approaches produced champions. When it come to pace I always suggest you work at a pace where you can accurately recall most of the techniques you employed in the course of your sparring round and can last the full time of the round without exhaustion, but you’re still fast enough that you can follow an opponent’s movement and successfully complete moves. If you can’t remember a thing that happened and/or you can’t make it to the end of the round, chances are you’re going too fast for your mind to comprehend what was happening and you’re just operating on instinct leading into physical exhaustion. If you are simply too slow to get into position to execute moves then you need to speed things up a little. Experiment with pace until you find a satisfactory compromise between these elements

Keep searching for knowledge. Even at the highest levels of the sport a single new insight can bring about a performance increase that has a significant impact on your capabilities. A move you’ve been doing for years can be transformed with the addition of a single item of useful information. The minute you close yourself off from new knowledge and adopt the belief that you know everything there is to know about that move you nail the door shut on performance increase.

When it comes to progress in this game there are two mindsets that are at odds with each other but which you must hold simultaneously. The first is always a constant demand for the fastest possible progress seeking always to add new elements to your game that can improve performance. The second is realization that all progress takes time and that you need to be realistic about how fast skills can be built. Learning to balance the demand for progress at the fastest possible rate with the fact that all progress takes time to develop is a key to sustained development over time. Too much demand for new skills creates incomplete skills and an unsettled game. Too much acceptance of the notion that all skill development takes time often leads to complacency that everything will be alright at the end and a lack of daily drive that results in needlessly slow progress. Balance then together - be demanding in your pursuit of new skills but realistic about how long it will take to master them

A comfortable opponent is a dangerous opponent. The single fastest way to make an opponent uncomfortable is to break their balance. The second you do so their demeanor changes to a scramble to get back in balance. When someone stands over you or in front of you, breaking their balance is a very high priority indeed. If you can reliably do this, then they will never be comfortable enough to methodically work against you but instead must scramble from engagement to engagement always a second or two behind you and in danger from all your attacks.

So much of this game is about staying defensively responsible by maintaining a compact stance to reduce vulnerability to submissions and scores. The converse is very important for your offense. If you can get an opponent extended you greatly increase your chances of successful submission or score. Learning to get opponents knees and elbows out and away from their torso is a truly key skill in Jiu jitsu

Every so often in Jiu jitsu you make a big jump in performance level in a short time frame. This is usually caused by the adoption of a new technique that you have a natural affinity for and which gives you great results. Most of the time however, your progress will be barely noticeable cumulative additions to existing skills that accrue over time. Let those small accumulations compound over time and one day you’ll surprise yourself with how far you’ve come without ever realizing it in daily practice

When you go to make contact with an opponent it helps a lot to have a clear sense of purpose. You have a sketch in your mind of what you want to do and how you will do it. However, the reality of any combat sport is that chaos can break out any second and in a moment all your fine plans can go to hell and you will have to immediately adapt second by second to circumstances you never anticipated. This means that within you must cultivate two mindsets. One of the tactician/technician when things go well, the other of the improviser/ adapter/survivor when things go badly. Too much of the perfect planner mentality can sink you when things go awry. Too much of the improviser/survivor can turn what should be easy matches into needless wars with sub optimal outcomes.

One of the main functions of pinning is to create asymmetric work rates. Your pins should create a situation where an opponent has to work much harder to escape the pin than you have to work to maintain the pin. Even if he escapes, his energy levels will be degraded to an extent where his performance will drop until he recuperates. Don’t get frantic - you’re winning already - every passing second works in your favor.

Helena Crevar gave another winning performance tonight here in Austin at a great local show @main_character_jiujitsu where she won the 145 pound title in less than two minutes via stranglehold. It’s great to local grappling getting so strong - there were many outstanding matches tonight. Now it’s back to training in preparation for the ADCC World Championships!

What speed should you go when sparring? When a group of beginners begin sparring they typically go as fast and hard as they can - using speed to make up for their lack of control. When you see two experts sparring they will use speed in conjunction with tactics - when they feel it’s in their best interest to slow things down, they go slow; when they feel it’s in their interest to speed things up, they increase the pace. If you’re unsure what speed you should be working at when you begin sparring I would make two suggestions. First, don’t exceed a speed that you can maintain for the full duration of the round. Nobody is impressed by someone who goes at full blitz speed for two minutes and then can barely move for the next six minutes. Pace yourself for the full duration of the round. Second, don’t exceed a speed where you can make sound decisions. If the speed of your body exceeds the speed of your sound decision making - problems are around the corner. Follow these two simple recommendations and you’ll soon find a good working speed to operate at for most of your sparring rounds.

You will rarely ever feel you’re making significant progress in this game: You are in a sport where you train alongside everyone else in a room where you all learn the same techniques and strategies and employ the same training methods. The direct implication of this is that you will all progress at roughly the same rate over time. This means you can go for considerable periods of time feeling like you’re not getting any better at all. Don’t be dismayed by this. It is a natural consequence of working in a room together. Have faith that it’s well nigh impossible to work hard over time in a decently organized manner without making any progress. Have faith too, that learning rates generally change over time. Partners that started long before you seem so advanced that you’ll never catch up, but don’t worry, your progress at the start will be higher per unit of time than theirs so it is indeed possible to catch up and surpass people who who started well before you no matter how unlikely this may seem today. Keep working diligently and just as a small some sum of money can grow over time into a fortune by adding regularly to over time and letting compound interest work its magic, so too can small additions to your knowledge and skill compound over time into Jiu Jitsu excellence.

Victory in Austin! Gordon Ryan made a successful comeback tonight at @flograppling WNO grappling event. He won against the extremely powerful Australian grappler Josh Saunders via outside heel hook after a period of positional dominance. This year has been a very difficult one for Mr Ryan as his serious long term stomach illness became even more severe. This was a test run before ADCC and despite all his troubles, Mr Ryan was able to take a decisive win. The event overall was excellent with very strong team performances from ATOS Jiu jitsu, B Team, AOJ Jiu Jitsu and Six Blades Jiu jitsu - but in the end it was the return of the King that brought the sold out crowd to the arena and he showed again his remarkable ability to shrug off severe physical problems and show his unparalleled skills. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Gordon Ryan returns to professional grappling tomorrow night in Austin in the WNO @flograppling event in a fifteen minute match against the powerful Australian ADDC trials champion Josh Saunders. Mr Saunders trained alongside us for the last ADCC where he gave a great performance against the great Felipe Pena and showed the world he belonged in the big leagues. He is a very physically powerful man with great speed for a heavyweight. This will be a tough test for Mr Ryan as he tries to prove he is fit for the upcoming world championships after battling against a recurring severe stomach illness most of the year. There are many other excellent matches in the card - it’s the last big show prior to the world championships so many of the biggest names of the sport will be using it as part of their final preparations for ADCC and CJI events - hope you all enjoy the show!

It’s not just a matter of weight: Top pinning pressure is one of the keys to high level Jiu jitsu performance. Most people associate pressure with physical weight. Weight certainly does play a role in how much pressure you can generate from top - there’s a reason why there are weight divisions in all grappling sports after all. However, even a heavyweight on top of you doesn’t feel so bad provided you can maintain a stance/posture that enables you to bear weight effectively. What kills you is when an opponent breaks your stance/posture and THEN applies his weight on you when your body is so poorly positioned that you can’t bear the weight efficiently. So when you’re pinning out your primary focus on getting your opponent extended and open and only then will your weight be truly effective in creating the pressure you seek

Make sure your pins drain your opponent of energy and will. Just as a good boxer saps his opponent of energy by punching repeatedly to the body so that later he can finish with a KO blow to the head; so too a good grappler uses pins to exhaust an opponent and finish with a well applied submission hold to the arms legs or neck. Don’t just see pins and a means of scoring points, but also as a vital component of a war of attrition that culminates in submission

When submission and position become one: Jiu jitsu is usually understood in terms of two elements - position and submission - and in most cases position comes first. Quite often athletes tend to specialize in one over the other. Some are predominantly positional players who win by points: others are submission hunters who win via submission and sometimes even have disdain for positional scores. The situation that unifies those two elements is the rear mount. It is the highest scoring position in the sport (tied with mount) and the at the same time the launchpad for the number one submission in the game - the rear strangle. Make sure you look to emphasize this unity of position and submission through rear mount and rear strangle - no other aspect of Jiu jitsu does such a fine job of unifying the two primary elements of the game in such a winning way

Victory in England!! Helena Crevar continued her winning way with a unanimous decision victory after several powerful heel hooks and rear mount strangle attacks in @polaris_professional grappling to win the 70kg title and belt - an impressive feat as this is above her weight class against an established champion. Now it’s back to Austin to continue preparation for the upcoming ADCC world championships which now has three female weight divisions and a first ever female absolute division! Congratulations Helena - keep up the good work!

It’s much easier to refine an existing move than learn a new one: when it’s time to make fast progress we usually think in terms of learning new moves. The fastest improvements however, usually come from improvements to moves you already employ. The difference between the successful execution of a move and an unsuccessful one is often very small - so just a few extra details or additions can make a substantial difference to your performance. Due to the fact that you’re already familiar with the move, these additions are usually easy to make. Starting from scratch with an entirely new move takes far more time - thus Refining an existing move often garners better short term results than adding a brand new one.

When a technique has an effect and breaks through there will be an immediate period afterwards where you have two choices - CONSOLIDATION or EXPLOITATION. There are pros and cons to both. Consolidating is usually the safer option since it holds the match in the situation where you’ve just achieved a significant breakthrough and ensures you don’t lose what you’ve just gained. Exploitation entails immediate forward movement after your score. The advantage of this is that your opponent will usually be discombobulated and often easier to score on for a short period after a successfully applied move. The disadvantage is that your own stance is often compromised as well and the resultant chaos can sometimes result in a total loss of position in your moment of triumph - never a pleasant thing. Experiment with both - they are very different approaches - risk averse personalities tend to be attracted to the consolidation approach - maximizing personalities tend to favor the exploitation approach - see which one you favor

Have a clear sense of what you want to accomplish next as you grapple. If you’re in a bad position, you need an eye for what the first action required for your escape must be. If you’re in a good position you’ll need a sense for the first action required to start an offensive chain that can break through your opponents defenses. If you’re in a neutral position you’ll need to identify a viable first action that can set up an entry into offense. Remember - everything starts with a small first step - but until that first step is taken - nothing happens - so work on identifying that first step quickly regardless of where you are - that way you’ll always be progressing quickly towards your bigger goal

To restrict movement - maximize connection and application of bodyweight. To create movement maximize - space and distance. To control - restrict movement. To escape - create movement. Keep this simple guide in mind as you spar and you’ll never be confused as to how you should be interacting with your opponent second by second on the mats.

Finding a favorite move: The higher you go in Jiu jitsu the more it becomes a deeply personal sport. When you start out you have to try and learn the foundations - you don’t have any say in what the fundamentals are - they’re the same for everyone so you learn EVERYONE’S game. Once you’ve passed that level it’s time to learn offense you learn YOUR game. You have to acquire a small set of favorite moves - the Japanese call them “tokui-waza” These will be the main means by which you fight for victory. What choices you make will depend mostly on your body type, your personality and your coaching heritage/lineage. Your choices can change and evolve over time, but it’s crucial that once you’ve become competent in the foundations that you start the search for your favorite moves and start gaining a deep knowledge of their use - how competent you become in them will determine how far you go in the sport.

Variation of speed and intensity: A very common error among people new to Jiu Jitsu (and even among many who are not so new) is the tendency to begin a match at a given intensity level and speed and maintain it as long as they can until they either win, lose or get exhausted and stop. Usually this results in fatigue in a short period of time. You must learn to vary the intensity and speed to a level appropriate to the second by second changes of the match. You don’t need to squeeze at maximum intensity for more a few seconds in most matches. For the majority of most matches you can be a surprisingly relaxed state, interspersed with a few brief periods of very high intensity and some others of moderate intensity. You can’t be overly relaxed all the time or you simply won’t be effective, but you can’t be squeezing like a maniac all the time either as you’ll soon be exhausted. Learning to vary intensity to situations is one of the biggest developments you must make and represents a significant step up in your sophistication as a grappler

I always encourage athletes to train every day that they can - but I don’t encourage them to train as hard as they can every day. Learn to switch up the intensity levels when training. Every time you step on the mats you have an opportunity to improve your skills, so the more times you do so, in general the faster your progress; but maximum intensity training is very arduous and leads quickly to injury and exhaustion. Learning to lower the intensity allows you to increase the volume. Sometimes you need a hard workout, conversely, sometimes you need a softer workout. Learning to vary the intensity allows you to increase training volume and that’s a key part of progress

Advantage gained is only useful if that advantage is kept and used: Jiu jitsu is a game of accumulating some form of advantage, be it positional, grip, balance or whatever, and then exploiting that advantage for further gain. When you see two Jiu jitsu athletes sparring you will see then immediately and constantly seeking to gain some form of advantage over the other. Understand always however, that you can only use that advantage effectively if you can hold it long enough to do something constructive with it. So GAINING advantage is only half the battle - KEEPING advantage long enough to do something more is the other half. Make sure every time you move into a good position you set your mind and body for the new challenge of KEEPING what you’ve gained - don’t let complacency result in losing immediately what you’ve worked so hard to acquire

Work step by step to your goals: The application of Jiu jitsu technique mirrors life. You never go straight into a completed move or hold. The application of moves is a process, not an event. It begins with a set up, then an entry, then series of adjustments towards a completed technique and finally completion. Like all processes the key is to avoid skipping steps or rushing through the steps faster than allows proper application. Take this approach and you’ll soon find your techniques having more effect in sparring and competition

If you can undermine an opponents balance you will create a temporary situation where his only thought is to recover that balance. It’s in that moment that he will not be focused on defense and therefore much easier to attack than would normally be the case. Defense requires a solid base. An opponent with a broken base of support must first stop whatever he is doing and recover his base of support - that’s exactly when your attack is most likely to succeed

When in positional trouble keep moving, but not frantically. When someone gets a strong position on you it’s natural to feel some concern. Most people understand that staying still will make a bad situation worse as you spend lingering and longer in bad position an opponent can advance uncontested to an even better position or a submission hold. Too often athletes think that the opposite approach must therefore be beneficial and engage in frantic mission to escape. This often creates big openings to a skilled opponent to get to better positions and tires you out without reward. Motion is indeed necessary, but don’t make it frantic. Keep moving in a purposeful manner towards a specific goal. It’s unlikely the first escape attempt will work on a good opponent, so be ready to smoothly transition to the next until sufficient space develops to complete an escape. Just the action of continuous movement towards a goal will make you a difficult opponent to control and greatly facilitate your eventual escape attempt. Then you even create situations where the attacker becomes more fatigued than you as he tries to complete a score.

Every match is won and lost one move at a time. Whenever you’re excessively worried before a match or very tired during a match, it’s natural to feel anxiety. That anxiety can freeze you and make you ineffective. Whenever you’re heading down that path just focus on what will be your next move. Too much concern about the outcome or your opponent never helps performance. The only thing that helps performance is a well executed and well chosen next move - so let that and that alone be your focus.

The best submissions always offer several different paths to submission from the same hold. Single option submissions will work up to a given level and then stop working, but when you can play between two or three options and keep an opponent guessing as to which option you’ll take, it will break through against even the toughest defenses. Given a choice, favor those submissions that offer multiple paths to victory.

Victory in Austin! Teenage grappling prodigy Helena Crevar was victorious tonight in a grappling bout against talented UFC fighter Mariya Agapova at the Austin TX @karatecombat event tonight. She won via heel hook in thirty seconds, showing once again her impressive leg lock development and her submission hunting style! It’s a great show set in a modern style pit. Now they’re into the karate bouts - it’s impressive how modern karate has evolved along much more MMA inspired lines and become very effective indeed as a basis for MMA. She will compete again this weekend at the IBJJF World Championship - that’s the kind of competition schedule that creates great champions!

Good stance can make a weak person strong and poor stance will make the strongest person weak. For every scenario in the sport there is a stance that most efficiently corresponds to it. The further you deviate from that ideal stance the more your muscles will have to compensate and the more fatigued you’ll become. Remember always that in the mat you’re only as strong as your stance - so do everything you can to train yourself to maintain it throughout the entire duration of a match

Going first or going second: Combat sports have always been split between those who actively initiate action and look to proactively control the flow of events and those who wait for their opponents to move first and then reactively counter during moments of vulnerability. Great champions have come from both styles so it’s not profitable to argue over which is better - the only interesting question is which is better for YOU and UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES? Your personal disposition/personality will be a big determining factor in whether you go the proactive or reactive route. It is also important to consider the match and the opponent. Longer matches often favor a reactive approach, shorter matches generally favor a proactive style. In training, experiment with both. You’ll often find against certain opponents one style gets better results than the other. When you can play both styles you can become a very versatile player who matches well against any opponent and in any circumstances

When you’re under attack, your first priority will always be to stop the attack - but the second you’ve accomplished that, your mind should already be mapping out potential counterattacks. Don’t be satisfied with stopping an attack - that’s good - but go from good to great by immediately putting your mindset back into offense. Remember always that a failed attack inevitably puts an opponent into an extended, vulnerable position and that a counterattack has a great chance of breaking through. The second you stopped the attack and have begun working your way free, it’s time to start plotting your counterattack to take the action back to the other guy!

A small number of moves packaged into a cohesive group that compliment each other will always outperform a vast number of moves that bear no relation to each other. Your ability to integrate moves means far more than your ability to acquire them.

Grip with a purpose: All Jiu jitsu technique requires some kind of grip upon your opponent. So the first positive action of any exchange is the act of gripping. Most people come out to grip with a “let’s see what happens” approach. This is acceptable in a relaxed class setting, but when it’s time to play your A game against a tough opponent you’ll need to do better than this. Learn to correlate your grips to your purpose. Every move you can make is associated with a specific grip. Have a clear picture of what technique you want to open with and fight for the specific grips that will be required for that technique. This will give your gripping game an immediate sense of direction and purpose that will lead immediately into attacks and move you towards an attacking game overall.

Whenever you can use an attack to load your opponents body into a position where his weight is concentrated on a single post of support - it will be a simple matter to complete the technique simply by attacking that remaining post. Learn to maneuver your opponents on to loaded position like this and the sweeps and takedowns become considerably easier. As an opponent posts out in response to your initial attack and recovers his balance - don’t see that a failed technique - see it as a lead in to the simple act of eliminating the remaining post and the second move will topple him every time.

Getting behind an opponent is the single most positive move you can make in Jiu jitsu. There are very very few scenarios where getting behind someone works against you and a tremendous multitude of scenarios where it’s among the best things you can do. Seek the back at all times and you’ll always have a positive and winning sense of direction in your game!

Reading your opponent: When you meet a stranger for the first time you immediately begin reading them based on what you see and the experience over your lifetime that form your beliefs about people and their behavior. You should do the same thing in Jiu jitsu. When you first come to grips with an opponent their look, their behavior, their demeanor - all give clues as to what their intentions, skills and attributes are. Whenever we interact with someone we consider it advantageous to know as much about them as possible. The same holds true for in Jiu jitsu. Rather than just come out gunning for whatever moves you planned to do, spend some time reading your opponent and gathering information - it often results in a more efficient path forward

If you compare your progress to other people in the dojo around you, you’ll always be miserable, since there will always be others who progress more quickly than you or began before you. If you compare yourself to where you were yesterday, you’ll always be happy, since with a just a little work it always possible to make yourself a little better today than you were yesterday.

We are all vertebrates: The human body, like all vertebrates, is essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything else hangs off that. That means that whoever controls the head controls pretty much everything else. Whenever you can gain head control in meaningful ways it’s a pathway to score. However, you can’t recklessly reach for the head as it’s typically well defended and over extension can be severely punished in this game. The main barrier to the head in Jiu jitsu is the legs - the guard position is designed expressly to keep your head as far from an opponent as possible when in bottom position and create a barrier with the legs from which many strong attacks can be launched. Once you get past at least one of your opponents legs however, the head can become a target. Keep your eyes looking for this simple formula - beat the leg(s) and get to the head - much of the control game is based on this simple insight

Tactile warnings: When it comes to physical threats the first warning we usually get comes from our eyes. We SEE the encroaching threat and then react. In Jiu jitsu you are almost always in physical contact with your opponent once a match starts. This means that the first warning you will receive is something you FEEL in a tactile way. When you have hands on an opponent you can literally feel a sudden change in muscular tension that signals the onset of an attack. The problem is that we carry our usual approach of trying to SEE threats instead of FEEL them. Next time you’re grappling try to improve your ability to read an opponent through tactile sensation rather than visually. The closer you get and the more physical contact you have with an opponent, the more you’ll feel attacks coming rather than SEE then coming. Vision is more important when distance increases and contact diminishes, but when you’re in close proximity with heavy contact - and that describes most Jiu jitsu scenarios - use that contact to read your opponent rather than your eyes

When you use the power of your hips and legs you draw upon your greatest potential for strength and endurance. If you can predominantly utilize your hips and legs against an opponent who is predominantly using his arms and shoulders, you will almost always prevail in a long match. Human nature and instinct has us fight primarily with our arms and shoulders, but sound training makes us fight primarily with our legs and hips. This is one of the clearest distinctions between beginner and expert in Jiu jitsu.

As soon as you stop an attack, your mind must make a switch from defensive mode to attack mode. Failed offense almost always puts your opponent in an extended vulnerable position and consequently, much easier to attack than he would be under normal conditions. Never be satisfied with stopping and attack - make sure you exploit your defensive success with offensive follow up whenever possible

Victory in Las Vegas!! New Wave won four out of four at the big @ufcfightpass FPI grappling show here in Las Vegas tonight! The evening began with seventeen year old grappling sensation Helena Crevar winning a great decision victory over a very experienced black belt ADCC trials champion and coming very close to submission. Then Oliver Taza won a very impressive tactical chess match against a considerably bigger and stronger champion opponent in the weight division above his normal weight. Giancarlo Bodoni had a flawless performance embodying control and dominance to win via strangle from the back against a no gi world champion. Then Luke Griffith shocked the grappling world by winning via stranglehold against one of the greatest grapplers in contemporary jiu jitsu, the double ADCC champion Kaynan Duarte. It was a truly impressive thing to watch this young developing athlete dominate the course of the match against such a great man. In the gym we see every day how talented this young man is, but his stage performances have not always reflected the talent we see daily - tonight he showed everyone what he is capable of when he lets his game go and plays to his potential. Keep your eyes on this incredibly talented young athlete! Thanks again to the UFC for giving our athletes a venue in Which to shine and matches against such great opponents. Thank you also to all our teammates who do such a great job helping our competitors get ready in long and arduous daily workouts back in Texas. I hope you all enjoyed the show!

Getting ready: The team completed final preparations for tomorrow night’s big show @ufcfightpass Fight Pass Invitational grappling event. Giancarlo Bodoni will take on the outstanding Brazilian no gi world champion Gabriel Arges, Luke Griffith is matched against the double ADCC gold medalist Kaynan Duarte - unquestionably one of the best grapplers of this generation. Oliver Taza will take on the very powerful and dangerous Pedro Rocha and Helena Crevar will match against European ADCC trials champion Aurelie Le Vern. There are many other great matches in the card for what will doubtless be a great night of grappling - see you at the show!

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video THE FASTEST WAY TO BECOME EFFECTIVE IN STANDING POSITION
with @bjj.fanatics As with all the videos in the FASTEST WAY series, the emphasis is on a simplification of a skills in a given area of Jiu jitsu. The idea is to focus on a smaller number very high percentage techniques that have proven easier to learn for most students yet still shown to be highly effective at the highest levels. This allows students to make rapid progress in a an area that may have previously been difficult or even just outright absent for them. In this video we look at a simple but very efficient program for standing position - takedowns and takedown defense that can be learned and assimilated in a short time to transform your ability. You will often see my students make use of the techniques seen in this video. It enabled many of them to greatly increase their effectiveness in standing grappling in a remarkably short time frame despite having a very limited background in this skill previously. I am sure it can help your progress too! Link in my Instagram story!

Once you get a good position the two primary demands are first, that you KEEP it, second, that you EXPLOIT it. Don’t try to exploit it until you feel confident that you can keep it. Maintaining ground takes priority over gaining ground in most cases. Remember that you are in a sport where loss of good position usually creates a deeper loss than the possible gain of advancing to a new position or submission attempt. Obviously you want to avoid excessive caution and timidity, but even more obviously you want to avoid recklessness. In general positional recklessness tends to be a worse vice in Jiu jitsu than excessive positional cautiousness

When you focus a big percentage of your bodies strength against a small percentage of a vulnerable point of your opponents body - then you can defeat bigger and stronger opponents. It doesn’t matter if an opponent is twice as strong as you overall, if you can fight 10% of his strength with 80% of your strength over a battle ground so vital to his ability to continue using his strength that if you win, he will not be able to continue the match. That is how smaller, weaker people defeat bigger, stronger people. It is always about concentration of force into a vulnerable area that if taken, the opponent cannot recover.

Victory in Dallas! Nicholas Meregali had another tremendous victory against three time ADCC medalist Vagner Rocha here in Dallas tonight at the @flograppling WNO event. The match began in standing position with both athletes looking to secure top position. Mr Meregali was able to control the gripping exchanges and take it to the mat with a fine arm drag. Once on the floor he was able to use his incredible top pressure and back control to pass and pin from mount and back. Mr Rocha showed great resistance and courage under fire but Mr Meregali showed his tactical depth by switching to arm bar (juji gatame) and taking a fine submission win against one of the toughest athletes in grappling. This is the fourth time in succession he has won via submission against an ADCC medalist - an incredible win streak. A recent addition to the team is youngster @evanleve_bjj who won his WNO debut after a powerful heel hook attack and showed the early results of his hard training. There were several other great matches here tonight. Nicky Ryan had the biggest win of his career so far with a spectacular leg lock victory over two time ADCC champion JT Torres. Mr Ryan looked outstanding from feet to floor and combined this brilliantly with his submission expertise to take a dramatic win. Andrew Tackett won an outstanding victory over Tommy Langaker and Felipe Pena won a fine victory over the great Rafael Lavato. The Rocha family had an amazing evening with father in an epic showdown and son and daughter winning via spectacular submissions for a great display of a family in Jiu jitsu. Now it’s back to Austin to get ready for the big UFC grappling show in Las Vegas! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

If you can create a threat you can create a reaction. If you can keep an opponent in a reactive state - you lead the dance. If you can lead the dance long enough, it’ll be extremely difficult for an opponent hold you off from victory. When an opponent feels no threat he approaches you very differently - full of confidence and looking to initiate offense. When he is in the midst of a threatening attack his entire mindset changes and his actions will reflect this. Learn to create a viable threat from all positions and you’ll be able to lead the dance to victory

Getting ready for the show! Nicholas Meregali has trained extremely well for another very tough match up against the great Vagner Rocha this Friday night in Dallas TX at the @flograppling WNO grappling show. In his last three matches Mr Meregali has come up against three ADCC champions and won all three by dominating submission. Now he is matched against a three time ADCC medalist. Mr Rocha has always been among our toughest opponents and is a fearless competitor who takes on the toughest matches without hesitation. This will be a very good headline match amongst many other great matches that evening - keep your eyes open for this one! It’ll be a great show!

Jiu jitsu often mirrors life. In everyday life, any time you’re engaged in any given project, a good start makes for an easier consolidation and conclusion. So too in Jiu Jitsu. Every time you engage with an opponent, if you begin well, you’ll find it easier and have to perform less work to take things through to a successful conclusion. A bad start means a lot more work has to be done and if your opponent has a higher skill level than you, often means the beginning of the end for you. So when you first come out to grips, whether standing or on the ground, make sure you’ve got a plan in place to protect yourself from attack and work your way reliably to an advantageous grip. Victory comes at the end of the match, but who gets there is very often determined by who consistently gets off to a good start.

Neutral position: Positions in Jiu jitsu are always understood in terms of dominant, inferior and neutral. Most of our time in sparring is spent in neutral positions since it’s not easy to get dominant positions on someone your own size and skill level. The whole game and its scoring system is built around this understanding of position. Understand always however, that an apparently neutral position (insofar as it is a non scoring position) can be rendered advantageous at any time by a skilled grappler. In every neutral position there are myriad subtle changes in balance, grip, inside/outside control etc that can make a position that is ostensibly neutral quite heavily weighted in your favor. Doing this won’t result in a score - but it will definitely give you a greater ability to go forward into a score or submission in your next move. Every time you’re in a neutral position, look to explore small changes in head position, hand position, grip, balance and stance that make your ability to control your opponent greater than his ability to control you. Remember - just because it SCORES neutral doesn’t mean it has to BE neutral - even a small advantage is still an advantage and oftentimes that’s enough to swing a tight match

The old cliche of a chain being only as strong as its weakest link applies very well to Jiu jitsu. Your game is a complex conglomeration of skill sets. Those skill sets are never all equally developed. Some will be better than others. If you are to be defeated by an opponent, the most likely avenue of defeat (especially when you train repeatedly with that person or have one very long match) will be the weakest of your defensive skill sets. The solution is to be honest about your weaknesses - you can’t fix a problem until you admit there is a problem. Learn to assess yourself honestly and accurately - this is usually quite easy in jiu jitsu since repeated defeats in a pattern make it clear where the problem lies. Start putting extra time into reinforcing that weak skill set. Time spent removing a known weakness in your game is far more profitable than time spent on some new move that you happen to be recently interested in.

Attrition: Jiu jitsu is all about exercising control that leads into submission holds. The submission holds create a threat of damaged joints or unconsciousness - that threat is what makes opponents surrender. There is however, a different kind of surrender that isn’t signaled by tapping the mat, but which happens inside the mind of an opponent. Instead of creating one big instantaneous threat via submission hold, the idea is to create a constant pressure and extreme physical discomfort over time that saps an opponents will to fight. This creates submission in the mind of an opponent - a feeling that it would be better to stop the suffering than to go on. Once this has been established, the opponent will willingly submit to the first submission hold you apply. Building pressure and discomfort over time breaks opponents mentally and once the mind is broken the body will surrender soon afterwards.

Did you stop because your opponent made you stop or because you stopped yourself? Jiu jitsu is a game where victory in any given exchange is usually taken by the last one to keep moving. If one athlete stops and the other one keeps moving, the fellow who stops loses. Now sometimes a good opponent just flat out MAKES us stop with a submission or a great pin, but in the majority of cases if we look honestly we will see that we stopped ourselves when we felt tired, frustrated or just ran out of ideas. Next time you’re in an exchange with a tough and equally matched opponent, be sure to see how long you can prolong the action - it’s almost always longer than you think you can - and recognize that if if you can prolong it longer than the other fellow - you win.

Jiu jitsu and metaphor: The history and practice of martial arts is often linked to metaphor. The movements of a given style are often modeled or understood in terms of an animal or element that represents key themes of that style. So for example, the imagery of water is often used as a metaphor for various martial arts as it has properties that exemplify important themes of many arts. Other times you will see animals, snakes, cranes, monkeys and others used to describe and inspire the movement and mindset of a style. One of the most interesting and informative metaphors comes from the great Judo master Kyuzo Mifune. He compared Judo (and it applies equally to Jiu Jitsu) as a ball. His reasoning is very interesting. A ball can never lose its balance due to the fact that every point on its surface is equidistant from the center - it simply rolls in response to every push or pull regardless of what direction or force the push or pull is applied with. Mifune’s main concern to symbolize holding balance in standing grappling (extremely important in judo), but the ball analogy holds true for ground grappling also. A ball can bear a heavy weight and still move effectively underneath it - just as a good jiu jitsu player can round out his spine and thus move effectively under a pinning force. What metaphors do you use to enhance your understanding of Jiu jitsu or help explain it to other people? Whether it be animal, elemental or some other analogy I’m sure you find it helpful or illustrative

When you’re underneath opponents or in danger - stay compact. Over extension is bad for weight bearing and leaves limbs available to be snatched by a good opponent. The more compact you remain the more defensively responsible you’ll be and the better you’ll be able to bear an opponents weight for extended periods of time. Elbows in, knees to chest, head inside and spine rounded - you’ll feel the difference immediately

Seminar with Gordon Ryan in Dallas TX: I am very happy to teach a seminar in Texas as part of the upcoming WNO 23 Grappling show on Thursday May 9th at 6pm in Arlington Texas. The show headlines with Nicholas Meregali vs Vagner Rocha and the day before Gordon and I will run the seminar going over many of the techniques and tactics that made him the best of all time! Due to space limitations at the event center it is limited to just 70 people so early booking is recommended - I hope to see you there! Link to seminar booking in my Instagram story

Probably the single most liberating feeling you can have in Jiu jitsu comes from confidence in your escapes. If you feel that if an opponent pins you you’ll never get out, that fear will subvert everything you try. You’ll hang back when it’s time to attack for fear that if you fail you’ll be pinned and rendered helpless. In short, if you fear that any mistake will result in you being helplessly pinned, you won’t take the risks required to attack and win - you’ll shy away from every opportunity for fear of being controlled if it doesn’t work. When that fear is lifted from you by the belief that you can escape any hold at will, suddenly your attitude towards risk completely changes. Now you’re happy to take risks because the dire consequences of failure no longer apply to you. So work hard on your ability to escape. It may not be the most glamorous part of Jiu jitsu, but you’ll never play a glamour game if you shy away from risk.

Seeking perfection knowing all the time that you’ll never get there: When you see a perfectly executed technique it’s an inspiring moment. Watching a great champion perform a perfect throw or submission hold is one of the strongest motivators to improving your own performance. The relentless pursuit of perfection is the basis of all improvement for all of us. In truth however, we all know that perfection is impossible, and even just very good performance seems a long long way away when you’re beginning. So how do we stay motivated here and now when perfection is a futile quest and even average championship performance levels seem like a long long way away? Understand this - perfection is an ideal, but it’s not necessary for victory. To win you only need technique to be executed at a level to surpass the defenses of the person in front of you here and now. Use the ideal of perfection to navigate your way forward towards your goals like a guiding pole star, knowing that you’ll never reach it but inspired nonetheless; but confident within yourself that so long as you’re executing better than the guy in front of here and now you can win today.

Slow things down first - counter second: It’s great to have a strong sense of counterattack but trying to counter in the midst of a strong opponents attack can make a bad situation worse very quickly. It’s almost always a good idea to start by SLOWING THINGS DOWN - get into a position and stance that allows you to gain some control and slow your opponents movements, THEN start with the counters.

Moderate your response to the level of threat you face: Whenever you’re threatened in Jiu jitsu it’s normal to react strongly. When you first start out every move your opponent attempts feels like mortal danger. In truth however, many attacks are not nearly as threatening as they initially seem, particularly when you see them early. Good players know this and carefully measure the level of their response to the actual threat they face. This saves you a lot of energy which you will need when the real threat comes. Learning to accurately gauge the real threat level is one of the skills that typically takes longer than most to develop, so don’t despair if it doesn’t come to you quickly. A surprisingly important factor in your skill development here is your demeanor. As an attack comes, keep a calm face. Excessive tension almost always manifests in the face first - keep yourself calm there and tension will be slower to migrate around the rest of your body.

A threat anywhere creates openings everywhere: It’s difficult to attack a well fortified position. When an opponent operates behind a sound defensive stance and puts barriers in the path of your attacks it feels like you’re trying to attack a castle wall. You need one really strong attack that you feel truly confidant with. That attack doesn’t need to fully succeed - it just has to create a strong defensive reaction. That reaction will inevitably create openings in other areas that will enable you to get a breakthrough. That’s a value of having a few really strong attacks that you have great faith in. Better to know a couple of good attacks in great detail than to have a dozen mediocre attacks with which you have only a passing knowledge.

Triangles are among the best expressions of the ideal of Jiu jitsu - to use the strongest element of your body (legs and hips) against a weaker element of your opponents body (head and shoulder) in a way that can end a bout (strangulation plus joint locks). In addition, constant practice with triangles builds a dexterity and skill into your legs that has great carry over into other skill areas. Perhaps most importantly it creates a mindset within you that seeks always to make your legs rather than upper body the centerpiece of your game. The vast majority of your strength and endurance is in your legs - the more you play with that simple insight in mind, the more successful you will be

If you can make an opponent carry your weight in a mechanically inefficient manner for an extended time you can rapidly wear him down to a physical state where his skill set evaporates. The ability to enact a skill presupposes the physical condition to be able to perform it - attack the physical condition and by extension you attack the skill.

Knowing moves is obviously important, but when it’s time to beat a tough opponent it’s not the total number of moves you know that determines winner and loser - it’s typically the athlete who correctly identifies and knows the NEXT move who wins. Learning the move is never enough - you need to be able to place it in the context of the match flow you are currently in and identify it as the follow up to a prior move that has been stopped by a skilled opponent - you have to be able to identify opportunity and then execute faster than your opponent can follow you.

If you can get an opponent of equal skill level reacting to what you’re doing, then you’ve taken the lead in the decision making game - and once you take the lead in decision making it’s only a matter of time until you take the lead physically as well. The athlete who controls the set ups gets to write the narrative and he who controls the narrative usually gets to write the ending.

Arrange all your defenses in layers. When attacks come, they are not instantaneous, rather, they come by degree. There will be a set up, an entry, the attack itself and then the completion. You must layer your defense accordingly. You don’t want to overreact to a set up. At this level simple awareness and vigilance is appropriate. Your reaction to the entry is typically fairly small as the intrusion is not severe enough yet to warrant a big reaction. When the attack progresses to the main move itself, you will need a major defensive movement to counter it as now your opponent is a serious threat. If the attack penetrates and enters into completion phase, now you need to take some risks and some quite extreme defensive measures to prevent a score or submission. It’s rather Luke taking medicine. You don’t want to treat every illness as life threatening when symptoms first reveal themselves, but rather respond in measure to the severity and progression of the illness, since in many cases the cure has its own risks and problems the more extreme they become. So layer your defenses in accordance with the level of threat

Unnecessary tension never adds to skill performance and indeed, often detracts from it. A huge part of your jiu Jitsu journey is finding that intermediate level of tension that lets you apply the skill successfully against strong resistance, but doesn’t result in you fighting against your own excessive body tension. Long after you’ve learnt a given technique, you’ll still be learning how to actually apply it with the appropriate degree of physical tension/relaxation against resistance

You are engaged in a sport where the number of effective moves is quite small in relation to the total number of possible moves. That means that in the performance of the really moves that will characterize most of your time in the sport there is no end of learning. Perfection is a distant dream or ideal, never a reality. Staying fascinated and restlessly curious about those few moves over a career is the key to success

When we first learn a move in Jiu jitsu it’s usually practiced against no resistance in a cooperative drill, but when you go to perform a that move on a resisting opponent in sparring, the degree of difficulty will be determined by defensive skills and attributes of that opponent. How successful you will be is almost entirely determined by how good you are at degrading this defensive skills and attributes of the opponent BEFORE YOU EVEN GO TO APPLY THE MOVE - the move itself is an afterthought - when a move is successfully applied ninety percent of the real work is done before the move is even initiated. Make sure your training takes this fundamental insight into account.

Wow!! UFC 300 was a long time coming. The most successful MMA sports organization in history wanted to put on a grand show to show its progression from fringe martial arts experiment to a banned and vilified event into the modern era of MMA superstars and mainstream acceptance building into a cultural and sporting phenomenon. The show started in difficulty, with injuries and cancelled bouts and the worry that the event lacked star power for such a high profile event but the athletes on the card showed that notions of star power are secondary to the expression of skill and martial virtues of courage, grit and tenacity. This was unquestionably one of the greatest UFC events in history. It was as though each pairing of fighters sought to outdo those who fought before them and it built up into an incredible event. There were too many outstanding performances to discuss them all in an Instagram post, but congratulations in particular to Bo Nickal who continued his great run with a beautiful exhibition of elite level wrestling merging with his rapidly developing top control into submissions. Charles Oliveira and Arman Tsarukyan had a back and forth war with Mr Oliveira showing beautiful submission skills whilst Mr Tsarukyan replied with top control elbow striking over time to take a closely contested win. Max Holloway and Justin Gaethe had what will doubtless become one of the most memorable lightweight matches in history that began mostly as a tactical kicker versus puncher battle and rose round by round into an all out war in the closing seconds into one of the most impressive knockouts in UFC history - an incredible display. The main event went even higher as the great Brazilian kickboxer Alex Pereira took on the very dangerous Jamahal Hill and in a sequence that will become the stuff of legend, wordlessly shrugged off an accidental groin kick and answered with a hybrid lead uppercut/hook that showed why they call him “hands of stone” as the blow didn’t appear particularly powerful but its effects were characteristically devastating. Congratulations to @ufc and @ufcfightpass on 300 great events building to this peak and all the incredible athletes on the show!!

Keep an opponent under pressure long enough and fatigue will lower his ability to execute skills to a degree where moves that would never work on him at the outset of a match will work with certainty late in the match.

Let good position do the work for you: There are many times in Jiu jitsu where you have to work hard to recover from an error or gain an initial advantage. Once we start working hard we have a tendency to keep working hard and if your work rate stays too high for too long it will result in exhaustion. It’s important therefore, that once you’ve gained a good position on an opponent, that you learn to dial back the physical intensity level and let the good position you’ve gained do the work for you. Now it’s time for the other guy to do the hard work. This asymmetric work rate is what creates a situation where you can fatigue an opponent while preserving your own energy levels. This is what enables you to beat tough opponents over time. Do the hard work to gain good position, but once there let the other guy do the hard work while you lower your energy expenditure - that’s the key to making position work for you.

Having a blast teaching in Norfolk Virginia: It amazing how jiu jitsu is spreading. Even relatively small cities and communities today have multiple jiu jitsu schools. When I began jiu jitsu there was one school in New York Ciry and only a handful of major schools on the entire East Coast - now you have multiple great training options in pretty much every city in the country no matter how far removed from what are considered the classic training areas such as Southern California, Florida and New York. It’s great to see how this growth is affecting the training at grass roots level. The widespread use of video as a training supplement to the gym has really made the level rise much more uniformly around the country and indeed, around the world, than was the case in the past!

Levers and fulcrums: When people talk about increasing their strength in Jiu jitsu they usually talk in terms of some kind of supplemental physical training program they do outside of Jiu jitsu training designed to increase their raw strength. This is an excellent addition to your training regimen and often proves beneficial. However, by far the greatest addition to your functional strength in Jiu jitsu comes from precision in the placement of fulcrums and efficient use of the incredible mechanical power made possible by levers. If you want immediate increases in the amount of physical power you can create on the mat - study precision in the placement of fulcrums and levers in the application of your moves. Nothing else will have such immediate and dramatic effect

If you can get under an opponent’s center of gravity in an efficient posture to lift and move him, then you can perform magic from bottom position. The more spherical or ball shaped you can keep your body when working from your back and the more straight and upright you can be when working from your knees, the more successful you will be.

What are your special talents? Ask yourself a simple question - what actions or skills do you get the most positive results from with the least amount of effort? In Jiu jitsu it’s the same as life. There will be certain moves that garner you positive results relatively early and with less effort. TAKE NOTE OF WHAT THESE MOVES ARE - they are your very likely going to be your specialty moves that form a disproportionately important part of your game. There is no telling ahead of time what these moves will be, and it’s possible they’ll change over the course of your career - but now at least, you must learn to maximize your development and use of these moves. Sometimes we fight to learn a game that isn’t really ours - take note of YOUR talents more than other peoples - that way you’ll be playing your own game - so when certain moves just seem to come easy and create more success than usual with less effort - take note.

Learning in Jiu jitsu is always a contest between the need to learn a sufficient BREADTH of technique to ensure you can cover all the usual scenarios in which you find yourself and and to learn with sufficient DEPTH of technique to ensure that your main moves cannot be easily countered by a knowledgeable opponent. Breadth makes you defensively sound, depth makes you offensively strong. The more you focus on one, the less you can focus on the other - this is a fundamental tension that will reside in all your learning in Jiu jitsu. At the start of your learning you must focus more on breadth, since everything is new and you need to develop basic insights into a wide set of subjects just to avoid being crushed by techniques you simply don’t know about. However, as your skill level rises, you will need to shift the emphasis towards depth, as you will need more and more refined and deep technique to get past the defensive skills of better opponents. Always be aware of this dichotomy in Jiu jitsu learning and use it to order your goals and plans out into the future.

Great showing in Las Vegas! The 2024 ADCC West Coast trials gave the emerging athletes of the sport a great chance to show their skills and win a ticket to the 2024 World Championships. Our team had a strong showing with the outstanding Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl winning gold to become one of the youngest athletes in history to qualify for the World Championships at just seventeen years of age. She won all but the final via submission and finished the final match in a mounted guillotine as time expired, an incredible performance from this amazing young athlete. Oliver Taza had a great weekend winning a silver medal to make an exceptional tally of two silver medals and a bronze in this trials run. There were many other outstanding performances from the rapidly developing junior athletes who maintained an exceptionally high submission rate throughout their matches. It was a great event with many outstanding performances from the Tackett brothers, the Corbe brothers, Jasmine Rocha, Mike Perez and many others. Thank as always to @mojassim80 for his exceptional organizational in getting this amazing show together and @adcc_official staff for all of their work in making it happen. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Every physical action you take in jiu jitsu begins as an idea in the mind - a mental recognition of possibility - which you then act upon physically. A huge part of your physical results comes from training your mind to see possibilities first for without that recognition of possibility there will be no physical action that turns that possibility into actuality.

The path to victory lies not in what you know, but rather in what you actually DO with what you know

The scariest situations in Jiu jitsu are always those where you know you’re in trouble but you have no idea what to do. As always, knowledge is the antidote. When you what to do in a situation you’ll keep moving in a positive direction even when it’s difficult. It isn’t difficulty that’ll make you stop and quit - it’s ignorance that develops rapidly into hopelessness - that’ll stop you every time. So make the acquisition of knowledge a priority and over time turn that knowledge into physical skills through training - then that feeling of fear will seldom show itself

Once you get some form of advantage it’s time to hustle! Opportunities don’t come very often against good opponents nor do they last long - so when is presented to you or you have created it - it’s time to act! Make sure you have the ability to vary your speed in sparring. You can move slow and relaxed most of the match but when you’ve gained that momentary advantage and opportunity is there in front of you - now it’s time to switch speeds and attack with decisiveness

When your opponents stronger: It’s never easy when your opponent is bigger and stronger than you. One thing that will make things a little easier however, is to put even more emphasis than usual on getting behind your opponent. Remember always that the human body is set up to apply strength to objects in front of it and poorly adapted to applying strength to objects behind it - so when you are in a situation where you’re weaker and smaller, pt even more emphasis than usual on getting behind your opponent early and often - and that strength disadvantage will be less problematic than otherwise

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video as part of THE FASTEST WAY series. This is THE FASTEST WAY TO DEVELOP AN UNPASSABLE GUARD. Guard retention is truly one of the key foundational skills of Jiu Jitsu. It is no exaggeration to say that all of bottom game in jiu jitsu is based upon pin escapes and guard retention since these two skills are what allow you to use your legs to fight an opponent from underneath. No amount of offense from guard position will have any value until you can hold guard long enough to actually apply them. It is very difficult to win matches consistently if you’re always trying to dig yourself out of pins because an opponent passed your guard. Guard retention without a gi is significantly different than with a gi because you don’t have access to collar and sleeves and pant grips. As such it has a very different feel and pace to it. In this video I also look at guard retention against the guard passing methods made popular by my students such as bodylock passes, half guard pressure passing, toreando passes and many more, along with easy to remember principles and concepts that will guide you regardless of the passing methods being used against you. If guard retention without a gi has been an issue for you - check it out! Link in my instagram story

Execution vs continuity: There are two paths to excellence in Jiu jitsu. The first is the path of perfect execution of technique. The goal is to develop a technique to such a degree of perfection that it can’t be stopped even when your opponents expect it. The second path is that of continuity of attack. The goal is to be able to chain moves together in sequences that an opponent simply can’t keep up with, so that even even though no single execution of technique is decisive, the combination of all them overwhelms the defense of the opponent. Both methods have their advocates. In truth however, it is very rare indeed an athlete can consistently win via perfection of execution of a move. Under match conditions perfection is rare. A more realistic approach is to chain moves together. However, the cabins must be of a realistic length. If you’re trying to chain a dozen moves together this is unrealistic since a good opponent would simply break contact and disengage by the time you’d worked through that many moves. The best approach is the combination of the two. You want your execution to be good enough that forces opponents into defensive reaction that enter you into a short chain of follow up moves, usually between two and four, that are executed well enough to get the breakthrough. Anything more than four is starting to get unrealistic and also suggests that your execution is not good enough for an opponent to be escaping so many moves. So work on both improving execution and continuity of moves, and keep it realistic by keeping those chains of moves relatively short and well executed and you’ll be highly effective in sparring and competition

One threat always creates another: Any time you threaten an opponent with a move it will elicit a defensive reaction. That defensive reaction, if appropriate will stop your move - but it will open up the possibility of another type of attack. There is no defensive reaction that doesn’t create some new type of vulnerability. The question will always be whether you are knowledgeable and alert enough to see the new possibility as the old one is shut down. Learning to use this cycle of creating an initial threat to elicit a reaction and attacking in a new way against that reaction is one of the core elements of good jiu jitsu. It begins as a habit of always looking for a new possibility whenever you run into strong resistance rather than simply giving up as most people do. As the old saying goes, as one door closes another will always open - you goal is to habitually look for that new opening every time you see one closing - if you can build this habit, you will be a very difficult opponent for your training partners

Control of distance is a crucial skill in all combat sports and jiu jitsu is no exception. As a general rule the more threatening your opponent is the more you’ll want to increase or at least maintain distance between you and your opponent. Distance control is the basis of defense and a crucial part of offense as well - though in the case of offense it gets a lot more complicated as distance will have to be correlated with your choice of attack options which vary widely. Learning to use your limbs as a shield or frame to maintain distance and control an opponents ability to close distance is key to your survival and success especially in bottom position where most of your opponents will be trying to reduce distance into pins. So like a knight of old would use his shield as protection against an attacker, so too you must use your limbs as a shield to protect the space in front of you - you will need to space to move into your own attacks so protect it at the earliest opportunity

I’m excited to teach alongside @gordonlovesjiujitsu at the West Coast ADCC Trials. We will run a seminar on Saturday March 30 from 6-9pm after the first day of competition at the Westgate Hotel. We will go over many of the core themes my students use in competition and how they can be of benefit to your development. Hope to see you there! Link in my Instagram story

The better a move starts, the better it will finish: It is very difficult to recover from a poor start when applying moving moves in Jiu jitsu. This is because the second you start your move you’ve showed your hand so to speak, and your opponent will immediately begin his counters. If your initial entry into the move is faulty it almost always gets worse over time rather than better just because your attempts at repair are done against active resistance. There is a need therefore, to enter into your moves with authority and precision to make it more likely that you’ll be able to follow through against the anticipated resistance - so make sure you know exactly what you want to do and build the skills to do it quickly and reliably under pressure - a strong start will maximize your chance of successful completion but a mediocre start will almost certainly condemn you to failure no matter what attempt at patching things up you make

If you can keep an opponent in a reactive mindset where he is only responding to your attacks rather than initiating his own attacks, it will be difficult for him to survive. Good opponents can defend single attacks well and even a short chain of attacks, but no one can hold off continual well executed attacks over extended periods of time. The outcome of most matches is usually determined by the athlete who initiates most of the action. Gain the initiative and keep it and you’ll experience success much more often than not

One of the fundamental skills of bottom position in Jiu jitsu will always that of getting deep under your opponents center of gravity. If you can reliably do this you will have an easy time moving even heavy opponents on top of you. Once you can move them, then you can sweep and submit them. Our natural instinct when underneath heavy opponents is to get out from under them - there’s nothing wrong with that - but the best outcomes usually come from getting FURTHER UNDERNEATH THEM so that you can maintain the contact required for sweeps and submission

Develop your strangles: Strangles are the most effective and versatile submissions in Jiu jitsu. They enable you to take out even the toughest opponents. Understand that that there are many options to choose from when it comes to strangles, but there are three main scenarios in which you must be effective. The first is chest to back in front of your opponent - front headlock type situations. The second is chest to back when you’re behind an opponent - some form of rear strangle. The third is chest to chest in front of your opponent. You must have at least one effective strangle that you have great confidence in for each of these three scenarios (and preferably more than one). This is your minimum requirement for your strangle program - make sure you satisfy it!

From the moment you approach your opponent it begins. Approach combat in the manner of a man climbing a rope or ladder. You don’t just lunge from wherever you are to the top of the ladder. You work your way up step by step. So too in Jiu jitsu. Work your way up the body to gain ever increasing amounts of control. From grip to off balancing to getting past the opponents legs into pins and then to submission. Don’t get discouraged if you slide down the ladder periodically - this is to be expected - just get right back to climbing. Each time you repeat the process your opponent will be a little more tired and the climb will get a little easier. Every time you try to miss a step and jump higher rather than climb higher you increase the likelihood of falling to the bottom again, so generally favor step by step rather than bounding ahead. This is the mindset of high percentage jiu jitsu

The earlier you start, the better you do: So often we approach lackadaisically toward an opponent and get to grips before we start making decisions as to what we are going to do. This is fine if you’re sparring some well beneath your level or if you’re in a more relaxed training mode, but in a more competitive situation you must start before you even begin contact. Even as you approach your opponent you should be scanning for openings and formulating a plan of attack. This way your first contact is made with a sense of DIRECTION AND PURPOSE - the hallmark of all effective action, including Jiu jitsu.

The safest place to be in a fight or a grappling match is behind your opponent. Ironically it’s also the place you are most dangerous to your opponent - so it’s a happy mix of safest for you, most dangerous for your opponent - that’s the ideal of Jiu jitsu.

Negating strength: The single best way for you to negate a strength disadvantage is to get behind your opponent. The human body is set up to exert strength to objects in front of it, but is poorly adapted to apply strength to objects behind it. This simple insight must be the foundation of your game when going against much stronger opponents. When faced with a much stronger opponent put your primary emphasis upon getting behind them early and often.

Know inside you what you want - but make the other fellow believe you want something else: If you have an opponent who knows ahead of time what your real intentions are before you act upon them, it will be extremely difficult to score even a single move upon him. If you can mask your intentions well you will score regularly. However, if you can DECEIVE an opponent into thinking you want one thing when in fact it’s another, you will score very often indeed. Make a habit of misdirecting an opponent but moving initially towards a fake goal and then swiftly changing direction towards your real goal and you’ll find success far more often than not

If you can sweep away an opponents base of support you will be in total control until he recovers that base - that recovery period is a goldmine of attacking opportunity. Make this simple insight one of the pillars of your game - attack the opponents base of support and attack in the recovery period - follow this protocol and you’ll have a lot of success

Be patient with your strangles: A common problem that afflicts many beginners in Jiu jitsu is a tendency to clamp on a strangle - squeeze as tight as they can and then release when it doesn’t take effect immediately. Remember, strangles take a little time, usually somewhere between five to ten seconds depending on how well set the strangle is and how skilled the opponent’s resistance is. Avoid starting with maximum physical intensity - that the power of your strangle can only diminish over time. You want the power of your strangle squeeze to INCREASE over time, not diminish - so start with enough tension to hold your position and increase the tension over time to build to a peak as the strangle starts to have its effect, rather the start with everyone you’ve got and weaken just as victory is in front of you. Here, talented youngster @davis_asare locks in a tight strangle but maintains discipline with body tension to make sure the power of the strangle increases over time rather than diminishes.

Know the tipping point: Every submission in Jiu jitsu has a tipping point - a threshold beyond which it simply won’t work. We’ve all seen those fellows who persist in working for a submission long after that tipping point has been breached. This is unprofitable work. When you know where that tipping point is, then you can use it as a marker for your next attack. If you play it well you can use it to gain the initiative in that crucial moment where the submission is lost and the pursuit of the next move begins - the athlete who starts that second move first has an advantage. The better your knowledge of where a move ends and the tipping point has been reached - the better you’ll be at getting into the follow up move ahead of your opponents

Stopping a move versus countering a move: When you get attacked by a move it can be intimidating. Initially we are happy just to stop the move and see this a triumph. As you progress you must try to go beyond this and see an opponents attack as an opportunity to strongly counter. Remember - AN OPPONENT IS NEVER MORE VULNERABLE THAN WHEN CAUGHT AT THE END OF A FAILED ATTACK. Train yourself to go beyond merely stopping attacks and see the possibility of countering as an opponent struggles to get back into position. Make sure you really do stop the attack first - don’t get into Hail Mary situations where you attack as he is attacking and hope your one works first. Stop the attack, gain a measure of control, then counter

Wisdom of the old West: The great American Lawman Wyatt Earp was asked about his proficiency in gun fighting at the end of his career. “Fast is fine but accuracy is final. You have to learn to take your time in a hurry. “ These words pertain well to our game as well. The two crucial themes they convey are first that the only moves that count are those that are completed. An arm bar that is 99% good enough doesn’t score and doesn’t finish a tough opponent. Only when it fully breaks through an opponent’s defenses does it end the match. Learning to get it right under pressure is everything. Second, don’t rush things under pressure. Learning to slow things down to a speed where you can do the job correctly under pressure is key. Every instinct in your body will be telling you to speed things up, but the athlete who can resist this and move at a pace that allows solid execution will be the one who prevails.

When you put hands on an opponent you’re always taking a risk - make it worth it: Any time you go to reach for an opponent you have to sacrifice defensive responsibility to some degree. A good opponent can take advantage of that - so make sure you make the risk worthwhile. What is the benefit of putting hands on the other fellow? When you come to grips you can MOVE him and BREAK HIS STANCE/BALANCE - that’s the reward for your risk. So make sure you never just complacently reach out and put hands on an opponent - if you’re going to grip - grip with a PURPOSE. Immediately get him moving or off balance or out of position - make sure for every risk you take there is a potential reward that justifies it

Victory in Las Vegas!! Nicholas Meregali continued his incredible run of victories in Las Vegas tonight at the UFC Fight Pass Invitational event, defeating the great ADCC champion Matheus Diniz via stranglehold in regulation time after dominating every aspect of the match. In his last three matches Mr Meregali has defeated by submission three ADCC champions in shut out performances - an incredible feat for an athlete still in the early stage of his transition to no gi Jiu jitsu. His ability to create initial pressure from standing position or bottom position on the ground and then translate that into positional advancement into mount and rear mount and then finish with submission is truly impressive. It was a great show overall for @ufcfightpass and had several other great performances. B Team had an excellent night with three impressive wins. Victor Hugo had another very impressive submission victory against a world champion to show once again that he is at the top of the game and ATOS athlete Ronaldo Junior had a great match against Cody Steele to take a narrow win with lots of action. We are always grateful to have the organization and infrastructure of the UFC letting jiu jitsu athletes show their skills to the world. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Counting down: Nicholas Meregali weighed in for his bout against the great ADCC champion Matheus Dinz tomorrow night on UFC fight pass Invitational @ufcfightpass The two athletes were closely matched in weight. The event features many of the best grapplers in the world with a great rule set designed to promote action - this should be a great show!!

Great night of grappling in Costa Mesa! Giancarlo Bodoni put on a fine show at the IBJJF Absolute Grand Prix tonight here in Costa Mesa. He defeated the great Brazilian champion Patrick Gaudio and Pedro Rocha to make it into the finals against the great double ADCC champion Kaynan Duarte. It was a tight tactical match with Mr Duarte winning via early takedown when Giancarlo rolled from standing into a leg lock entry which was countered well by Mr Duarte. It was a fine performance against a great champion in a heavier weight class. The show overall was great. Jiu Jitsu superstars Kade Ruotolo and Tainan Dalpra also had fine wins in their super fights. Tomorrow Nicholas Meregali and I will drive from Orange County to Las Vegas to prepare for his upcoming match against the great ADCC champion Matheus Diniz. I have always considered this drive route one of my favorites in the USA - the coast and the desert always look majestic. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

First workout in California! Giancarlo had his first workout here in Costa Mesa California at the @ibjjf headquarters gym in preparation for the IBJJF Grand Prix Absolute on Thursday night. The IBJJF has done a tremendous job getting the best athletes together for this event which features some of the best in the world in the main event tournament along with super stars such as Kade Ruotolo and Tainan Dalpra in gi super fights - it should be really great event!

Back on stage! Giancarlo Bodoni will compete this Thursday February 29th In Costa Mesa, California in the big @ibjjf Absolute Grand Prix! The show features Jiu jitsu legends Kaynan Duarte, Patrick Gaudio, Roosevelt Sousa, Dante Leon, Haisam Rida, Pedro Rocha and Elder Cruz in an open weight tournament! Matches will be ten minute IBJJF rules. This is unquestionably one of the toughest tournaments of the year with almost everyone on the card an ADCC athlete and/or world champion. An event featuring any two of these athletes would be good - watching all of them on one show going head to head will be epic!

If you’re going to bear an opponent’s weight - make sure your structure is sound. The fastest way to get exhausted in a match is to carry an opponent’s weight in a mechanically inefficient way. So whenever you have to carry weight - your first step is to get into a position or structure that enables you to carry it efficiently. This will vary according to the scenario. How you carry an opponent’s weight will vary greatly based on whether you’re working in a pin, a takedown, from bottom guard position etc. whichever scenario you’re in, there are efficient ways to carry weight and inefficient - make it your habit to quickly work your way into efficient physical structure so that you don’t exhaust yourself, and as always - spend as little time as possible in a match carrying an opponents weight anywhere other than on your legs and hips

Setting traps: You are engaged in a sport where your opponent knows most of the moves that you know and also knows the counters to most of those moves. When you reflect on this it can be disconcerting. If this is the case - how the hell does anyone ever win? Well there are many factors but one which is very important is that of setting traps. If opponents have a good sense of awareness of potential danger (they know the same moves you know) then often you have to give them a reason to take a risk. You can for example,
feign vulnerability and this will motivate an opponent to commit to an attack that he might not otherwise have tried. If you present too much danger to a knowledgeable opponent he will always back away and be very difficult to attack, but when you deliberately offer some kind of opportunity or opening - now he will commit in ways that you can exploit. Make sure your game isn’t always about aggressively chasing your opponent down. Add some subtlety to game. Learn to draw opponents in with subterfuge and suddenly opponents who always seemed so difficult to engage with become much easier to defeat

Jiu jitsu meets everyday life: I am certain everyone who reads this has had two life experiences. The first is that of walking along comfortably but perhaps focused on something else and then tripping over an unseen obstacle such as a curb and stumbling to the ground. The second is that of walking and taking a step on to a slippery surface such as ice and once again falling to the ground. You can create both of these everyday effects in Jiu jitsu through the use of your feet. Catching your opponent mid step with your foot recreates the curb trip. Sweeping his foot just prior to it making contact with the mat recreates the icy floor. Much of what seems like complex technique in Jiu jitsu is just a recreation of fairly simple ideas we have been familiar with since childhood set in another context

Pathways: There are goals that you want in a match - an opponents back, control of both legs, front head and arm - whatever the goal, there will be a pathway to it that you’ll have to navigate to get to that goal. For example, there are many pathways to the opponents back - one of the best is to beat your opponents elbow. An opponents elbow in good position is a closed door - if you can catch it out of position it’s an open pathway to the back. The body is full of such pathways and doors - learning to identity them and exploit them is a key to your progress

Nobody ever solved a puzzle better by getting emotional - jiu jitsu is just dynamic puzzle solving under time limits and physical stress - stay calm and detached and you’ll solve problems better.

I will be teaching a no gi Jiu jitsu seminar alongside Gordon Ryan at the Arnold Classic Fitness Expo in Columbus Ohio on March 3. The Arnold Classic has always been a huge yearly event with many different types of physical fitness activities represented. Jiu jitsu has always had a strong presence there so I’m really looking forward to teaching this three hour seminar! Hope to see you there!

The way of all progress: There is an odd element to making progress in Jiu jitsu and indeed, in life in general. Progress almost always entails the learning of new skills. Once those new skills are operating at a satisfactory level, they add to your game in ways that are beneficial, offering new paths to your goals. However, there is inevitably a time in which you are trying to develop those skills where your performance will actually DIMINISH. This is caused by the simple fact that skills take time to develop. As you devote more time to them, inevitably attention must be taken away from your main previous skills so they will slightly retrograde. This leaves you with a temporarily diminished skill set - the exact opposite of what you were hoping for! Don’t be discouraged. As the old saying goes - sometimes you have to take a step back to take two steps forward. ALMOST EVERY FUTURE PERFORMANCE INCREASE IS ON THE OTHER SIDE OF A TEMPORARY PERFORMANCE DECREASE - you have to get over the mental hurdle of temporary valleys to get to the next peak - it’s simply part of the process.

Strangleholds are the KO punch of grappling. They can end a match at any time regardless of the physical intensity and mental toughness of your opponent. You can choose your favorite submissions but make sure at least one of them is a strangle that you can employ from anywhere on anyone. Even better, have a solid strangle from front and back, top and bottom. It will be a huge benefit to your game overall.

Control is control: Much is made of the difference between gi and no gi Jiu jitsu. There are definitely some major differences in feel, technique and tactics when you switch between the two, nonetheless there are more similarities than differences. Ultimately Jiu jitsu is about control of the human body - not the cloth around it - accordingly the major principles and concepts of Jiu jitsu remain the same for both - only the details change.

Keep attacking their balance and breaking their stance and every subsequent attack will be easier. An athlete in balance and with a set stance is like a walled castle - but break their balance and stance and those walls crumble leaving everything else open to attack.

When you work in combinations the first attack has to either be real or indistinguishable from a real attack from the opponent’s perspective. Attacking in combinations is a key element of progress in Jiu jitsu. It’s unlikely your first attack will work every time on skilled opponents and in the vast majority of cases you’ll need to strong moves together so the second, third or fourth move gets the break through. When athletes start to attack in combination it’s easy to subconsciously go easy on the first move because you know inside your head that you’re banking on the second one being the real attack. However, when you do this the opponent will simply not react to the weak threat of a noncommittal first attack and the whole combination you had mapped out in your head will fail before it even begins. So make sure you put some pep in that opening move - even when you’re not expecting it to break through - all the subsequent move depend on it!

How do you know a move is good for you? Think about your everyday life. A simple test to assess what you are naturally gifted at is to ask - what activity do you get the best results with the least effort? Whatever is your answer is your natural gift in life. So to with your jiu jitsu. There are some moves that just seem to come more easily to you than others and you get good results with noticeably less effort than most other moves. Make a note of these moves - they can become your main weapons. You will find that you make easier and faster progress with them and in time they can define your game.

It’s difficult to enter into attacks through the front door on a skilled opponent. Most of the time you’ll need an angle to enter. As soon as you make contact with your opponent, start looking to get away from direct frontal alignment and out towards an angle. Most of the major attacks are great facilitated by this. Think always about getting outside your opponent’s arms or perpendicular whilst underneath and suddenly all those closed doors that shut down your attacks start to open

If you can limit an opponents hip movement whilst also shutting down his feet - much of the danger presented by the guard position is immediately negated. Understand where the danger comes from and you can attack it at its source.

Use your pins to create discomfort and you’ll create stronger defensive reactions upon which you can capitalize. A comfortable and relaxed opponent can problems solve and plan, an opponent suffering strong pains and duress will only be concerned with how to stop the suffering with no mind for how to get out and counterattack. Make your pins a source of great hardship for your opponents and you’ll soon observe the link between pinning and submissions

When you’re in a winning position have the presence of mind to consider what your opponents counters will be - remember it’s not only about what you want to do, but about what you want to do in response to what your opponent will be doing. It’s so easy to only only focus on what you want to do when it’s seems close to over, but the better your opponents are, the less likely it is that it’ll be over without some last minute resistance/counters - so even as you’re putting your finishing plans into operation, be mindful of what a good opponent might do and be ready to move accordingly - it’s never over until it’s over

Jiu jitsu always asks us to seek advantage before attacking. There are many different forms of advantage. They all have their good and bad points but they’re all much better than just attacking when you feel like it. Train your mind to attack in two stages - preliminary advantage first, the actual attack second. It’s much easier to penetrate a partially broken defense than a prepared defense. Study the relevant forms of advantage - positional, timing, balance/kuzushi, grip - the list is long but the spirit is always the same. Develop some favorites and apply them prior to your attacks and you’ll soon find that defenses that used to seem impenetrable to you are suddenly something you can reliably breach

Everything your opponent does from top position or standing position presupposes a working base of support - if you can successfully attack that - you attack his entire game. Make his base/stance your first target of attack and any other target you fancy will be attainable.

Your head is the basis of top pressure: When you’re on top of an opponent and looking to create forward pressure lead with your head. If you’re shy with your head , you’ll never create any real pressure, so lead with your head and let the rest of your body follow to create match winning pressure.

If you have a game that is specialized into one or two favorite positions your ability to win will be determined mostly by your ability to force an opponent into those positions. If you can’t, it’s only a matter of time until opponents figure out that they only have to play a tactical game and stay away from those few positions you favor in order to defeat you. This gives you two options. First, you can become so good at forcing the action towards your favorite positions that very few can stop you doing so. Second, you can develop a more complete game that enables you to create winning pressure in all the major positions so that an opponent has no safe zones to retreat into. The first option generally takes less time to develop but is also easier to counter. The second is a longer term solution but will result in a deeper game that even the best opponents will struggle to deal with. Understand that even taking the second option you’ll still have your favorite positions and moves, but they’ll be embedded in a more complete game overall.

The mount is a frustrating pin for many beginners in jiu jitsu. You are told on your first day that it is the ultimate positional goal of Jiu jitsu and that it scores the highest (along with rear mount) of all the point scoring moves - but when you first start getting there you often find that it can feel rather unstable compared with other pins from side and north south positions. This often motivates students to shy away from mount for fear of being reversed and to instead stay in side pins. Don’t let this kind of thinking stop you from aspiring you to get to the mounted position. The more time you spend there the more stable you’ll become. You can hasten that progress by always seeking to get under one of your opponents arms and controlling his head to lock his shoulders down to the floor. There are many benefits to getting mounted besides the points. There are reasons why so many of the best pinners in the game favor it above side pins. Don’t let early failures frustrate you to a point where you neglect it as a skill - long term development is far more important than short term wins.

If you can break an opponent’s posture and control his movement all of the other elements of Jiu jitsu are easy. Success or failure will always come down to your ability to do these two things - if you can’t, all the moves of Jiu jitsu seem impossibly difficult. If you can, they can become surprisingly easy.

The better your opponent the more important your second, third or fourth move becomes: When you begin Jiu jitsu it’s hard enough just to perform even a single move well against resistance so you naturally tend to focus on executing that one move as well as you can with no thought of what comes next. As you go against better and better opponents they defend that first move very well so that there is little chance of it succeeding. That’s when you need to change your mentality and start prioritizing the second or even third or fourth moves, since that is where the breakthrough will be achieved. Making this mental transition from a kind of mental myopia worrying about only the move in front of you to having a far sighted vision that extends out two, three or four moves out into the future is a key part of your transformation from beginner to expert.

Two points of control is always better than one: The game of Jiu jitsu is always about control. If you can nail down one significant part of your opponent’s body, that will certainly be a great step towards control. It is always better however, to nail down two major parts of the body so that between the two, your opponent cannot begin to extricate himself from one because of the control from the other. Each element of control protects the other from a potential escape. Here, my legs control my training partners head while the figure four grip on the arm controls arm and shoulder, making escape significantly more difficult than if just one of the these control points was being used

Pinning limbs: Pinning the upper body body is a foundational skill in Jiu jitsu, but going the extra distance and pinning a limb as well as the torso is always a good thing when trying to go from pin to submission. Almost all the major upper body submissions benefit from pinning down an arm prior to executing the technique. Make a habit of this and you’ll soon see that pins are not just for points but make your submission game much stronger

Risk from winning position: One of the hardest things to get students doing is to take a risk from a position were they know they’ve already won the match. If you’re mounted on an opponent and cruising to victory - your mind will be asking you - why take a risk of losing that winning position? That’s totally understandable and in some cases it’s sound thinking, but as a general approach to Jiu jitsu I think it’s far better for your long term development to take a maximizing mindset that seeks not only victory but the best kind of victory - submission. That often means taking further risks in situations where risk is no longer necessary to win. Using mount as an example - the closer you keep your chest to your opponent’s chest the safer your position will be - but the less likely you’ll finish via submission since the strongest submissions from that position usually require the input of your legs and thus moving away from the safety of chest to chest positioning. Building a mindset that encourages this kind of risk taking will distinguish you as a submission hunter who seeks the highest goal of submission and who goes beyond control and towards control that leads to submission

The long trek home: Heading home from Tokyo’s Narita Airport. It’s always a mixed feeling at this airport. Tokyo is one of my absolute favorite cities in the world so I’m always sad to leave. The city and people are incredible with an incredible mix of industriousness, aesthetic sense, uniqueness and social etiquette mixed with a warrior heritage that makes this a world capital of martial arts. It was a privilege to be among the best kickboxers, grapplers and mma athletes in this great city these last seven days. In this two weeks I saw my dear Mom on her 90th birthday, met up with my jiu jitsu friends in Sydney and Gold Coast Australia and then watched Garry Tonon put on a flawless MMA Jiu jitsu performance against a champion opponent. Now it’s time to head home to the USA and see my dear students back in Austin Texas and get ready for more challenges. I’m excited to get back stateside and keep pushing this game further. Wishing you all the best wherever you are in this crazy world of ours!

Victory in Tokyo! Garry Tonon won his MMA fight against the great former two division champion Martin Nguyen via rear strangle in a shut out performance in the first round tonight at OneChampionship 165 @onechampionship here in Tokyo Japan! He wanted to make a strong display of Jiu jitsu here in the birthplace of the sport and that’s what he did with a great expression of restricting an opponent’s space and taking away their mobility at the ropes with takedown to mount/rear mount and strangle finish. He had a great training camp where many friends and training partners made great contributions to his preparation. In particular we would like to thank @onelegsexy and @babyfacebenoit and @james.nakashima and @ronnie_rodriguez17 @roccogmma @ayecito__ and @eliabmma @vance_shaw and @headkicks_mma and @andyjimenezmma and all the New Wave squad who train daily with Garry in Jiu jitsu. The 155 Pound division in OneChampionship is extremely deep and strong and has been in turmoil the last year due to many injuries among the champions and top contenders. Now all that is resolved and it’s a field tremendous talent for sure. It’s always a great honor to represent jiu jitsu in its birthplace Japan and it was delightful to see Mr Tonon put on such a faultless expression of classic Jiu jitsu against such a great and dangerous opponent here in Tokyo. Thank you all so much for following our athletes and your interest in our approach to Jiu jitsu. Wishing all the very best from Tokyo Japan!

Counting down: Garry Tonon successfully weighed in today in Tokyo for his bout against the great former two division champion Martin Nguyen in OneChampionship’ big event tomorrow here in Japan. Mr Nguyen has genuine KO power in both fists and extremely good striking overall. In addition he has always been a great scrambler who has proven himself very difficult to take down and even harder to hold down - this will be a very difficult test for a grappling based fighter like Mr Tonon. In addition there are some really interesting other bouts on the card. The great Dutch kickboxer Nieky Holzken will take on Korean Japanese judo/mma legend Akiyama in a mixed rules match where the first two rounds are boxing/kickboxing that will massively favor Mr Holzken but the last round is MMA which will strongly favor Mr Akiyama. The great Japanese grappler Shinya Anoki will take on former UFC fan favorite Sage Northcutt in a classic striker vs grappler contest. One of the most impressive strikers I have seen, Superlek of Thailand, will take on the very talented Japanese striker Takeru. I must check the rules for this bout - whether its Muay Thai or kickboxing rules will have a big impact on how they fight and possibly even the outcome - either way it will showcase some incredible high level striking skills. Grappling sensation Kade Ruotolo will take on the very tough and capable Scandinavian grappler Tommy Langaker. This will be a rematch. The last bout was razor close and probably should have been declared a tie. Now both want to run it back and show a much more decisive outcome. There are a bunch of other great matches also! Check it out @onechampionship 165!

When you can fight an opponents arms with your legs you will always be operating from advantage. If you feel that you are someone who usually operates under a size and strength disadvantage you would do very well to make a serious study of those jiu jitsu movements which out your leg strength versus an opponent’s arms strength - this is a big part of how smaller, weaker people can defeat bigger, stronger people. Triangles and juji gatame arm bars are obvious candidates to start your study, but there is much more than this further down the road. You can’t trust many things in life, but one thing you can always trust in is the strength and endurance of your legs - use them to your advantage whenever possible

Young guns headed into competition! Three of the most promising developing athletes in New Wave will be competing in the new @pitsubmissionseries run by @karatecombat event in Florida on January 26. Outstanding South African Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj will be taking on the great ADCC double medalist Vagner Rocha who has always been one of our teams toughest rivals. Daniel Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant will take on the massive Brazilian black belt world champion Max Gimenis in a battle between two of the biggest men in the sport. Teenage sensation Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl will take on black belt champion Caitlin Murdock in one of her toughest tests so far. Interestingly the bouts will be contested in a Karate combat style pit - a match surrounded by a perimeter that slopes upwards and keeps the athletes inside the mat space through gravity - unusual and should add some spice to the grappling matches as it has a bit of the unknown woven into it. Moreover the matches will be held in a luxury mansion in Florida hosted by some very interesting characters in the entertainment industry. In addition to grappling matches there will be professional karate matches making it a night of combat sports - check it out!

Start small and finish big: When it comes to taking your opponents back, it almost always begins with a small movement that gets you outside an opponent’s elbow, some other small movement that creates the possibility of full back exposure - this is your crucial foot in the door - it gives you the possibility of back control but not the actuality. Then there is a big decisive movement where you take the back followed by the task of cementing back control and controlling your opponent from there. Get used to this process of creating possibility with a small but crucial movement by beating your opponents elbow or head or spinning inverted between his knees and coming out the back door and then capitalizing with a sudden big movement to the back and finish by clamping into the great new position you’ve gained. Understand that like most big events in life - it begins with a small event that creates possibilities and then you have to show the skill and confidence to make it an actuality

First workout in Tokyo: Garry Tonon completed his first workout in Tokyo last night just hours after flying in. We trained at the gym of Japanese MMA icon Kid Yamamoto who was a very impressive fighter back in the day. It was a dramatic switch from the humid heat of Northern Australia to the misty cold of a Japanese winter! Tokyo has always been one of my favorite cities in the world and it’s great to be back!

Victory in Long Beach! The big ADCC Open in Long Beach California was a great opportunity for some of the juniors to go out and get invaluable competition experience and they went to work in grand style! Daniel Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant won double gold in convincing style. Sixteen year old phenom Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl won double gold defeating everyone in an outstanding field of adults. Abraham Montaigne @abraham_the_mountain won gold and silver (and would have won gold were it not for the existence of Big Dan) Youngsters Dominic Meija @dominatormejia won gold and teammate Reese LeFever @reeseis_bjj won silver as they took over the division. Teenagers Andrew DeGraff @andrewdegraffmagic and Landon Morel @landonelmorebjj won silver and bronze respectively. Amazing work from all of them! Nothings beats watching hard working people overcome obstacles and get closer to their goals and dreams! Great work guys - see you all soon!

Crikey mate! There’s a bloody kangaroo in the backyard! You know you’re in Australia when you go to your Mum’s (Mom) house for lunch and there’s a bunch of kangaroos jumping around in the yard 😂😂 Luckily these were the little docile gray kangaroos which are pretty friendly rather than the big red kangaroos that would easily double foot stomp me into oblivion if they felt so inclined 😂😂 Heel hooks ain’t gonna work on those bad boys!

Gold Coast Queensland Australia - I’m having a blast here in Australia catching up with family and friends and seeing some great jiu jitsu buddies again. Now I’m in Gold Coast to see Mum (Mom) - I got a chance to have tea with some friends in Surfers Paradise and was reminded just what a great area this is. Overlooking the mighty Pacific Ocean from up high is one hell of a way to start the day! Wishing you all the best from Australia! 🇦🇺🇦🇺

Triangles from top: We usually learn the classic front triangle stranglehold from bottom position first. There is a reason for this - because your back is on the ground there are no issues with balance and your legs are not bearing any weight and thus move freely and relatively easily into the triangle. As a result most people learn and practice front triangle from bottom position. Don’t let this dissuade you however, from using front triangles from top. Triangles have a unique power to let you use the strength of your legs against an opponents head and arm - giving you a power advantage even against stronger opponents. It can feel like a challenge when you start out as now you have to find balance on top of an opponent as you try to finagle your legs into position whilst using them for balance and support at the same time. Stick with it - the potential benefits of the power of leg strangles will one day more than make up for some early frustrations.

Creating openings: Even the most perfect execution of a given technique will come up short if it is applied against a perfectly executed defensive structure. Alternatively, a technique that is far from perfect will work adequately if it is applied against a very compromised defensive structure. A huge part of whether or not your techniques will work is bound up with your ability to create temporary openings in your opponents defensive structures and attack through that window of opportunity. Try to build into your game the notion of prior set up THEN execution rather than just going straight into the move. The better your opponents the more this essential two step methodology must permeate your game.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video THE FASTEST WAY TO BECOME AN EFFECTIVE NO GI GUARD PASSER. In this video I show a program to use a relatively small set of extremely high percentage moves proven by my students to work very well at the highest levels. These are more than enough to cover all the major passing scenarios you will find yourself in and work together synergistically to enable you to pass even against very strong resistance. By narrowing the focus of moves learning time is reduced and decision making performance under pressure is improved. If you want to improve your no gi guard passing performance in minimum time - check it out! I will post links to my videos ( including this latest one) in my Instagram bio and story.

Australia bound! At the airport waiting for my plane on the long haul to Australia to see Mum (Mom) family and friends. It’s these times you remember how big the Pacific Ocean really is! Looking forward to checking out the burgeoning Aussie jiu jitsu scene! Hope you are all doing well 🤗🤗

Movement creates space - space makes moves possible - when you’re shut down and immobilized - start with movement, nothing crazy that makes a bad situation worse, just enough to create enough space to get moves working again. When everything seems difficult - MOVEMENT BEGETS MOVES

How do you measure success? Some days are better than others in the gym. There’s times you come out feeling like a champion and times you come out wondering whether you’ve ever improved at all. If you measure success too harshly you can get strongly discouraged by a run of bad sessions. What you find is that even the worst sessions have some elements of goodness in them. You don’t have to win to have a good performance. When I first began jiu jitsu my three most important training partners were ADCC medalists/champions. Every day I got destroyed in terms of overall result. I measured success in terms of how long I could last, or whether I could stop or at least delay a move that they constantly used on me. When overall victory isn’t realistic, look for little victories within an overall defeat. It’s all about progress and progress can still be excellent even when you’re losing every match. In time you’ll get better, and as you do, your measurements of success will reflect that as you set bolder expectations for your performances. Remember always that success and failure come in many forms and scales and that the two are tightly woven together. When things seem tough and results aren’t in alignment with your hopes keep this in mind and find some comfort in your little victories

If you can break an opponent’s stance and structure - everything else gets easier. Look for ways to off balance an opponent or upset his structure in ways that undermine his ability to carry weight or move freely and suddenly moves that seemed impossible to perform become very doable.

Stay in the game: There are few routes as frustrating as combat sports. Everything you do is against the skilled resistance of your sparring partners who learn all the same techniques and tactics that you do and progress at a similar rate. This means you never really feel like you’re improving because they are improving alongside you. It’s natural to feel disheartened as time passes and each sparring round feels as difficult as your first classes. Hang in there - in thirty years I’ve never seen cases of students who trained diligently over long periods of time who didn’t make significant improvements despite what you feel. Stay in the game - that’s the most fundamental demand for continued progress. Yes, there are things you can do to speed progress, but nothing can make up for the most basic demand of all for excellence - longevity in the game

Once you’ve created pressure - keep it on: Oftentimes I see students perform a fine sequence of moves and upon completion stop moving. This is understandable if you’re very tired and need to compose yourself, however, in many cases once you create an opening - keep exploiting it to see how far you can take it. Very often an opponent will be discombobulated and confused at the end of a successful offensive cycle and open to subsequent attacks before he can physically and psychologically recover. This doesn’t mean attacking frantically - just keep moving positively towards the next goal. Big openings are difficult to create on a good opponent - if you have created one - use it!!

Heading to Australia to see Mum! My mother’s 90th birthday is fast approaching so I will go down to Australia to see her and family! It’s always great to head back there not only to see friends and family but also to see how jiu jitsu is progressing back home! Australia is really starting to shine in Jiu jitsu so it’s always great to go back and see the enthusiasm and drive they bring. Australia has always shone in athletics so it’s no surprise they are doing so well in Jiu jitsu. I can’t stay long this time because Garry Tonon has an upcoming MMA bout in Tokyo shortly after Mum’s birthday - but I will teach four seminars in Sydney on the weekend of January 10-11 and then go to Brisbane/Gold Coast to see Mum and while I’m there I will teach weekday seminars January 16,17 and 18 and then Saturday seminar on the 20th before heading to Tokyo. Can’t wait to see you all see if I can add a little help to down under Jiu jitsu! 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺 I will start adding more details in my Instagram story over next couple of days!

If you can restrict the other fellows movement without limiting your own - you will win. If you connect too tightly to an opponent you will shut down his movement but at the cost of your own as well, thus giving you no real advantage. Obviously if you’re too loosely connected your opponent will simply pull away from your attacks. The happy middle ground is to tightly connect to one important part of your opponent’s body, perhaps the head/shoulders or the hips, but leave some slack elsewhere. This will enable you to restrict your opponent’s movement but leave enough slack for your own body to move freely around the opponent’s immobilized body.

Directions of force: A big part of this game is applying forces upon your opponent in a way designed to fulfill some purpose or goal. How accurately you apply that force is a big part of whether you succeed or fail in achieving that purpose or goal. Accuracy usually pertains to a target, but in the case of applying force to an opponent it also involves how accurately you apply the direction of that force. Sometimes even a minor error in the direction of force can create a big drop in performance of a given move. Oftentimes you will need to change the direction of force in response to an opponent’s movements or resistance mid move. The key is this - don’t just choose a direction and push or pull with all your might. Try to feel where beneficial changes in direction can be made as soon as you start applying force and be alert to any changes that need to be made as you and your opponent start moving. You can easily feel when you’ve been stopped - don’t just quit - look for a new direction. If you change to a new direction and you feel you’re pushing into a brick wall of resistance yiuve clearly gone in a wrong direction so change again until resistance lowers. Learn to feel where resistance increases and where it decreases and move in accordance with this - this will make your game far more efficient and rewarding

Use your head! Being told to use your head usually implies using our ability to think - that’s always good advice - but in Jiu jitsu you can often take the advice more literally and use your head for what is is - one of the best methods of generating pushing force. Learning to push with your head is crucial for success. So many of the major movements of Jiu jitsu require you to go in aggressively with your head to push an opponent flat while your arms are preoccupied with other tasks. There is so much demand for your arms to do work in this game that often your head is the only available means left to push your opponent - so use it! Take some time to develop your neck muscles and get used to carrying weight on your head and neck by bridging until you feel you can push with confidence and strength. Make sure your head is as much a part of your game as your arms and legs!

Happy New Year to you all! Wishing you a great year of Jiu jitsu in 2024 and good progress towards all your jiu jitsu goals!! 🤗🤗

The more you can use your legs to pin and trap an opponents arms in dominant positions, the more successful you’ll be entering into submissions. Pins are great for controlling opponents but remember that most of his defense when pins begins with his arms. If you can take one of his arms out of action by pinning it or trapping it, you will add greatly to the danger your pin presents to the opponent. So when you pin whether chest to chest or chest to back, look to go the extra distance and pin/trap an arm as well and you’ll be be able to do more than immobilize an opponent - you’ll finish him!

Control your opponents head and shoulders between your knees and attack his isolated limb with your arms - that’s the pattern of so many upper body submissions, particularly when applied from underneath. Get used to the idea of sliding out to an angle and bringing your knees up to your opponents head and shoulders for control - it’s a movement you’ll be using throughout your time in jiu jitsu and which will bring you many of your best successes.

Use your weight: Once you’re in top position and you’re no longer being held between your opponents knees it’s time to start using your weight to create pressure. Of course it’s easier to do this when you’re big and heavy, but I assure you - even a small person can be shockingly effective using body weight to slow and immobilize a bigger opponent if they know what they’re doing. Sixty kilograms of well applied bodyweight will greatly outperform one hundred kilograms of poorly applied bodyweight. Try to FOCUS the application of your weight. Don’t just apply it across a broad area. Have a target in mind and use your legs to direct your weight on to that target. The head and shoulders is the most desirable target but you can’t always go straight there so learn to target other areas as well. Whatever weight you are - learn to maximize its use and you’ll be a formidable threat when on top!

One of the most impressive twelve months I’ve ever seen in grappling: Nicholas Meregali continued his meteoric rise in grappling this year in a way that few would predicted. In a game that has become increasingly specialized into gi and no gi athletes he got to the absolute top in both by beating the best of the best in dominant fashion and showed a truly incredible ability to reinvent his jiu jitsu mid career and take on entirely new skills and directions in a breathtakingly short time. In a truly sensational year and Meregali defeated the two most outstanding current gi athletes, both current world champions Victor Hugo and Erich Munis. He did so by winning Pan Ams double gold almost every match by submission and the IBJJF Grand Prix, again almost every match by submission. Shockingly his preparation for these events was a few weeks in between his no gi training! Then in the no gi realm he took on four athletes who I believe most people would agree would be the three best open weight active no gi athletes outside of our team/former teammates - Kaynan Duarte, Felipe Pena and Cyborg Abreau - and defeated all three in the most impressive way possible by submission. Moreover, he did this while exhibiting A completely revamped skill set from feet to floor. This has truly been one of the most remarkable transformations I have ever seen from an athlete who already a star with a fully developed game in one domain - to take on and dominate a whole new category of the sport with an entirely new arsenal in a year whilst improving his original domain was a truly amazing feat. Now he stands at the top of both gi and no gi worlds and is the best mixed domain athlete in the world. Congratulations Nicholas - that was one hell of a year!

What a year for this man! South African jiu jitsu star Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj had a truly outstanding year in 2023. He won the coveted Grand Slam European Championship, Pan Am Championship and World Championship at brown belt IBJJF Federation. In between that he also won ADCC European trials to punch his ticket to the 2024 ADCC World Championship in Las Vegas. In addition he won his WNO professional grappling match against the current Black Belt World Champion and perhaps most incredible of all - every single match in all these tournaments was won by submission - an incredible feat. In fact I believe no one has ever won Euro, Pans and Worlds IBJJF every match by submission at Brown Belt level before. It’s crazy to think that when he first arrived here around a year and half to two years ago he had just lost at European ADCC trials and then lost two matches to local purple belts. From that inauspicious start he now stands very high indeed in the grappling world - a tremendous testimony to his exceptional work ethic and that no nonsense practical mindset that has made so many South African athletes successful across many sports over many generations - well done Luke!

Happy Holidays! Had a fun day training at Renzo Gracie Austin and Roka with the crew! Now it’s time to relax 😜😜 Wherever you are I hope you have a great day!

The basis of guard position will always be your ability to off balance your opponent. If you can do this all your attacks will be substantially easier and all his passing attempts substantially more difficult and risky. Learn to constantly threaten your opponents balance first and then attack second.

When you control inside position it’s tough for an opponent to apply his weight and strength on you: If you want to be someone who is difficult to pin down and control - keep your hands, elbows, head, knees and feet inside your opponents limbs. This will make it very difficult for him to control you with grip and weight. Be diligent with this - many people can maintain inside position for short bursts but only a few can maintain it throughout a match. A disciplined approach to gripping makes the rest of your skills much easier to apply

Advancing: This is a game where you rarely make immediate jumps to victory. The vast majority of your victories will be incremental. The proceed step by step, often after losing and regaining steps against fierce resistance. Train with this in mind. KNOWING THE STEPS to the next vantage point is half the battle when you’re starting out. If you want to control an opponent’s hips you’ll have to win prior battles for the feet and then the knees before you get the prize of the hips. Train the game as it really is - learn to fight a string of little battles victoriously in order to win wars.

Draining energy: Sometimes when we get a position and attempt a move it can be rather frustrating when that move doesn’t work as planned. Don’t get upset - remember that there are two games going on here simultaneously - the obvious one is to apply a move or series of moves to completion, the other is to exhaust your opponent physically and mentally. Each time an opponent resists a move from inferior positions he gets a little more exhausted. As long as you’re winning that battle it’s ok to fail with the application of some moves. Have faith that each time an opponent resists he’s drained a little more from his batteries and there will be a threshold where he won’t be able to effectively resist the next move.

Start with the extremities and work up to the core: The goal of Jiu jitsu is control. Humans are vertebrates - our spine is our central physical feature. Control over a human means control over the spine. The spine has two ends - the hips and the head - so those will be the two major points of control that you’ll want to end with. However, you can just immediately access head and hips against a skilled opponent since they will be well defended and reaching naively for them will be strongly countered. Therefore you must work your way towards them step by step. This usually means starting at the extremities of the body - the hands and feet, and working your way methodically to elbows and knees and then to hips and head. This will be the pattern you’ll follow most of the time - make a habit of it and you’ll get the control you seek with much lower risk

Everything you do in this game you do against resistance: Something you can always count on in Jiu jitsu is that any move you attempt on an opponent will be met with resistance. It is crucial therefore, that every time you go to apply a given move you pair it with an another move that goes in the OPPOSITE DIRECTION in order to take advantage of your opponent’s defensive reaction. If you apply this simple idea you will soon find that resistance can actually be exploited and used to your gain, rather than as most people experience it as a terrible barrier to success. Learn to pair all your favorite moves with another that works in the opposite direction to take advantage of defensive reactions.

Distinguished guests: One of the great pleasures of teaching Jiu jitsu is having distinguished guests and friends drop in for training. They don’t get any more distinguished than this fellow @jasonnolf Jason Nolf and @genomorellimma Geno Morelli - alumni of the great Penn State wrestling program - stopped by today and showed their wizardry on the mats. Mr Nolf showed his integration of wrestling and jiu jitsu by landing his signature Winn Dixie roll right into a kimura submission during sparring! One gets the impression watching him he could learn jiu jitsu very easily and rapidly! What a pleasure to see these guys in action!

Everyone looks good in dominant positions - the real measure of the depth of your skill set is how well you operate in bad positions and navigate back to good positions. Make sure you don’t just practice your favorite scenarios - spend an equal time on your least favorite situations because in a tough match it’s only a matter of time before you end up there.

In this game you’ve got two choices as to how you can beat an opponent - you can either develop your movement potential to a degree where you can consistently out maneuver your opponents in order to get into winning positions. This requires you to create movement that speeds the game up beyond a point that your opponent can follow and generally favors athletes with good mobility and speed. The second option is to stop or restrict an opponent’s movement. The focus is on slowing the game down in situations that favor you and this typically favors athletes with isometric strength and endurance. The first approach is all about creating movement, the second is all about denying movement. I usually find people will tend to naturally gravitate towards one or the other without being prompted or coerced. Interestingly, athletes who start with a movement based game will usually switch as they age to a movement denial game. Who do you think would be good examples of a movement based game among contemporary athletes? Who would be good examples of a movement denial game? Who would be a good example of an athlete who has both elements in their game?

It’s never enough to simply pin an opponent: In jiu jitsu pins are a means to an end - and that end is submission. In most grappling arts pins are an end - you can finish a match with them. For us, it’s a great way to control an opponent’s movement but you have to go further and isolate an opponent’s limb so that submission becomes possible. The single best way to do this for upper body submission is to get his elbows out and away from his torso. Don’t be satisfied with the pin. Always go the extra distance and work his elbows out and away from his torso so that the process of isolating a limb can begin - once you can isolate and restrain a limb - you can attack it with confidence!

Nice work In Kazakstan! Team Modolfo - a gathering of Jiu jitsu super stars under the leadership of @mojassim80 head of ADCC won the big @aiga.global grappling tournament in Kazakstan this weekend with a dominant display. New Wave standouts @giancarlobodoni and @jiujitsugiant played a prominent role in the victory - winning both their matches decisively. They were joined by other superstars such as Mica Galvao, Dante Leon,
Baby Shark, Izaak Michel and others in a great display of Jiu jitsu talent. Young @dominatormejia represented another team and win his matches in brilliant fashion also go a great weekend for New Wave. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

When your hand fighting - don’t forget your feet! We live in a hand dominant world. Most of the tasks we perform every day, from driving, typing, working, even mundane things like brushing your teeth etc are performed predominantly with the hands. We tend to carry that mindset into Jiu jitsu but his is not good. When you hand fight whether standing or on the ground - DON’T NEGLECT YOUR FEET. Use your feet to off balance and stumble your opponent whenever you can. In the midst of the hand fight - don’t neglect the foot fight! It will double your effectiveness every time!

Pressure over time conquers all: When I first met Nicholas Meregali I was immediately struck by the brilliance and of his attacks and by his general spirit of offense and decisive victory. What was absent however a sense of CONTINUITY OF ATTACK CREATING PRESSURE OVER TIME. Other things being equal Attacks in no gi Jiu jitsu usually have a lower percentage success rate than gi due to decreased friction and therefore there is a greater need for combined/continuous attacks creating a relentless pressure that exhausts opponents until resistance levels fall below a threshold where submissions work with a higher chance of success. Mr Meregali built this approach into his game over the last year to a degree that is truly extraordinary. His last two matches were testimony to this development. He took on two of the most elite grapplers in the world - Kaynan Duarte and Felipe Pena - both ADCC champions and very powerful physical specimens who we consider the best active players in the world outside of our team mates. Mr Meregali defeated both by stranglehold from dominant position after controlling every aspect of the match from feet to floor with unrelenting pressure that made submission look inevitable. I can’t think of a better example of an athlete redefining himself mid career in such impressive fashion. Let that example be your inspiration - I guarantee that focus upon methodical pressure over time will get you decisive submission victories that opponents find very difficult to stop

Victory in Las Vegas! Nicholas Meregali won a tremendous victory tonight over his great rival Felipe Pena via rear strangle with one of the greatest performances of his career to cap off an incredible year of victory for this truly outstanding Brazilian athlete. This was an always going to be a battle to determine who is the best in the world outside of Gordon Ryan - both men had a legitimate claim to that title - and tonight it was settled. Mr Meregali started with pressure, survived an early reversal and went back into pressure mode until he got to his lethal strangle skills and won in dramatic fashion! To finish such a great jiu jitsu athlete within fifteen minutes is a truly impressive performance. There were other great fights tonight. Nicky Rod won a fine victory over Brazilian superstar Yuri Simoes showcasing his very strong takedown and passing skills. Mason Fowler showed his very strong submission skills with an impressive Kimura victory over Haisam Rida. The great Brazilian athlete Victor Hugo had a dramatic win over New Wave’s Dan Manasoiu. The match was very even as the two big men went toe to toe standing and on the ground. With just a minute left and very tight Mr Hugo exploded up from underneath and reversed Dan into mount position and won via classic American lock on a very fatigued Dan. It was a great match for the spectators with all the back and forth and the dramatic ending. Thanks again to @ufcfightpass for another great show and thank you for your interest in our approach to grappling and the long journey our athletes go through. Wishing you all the best from Las Vegas!

World champion! Reese LeFever @reeseis_bjj won purple belt gold here in Las Vegas today at the IBJJF World Championships with a 90% submission rate and a very dominant points win in the finals. It was a remarkable day for the young man from Tennessee who one year ago moved to Austin Texas to train with us and now is on top of the podium! Well done Reese!!

Helena Crevar wins double gold at @ibjjf world championships! @helenajiujitsugirl shows off her two gold medals with her proud parents here in Las Vegas after another 100% submission rate day. Now it’s back to the gym to help @nicholasmeregali and @jiujitsugiant get ready for the big Sunday night show at @ufcfightpass Grappling Invitational! Wishing you all the best from Las Vegas!

Luke Griffith double gold! Luke Griffith won the IBJJF @ibjjf brown belt world championship absolute division with a 100% submission rate to finish an incredible day here in Las Vegas. Another remarkable performance from this incredible young athlete and a great reward for all the hard work he has put in to get his skills to very impressive level. Congratulations Luke! Looking forward to another great day tomorrow with other New Wave athletes such as Oliver Taza and Helena Crevar stepping on to the mats - see you there!

Luke Griffith wins IBJJF World Title! South African sensation Luke Griffith had another exceptional performance today in Las Vegas at the IBJJF World Championships - winning every match in his weight division via submission (all strangles this time) to become 2023 IBJJF Brown Belt world champion. Later today he will try to win the prestigious Absolute Division - open to medal winners of all weight divisions to find the best of the best! Congratulations Luke! @ibjjf

First workout tonight in Las Vegas in preparation for for UFC Grappling Invitational this Sunday night! Nicolas Meregali will take on the great Felipe Pena and Daniel Manasoiu will take on the great Victor Hugo in what should be an epic showdown of heavyweights. I discovered tonight that I am extremely short, small and weak 😂😂😂 I hope in my next life I come back looking like one of these monsters 😂😂

Every time you go into a move it’s a chance to learn a little more about it: Most people drill for numbers and think that performing a certain number of repetitions will inevitably create expertise. This is not the case. After a fairly short time you get rapidly diminishing returns on your attempt to improve. Rather, work with an active, experimental mindset that constantly asks what minor changes in angle, positioning, placement and any other relevant factors can have in the quality of your performance of that move. There is always some new nuance that you hadn’t observed before that emerges and over time a feeling of what mechanical efficiency in that position starts to feel like - then it’s all about replication of that feeling in increasingly strenuous tests leading up to full power sparring and competition.

Pressure comes from precision: We tend to think of pressure as the result of the power of our weight and muscles being applied to an opponent. But in truth, precision with positioning of your body on to the appropriate areas of your opponent’s body is far more important. You can be big and heavy but if you don’t know how place and hold your weight, a skilled opponent won’t feel much pressure and easily escape. Conversely, you can be of modest size and strength but if you know exactly how to use your weight and position it, you can feel like a truck parked on an opponents chest. Just as the effect of a boxers punch is mostly determined by its accuracy and timing rather than size and strength, so too with grappling where the exactness of placement, how well you conform to the opponents body and how you apply the weight you have determines pressure rather than your gross weight.

Strangles: There are two major categories of submission holds in Jiu jitsu - strangles and joint locks. It’s very important that you be strong in both but it’s equally important that you understand that strangles have an innate superiority over joint locks. Joint locks attack your opponents body. As such your opponent can always simply choose to sacrifice the joint and continue fighting. Strangles attack your opponents CONSCIOUSNESS by restricting blood flow to the brain. As such it is irrelevant whether they choose to endure the attack - they will simply pass out regardless. For this reason they will always have a substantial advantage over joint locks. In a high stakes match they will never let you down. You could have a great career if your only submission holds were all strangles - but you would struggle if all your submission holds were joint locks since there would always be critical times when opponents simply toughed out the lock and let their arm or leg get injured in order to preserve a lead and win. Be very sure that among your best three submission holds at least one is a strangle - there may be a day you need it!

Victory in Austin! The New Wave Team had a fine outing here in Austin tonight at the @flograppling WNO grappling invitational. Giancarlo Bodoni won a tightly contested match against his great rival Lucas Hulk Barbosa - this despite taking the match on just a few days notice. He used a disciplined hand fighting game to push the pace and direction of the match and win the rematch if the last ADCC gold medal match! Luke Griffith won via heel hook against ADCC semi finalist Roosevelt Sousa, showing his versatility with a game that went smoothly from standing to ground with Luke in control throughout. Helena Crevar once again showed her incredible potential defeating an ADCC trials winner and very experienced and highly ranked no gi competitor in a dominant performance - truly remarkable for a sixteen year old against such a high level opponent! Young purple belt Reese LeFever won a convincing victory over the always exciting giant killer Estevan Martinez despite taking the match on just a few days notice - a very impressive debut for him. Another youngster Dominic Meija lost a close decision in a fine back and forth match but showed again his exciting movement based style - he has a ton of potential for the future. Great to see everyone taking the skills they work so hard to develop in the gym showcased onstage! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Tomorrow night Team New Wave will go on stage at @flograppling WNO Invitational. Giancarlo Bodoni @giancarlobodoni will have a rematch with his great rival Lucas Barbosa. The last time they met it was the finals of ADCC with Giancarlo winning a very hard fought and dramatic victory. Now they go head to head again! @helenajiujitsugirl @dominatormejia and @reeseis_bjj will take on very tough opponents on a stacked card! Main event will be grappling super stars Pedro Marinho vs Rafael Lavato. Keep your eyes on this show - it looks like some action coming up!

Coming to grips: Within a few seconds of coming to grips with an opponent you’ve never grappled before you will know his approximate skill level. The nature of his gripping will immediately tell you a lot of information. Is he relaxed/efficient or overly tense? Is he gripping with purpose or merely gripping for the sake of gripping? Are his feet moving in concert with his hands or is he all upper body and nothing else? Is there subtlety and nuance to his game (fakes, feints, misdirections) or is everything straightforward? All these things and many more can be readily felt or observed within seconds of contact. Use this time to read your opponent. Just as when you meet someone for the first time you spend the initial period learning as much as you can and trying to discern real from false information - so too when grappling. Most people aren’t very good at keeping secrets and grapplers are no exception - you can usually read their intent with confidence and then adjust your game from there

Breaking it down into steps: When you look at the application of a jiu jitsu technique it’s natural to fixate on the outcome since that’s the goal of the technique and the most noticeable part of it. Understand however that the technique you observe is the last part of a surprisingly long chain of events. If any of those initial steps failed it’s unlikely you’d have ever seen the final technique. It is of the greatest importance then, that you identify those previous steps and devote as much energy to their development as you do to the finishing technique, since those preliminaries are just as essential as the final step in the success of the sequence overall. Just what those preliminaries are will depend on the move itself, but in the vast majority of cases it will involve maintaining your own stance and balance whilst breaking that of your opponent. Make a sincere study of the art of stance and breaking stance and the moves you seek to employ will seem like an afterthought

If you can control an opponent’s ability to make effective contact with you, then you will be in charge of every grappling exchange. Understand that the two primary means an opponent has of making effective connection/grip upon you are his hands and feet. Control those and you’ll control the exchanges. As a general rule, negate your opponent’s hand and foot grips prior to attacking and you be less like to fall victim to counters and will face significantly less resistance.

Using top position as a default: Sometimes you’ll have an opponent who for tactical reasons you specifically want to attack from bottom position - in this case get to bottom position and stay there. However, there will be just as many cases where it makes sense to see top position as the default - even when you begin the match in bottom position. Just because you start in bottom position doesn’t mean you’re condemned to stay there. In the majority of cases there will be multiple opportunities in a match to come up from bottom and get on top EVEN IF YOU CANNOT SWEEP YOUR OPPONENT BY CONVENTIONAL METHODS. The natural ebb and flow of guard position which is created by movement and the threat of submissions, will almost always create sufficiently large and sudden weight transfers by the top athlete that the bottom athlete will be able to spontaneously pop up from bottom and hustle their way to top - you just need to be mentally aware of your opponent’s weight shifts and have a mindset of taking advantage of opportunity. If you’re mentally LOOKING for the opportunity it’s almost guaranteed you’ll find it at some point. Treat advancing to top position as a default option any time there is a major transference of weight and you’ll be pleasantly surprised how often you see opportunities and capitalize on them!

Creating space and distance in defense: This game is divided into offensive and defensive skills. The basis of almost all the defensive skills is to create space between you and your opponent. Only when you’ve created sufficient space can you perform the moves you need to get out of bad situations. As such, the defensive moves of Jiu jitsu mostly begin with a push action. When in trouble - focus first on creating space between you and your opponent - everything follows from that

The biggest sale of the year is on now! Black Friday sale at BJJ Fanatics! 52% off all my instructional videos! See the link in my Instagram story!

You don’t have to be heavy to use your weight to advantage against an opponent. A 60kg athlete who can use good stance and positioning to use 50% of his weight to bear against a small part of his opponents body will be much more effective with his weight than a 100kg athlete whose weight is dissipated through poor stance and positioning so that only 20% of his weight is brought to bear against his opponent. When stance and positioning is equal, greater weight will be decisive, but if you have strong stance and position even a light athlete can feel awfully heavy when he wants to. Don’t let your weight make the decision whether you use it to create pressure - let your stance and positioning skills make the choice

An opponents arms will never be stronger than your legs even given a considerable size difference in his favor. Use this simple truth to guide your jiu jitsu. Whenever possible make your matches a contest between your legs and his arms and if you can frame the battle in these terms you’ll emerge the winner in the vast majority of cases.

It’s easy to score from strong positions, but your real tests will come when you need to score out of bad positions. Every time you escape - train yourself to immediately counterattack and score. You’ll be surprised to find that many opponents are a little complacent when they’re in good positions so that in that critical moment you break out - it’s not that hard to immediately score in many cases. It starts with your mindset - if you don’t conceive of the possibility of counterattack - it won’t happen even if you have the opportunity and the skills

If you can consistently get behind an opponents elbows the match will almost always go in your favor. Any time an opponent reaches from a neutral position there will be opportunities for you to slip under, over or around his elbow and gain advantage - it’s up to you to recognize opportunity and build the skills to take it!

If you can combine an inquisitive mind that keeps looking for interesting new projects in Jiu jitsu and combine this with a persistence and disciplined character that makes you follow through on projects to completion - you’ll never have to worry about not making forward progress in this game.

Create a threat to your opponent as often as you can - how he plays against you is directly influenced by the threat level that he perceives from you - the greater the perceived threat, the more conservative and cautious his game will become. A conservative and cautious opponent is much easier to control

Be impatient with seeking and starting your projects, but patient with the results. It takes time to craft a skill. You want a restless and striving mind that seeks new goals and projects but temper it with the patience to give your work enough time to develop into a powerful skill.

Once you come to grips with an opponent you can feel their intentions. This gives an advances warning of an impending attack and facilitates all your defensive reactions. When you don’t have any hands on an opponent you have to figure out their intentions with your eyes, which usually takes longer and is more subject to deception. So when you come face to face with your opponent, make a habit of getting hands on him early and learn to read intention through then as accurately as a blind man reads braille through his hands - you’ll be defensively stronger and well positioned to get into counter offense

Most of the moves associated with standing position are just as effective down on the ground: we often make a big distinction between standing grappling and ground grappling and there are certainly some very important differences - so much so that there are many grapplers who excel at one but are very uncomfortable in the other. Be aware however, that most of the major moves of the standing game world just as well down on the floor. Double legs, single legs, even throws such as uchi mata are very efficient in ground grappling. Some moves such as sumi gaeshi which are a big part of the jiu jitsu ground curriculum, also excel as standing throws. Yes, there are some big differences between standing and ground grappling - but there is a lot of overlap too. Use that overlap to gain confidence. If you’re mostly a ground grappler, start using single legs and double legs and even throws down on the mat - as you start scoring with them and learning how to apply them on the floor where you’re comfortable, it’ll be easier to translate that into using them successfully on your feet

Once you get top position don’t sacrifice it willingly. Too often athletes get top position and then throw it away too quickly going for a risky or low percentage move. There is nothing wrong with taking a calculated risk, but make sure there is a potential reward that makes it worth it. Remember that top position requires TIME to have an effect. If you quickly jump off to another move you simply won’t let top pressure work in your favor. If you do get bucked off if should be because your opponent FORCED you out of top position, not because you jumped off looking for a prize not worth fighting for. Make a habit of not surrendering top position without a fight - soon you will see that the pressure you can generate over time will make your investment worth it as submissions on a weakened opponent are much easier to apply than on a fresh opponent

Levers and fulcrums: In so far as jiu jitsu is a mechanical study of the optimal way to position lever and fulcrum in order to create breaking/tearing leverage upon an opponents joints or sealing strangles upon the neck, there are correct and incorrect ways of applying moves. When you drill, experiment with hand, elbow and hip placement. Feel for that optimal placement of lever and fulcrum - your goal is to be able to find it first time every time, even under pressure. The difference between applying force with lever and fulcrum placed poorly versus applied with precision is often the difference between winning and losing

Get your hips into it! Your hips and legs are the source of most of your strength. They will keep firing king after your arms, shoulders and back are exhausted. They can lift things your arms and shoulders couldn’t budge. Train your mind to think always in terms of hips and legs rather than arms and shoulders as the basis of your power. See your arms as connectors that allow you to apply the strength of your legs and hips to an opponent rather than as a primary source of power.

The more you learn about defending a given move, the more you’ll know about attacking with it also; the more you know about attacking with a given move, the more you’ll know about how to defend against it. Every move has two faces - it’s offensive aspect and it’s defensive aspect. Knowledge of one always furnishes knowledge of the other

Be highly competent at everything and truly excellent at a few important things - that’s the path to greatness in Jiu jitsu. You need competence at everything so that you don’t have any obvious weaknesses for an opponent to exploit. You need real excellence at a few things to be able to break through even the toughest defenses and get to the win. You can’t be the best at everything but you can definitely be good enough to be defensively strong, you definitely can be the best at a small number of things and that’s enough to win even at the highest levels

How you feel before a match is always worse than how you’ll feel during the match. The time before a match is ruled by your imagination and it will give rise to every fear and doubt it can conjure up. But don’t worry, the time DURING the match is ruled by action - your body knows what to do from all your training - there won’t be time for fear. The best antidote to fear is action - so be confident that once the action starts your fears will be replaced by a steely focus on the task at hand

As a general rule - the more dominant your situation - the more you’ll want to slow the action down. The more critical your situation - the more you’ll want to speed things up. As in life, so too with jiu jitsu - Prolong the good times and shorten the bad times. Next time your in a great position on an opponent - slow down - let the position do the work and let time work it’s magic - save your speed and explosion for the bad times!

Directing your strength: Raw strength and weight is always impressive to observe, but directed strength and weight is what garners the results in Jiu jitsu. What gives your strength and weight direction? It is your stance. Your stance can corral all your strength and weight and unify it and then allow you to direct it to a target. Strength without stance doesn’t accomplish much. A weak body with a strong stance can shock you with its power delivery. Every time you practice Jiu jitsu, be conscious of your stance until it becomes so ingrained that it’s becomes unconscious - that’s when expertise really starts to emerge.

Close contact: the best scoring and finishing opportunities in the sport come from close contact situations. Distance means safety in this game - but ultimately it’s safe for both of you. You have to get comfortable getting close enough to control and finish and that entails greater risk because if you’re close enough to control him, you’re close enough for an opponent to turn the tables and score on you. Learning to get comfortable in situations where you can both score on and be scored on is a big part of your progress. In time you’ll learn the subtle aspects of control that stack the odds in your favor in these contact situations, but you’ll only do that if you first make the mental step of pushing through the natural inhibition we have with risk and realize that the only way to get to what you desire is to take some risk knowing that there will be some early failures but a bright future

Balance and Kuzushi: In standing and top post the game of Jiu jitsu is predicated entire on your ability to maintain balance and stance. Without these two prerequisites the rest of the game is impossible - so if you can consistently break an opponent’s balance and stance (Kuzushi), then the victory will very likely be yours. Because we think mostly in terms of outcomes, our minds tend to focus on the most desirable outcome - submission. However, the only way you’re going to reliably get to those desirable outcomes is by getting a strong start - and the strongest start is to break your opponents stance. So study the notion of breaking stance and balance as deeply as any other skill - for all of them become easier with mastery of this one

Points of no return: In the application of a given move there is always a point of no return for your opponent behind which defense fails and the move can be taken to completion. Learning to read that point is extremely important, because there will be many many occasions when you DON’T take your opponent past that and he successfully defends your move. That’s when the question of what comes next arises. The better you are at reading whether or not you’ll get to the point of no return, the faster you’ll be able to switch off to a secondary attack and keep the kind of continuity of attack that is a distinguishing characteristic of superior athletes. When you drill and spar - constantly look for that critical point and learn to feel it physically so that it’ll be clear in a competitive situation whether you’ll be able to breach it or not and whether you’ll break through with your first attack or whether you need to switch to another

If you can consistently make an opponent work harder than you for extended periods of time you can make an opponent who felt impossible to beat in the opening minutes of a match feel easy to beat as time marches on. If you can create and maintain physical pressure then you can turn time into a weapon - and trust me, it will become one of your best weapons

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video as part of the new FASTEST WAY series. This series is all about taking important facets of the jiu jitsu game and kick starting your progress in positive directions. This first video is THE FASTEST WAY TO IMPROVE YOUR SUBMISSION PERCENTAGE. The video focuses attention on to the most high percentage submission in the jiu jitsu - the rear strangle - and shows how you can prioritize this move from anywhere - inferior, neutral and dominant positions. By taking the most high percentage finishing hold and showing a complete guide to how to get there from anywhere, how to stay there long enough to get the job done and how to break through the toughest defenses, athletes can quickly increase the number of successfully completed submissions per training session. My previous video on rear strangles from ENTER THE SYSTEM focused on the well known strait jacket arm trap system used by my students, this video is a comprehensive guide to navigating to the back, staying there and finishing without necessarily trapping arms prior to finishing. If you want a quick way to increase your finishing rate you can’t do better than focusing on the back! Link in my Instagram story

How fast do you learn? A question I’m often asked is whether it is possible to increase the rate at which you learn the skills of Jiu jitsu. My answer to this is yes - definitely. There are however limits on how quickly you can learn any physical skill and jiu jitsu is no exception. There are quite a few factors involved in speed of skill acquisition. Two of them that I place a lot of importance upon are TECHNIQUE SELECTION and FOCUS. When it’s time to improve your performance in a given skill area it’s important to choose wisely which techniques you will focus upon. Not all techniques are created equal. Some figure much more prominently in successful outcomes in high level competition - focus on these above others to make faster progress overall. In addition, focus your training time upon a smaller set of moves to maximize training volume on those skills, even at the expense of learning other skills. Remember always that in this game one move performed very well will almost always outperform a dozen moves performed in a mediocre fashion. Don’t despair if your current skills diminish a little as you focus on these new skills. Be confident that moves learned prior can be re-learned much more easily than brand new skills - you will recover them quickly with a little training. When it’s time to increase your performance quickly - choose wisely and focus intently on those choices - you’ll soon see results

Frames: When you’re in bottom position the single biggest need you have in order to be effective is SPACE. Your opponent will be doing everything they can to take space away from you so your game will always be to put defensive frames between you and your opponent to maintain space. If you can maintain space you can move and if you can move you can win - so get those frames in place and protect your space!!

Heading to Boston: Waiting for my flight to Boston to film a video as part of the new FASTEST WAY instructional series. It’s late fall up there in New England - I haven’t been in cold weather for a long time! 😜😱 Watching the Francis Ngannou Tyson Fury highlights - what an impressive performance from Mr Ngannou against such a great champion! For two decades we’ve been listening to boxing pundits tell us that MMA striking skills were primitive compared with boxing - well, now the world can see it ain’t necessarily so. Hope you all have a great Sunday!

Winning in style: South African stand out Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj showing great style en route to double gold in both his weight division and absolute winning every match by submission! 🇿🇦🇿🇦

Victory in Rome! Outstanding South African athlete Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj won double gold at brown belt today in Rome at the IBJJF European Championships. Luke won both his weight division and absolute with every match via submission - an exact repeat of his performance at Pan Ams! Now he wants to do it again at the IBJJF World Championships in about a month - the best always set their goals high! Congratulations Luke! An amazing performance from a very hard working and dedicated athlete!! 🇿🇦🇿🇦

In almost all the classic moves of Jiu jitsu your arms are merely connectors to your opponents body - the POWER comes from the HIPS and LEGS. Program your mind to think always in these terms and you’ll do well in this game

Unsure where to go next? You can never go wrong by chasing the back. In a world of competing options many of which are very enticing, it’s nice to know there is one option that can literally never go wrong and which you know ahead of time outperforms every other option. In jiu jitsu that option is the back - get there and your chances of finishing an opponent climb massively and the chances of him doing anything threatening back to you are minimal. In every neutral position, scramble and escape - MAKE THE BACK YOUR DEFAULT OPTION - it will give your game a sense of direction and decisiveness that will greatly benefit you

Take your time when you have pressure positioning - time becomes a weapon when an opponent is under duress. There are some situations where speed and quickness are a virtue, but when you have top pressure in your favor, deliberate slowing of the pace is what you want. Patience and deliberation are your virtues here.

Use your feet like hands: The single biggest problem most people have when they begin Jiu jitsu comes from the fact that we spend our whole lives living in a hand/arm dominated world - almost all our daily skill actions are performed mostly with hands and arms. Our feet and legs are used only for locomotion, not for dexterous, skilled tasks. Then we come into Jiu jitsu and discover that most of the game is played with feet and legs with hands and arms very much in second place in importance. Learning to rely on feet/legs over hands/arms is the biggest and most important mental and physical shift you can make. The earlier you make it, the better.

Committing to a move: We work in a sport where a move that is well executed 95% to completion fails. Only moves that go through to 100% succeed - so a large degree of commitment to the execution is required. Once you feel all the opening steps are in place and you’re mechanically well set - it’s time to go - don’t let a move fail because of timidity. If a move fails it should be because your opponent successfully resisted or countered - not because you held back when the time and conditions were right.

You don’t have to be fast if you know how to slow the other guy down. Your speed is largely determined by genetics and diminishes with age - but your ability to slow another person down through body positioning has no limit - focus on that more than increasing your own speed.

Daniel Manasoiu wins again! Straight off his victory at East Coast ADCC Trials where he won gold and a ticket to the world championships, Daniel Manasoiu wasted no time getting back in action. He flew straight to Abu Dhabi to compete in Abu Dhabi Extreme Championship ADXC where grapplers compete in a cage in three three minute rounds - a rather unusual format. Dan defeated Brazilian heavyweight Antonio Assef via uchi mata takedown into heel hook in less than a minute to take a decisive win. Here he is hanging out with my teacher Renzo Gracie who was a guest at the show! Congratulations Dan!

Once you develop a strong primary move that opponents fear - it’s much easier to develop secondary moves that feed off the defensive over reactions you get in response to the primary moves. How successful you are at applying moves is not just a function of how well you execute them - it’s also heavily affected by show well your opponent responds to them. If they over react to one move, it’ll be a lot easier to breakthrough with a complimentary follow up move. That’s why it’s so important to have at least one move that opponents know and fear. It functions not only as a bludgeon to break through by itself, but even more importantly, as a provocation that creates over reactions that compromise your opponents ability to defend your other attacking moves.

When it’s time to establish control of an opponent the general pattern in Jiu jitsu is simple - start at the extremities - hands and feet, then work up and past the limbs to the hips, then the head. All positional control terminates at the head and shoulders. Then to finish via submission,
Switch away from the head down to a single limb. This simple pattern you will follow innumerable times on the path to mastery. It is conceptually simple, but executing it on a skilled opponent can be very difficult. No matter the degree of difficulty, this will be the general pattern you follow in the vast majority of cases. Make it your habit and you will be successful

The wisdom of the old masters: The old masters of Japan who laid the foundations of our sport always said that the first skill one needed to learn was ukemi - the skill of falling safely to prevent self injury during training. In modern jiu jitsu most of the action is on the floor so ukemi tends to be undervalued. Still, the same idea holds true. The first concern you must always address is avoiding needless self injury. So learning to tap early to submissions, learning to relax your body to give way to force rather than confront it head on every time, learning the correct body postures to keep yourself safe under heavy physical pressure, these are all truly essential skills. Remember always that the number one reason for extended time off the mat and detailed training programs is injury - so learning the essential skills of lowering risk of self injury is a big part of continued progress over time. Just as every doctor begins his career with the adage “first, so no harm,” so too the jiu jitsu player must begin his career with the adage “first, avoid self harm” and learn the simple but vital skills of physical self preservation on the mat

Jiu Jitsu exhibits the characteristics of both art and science: We usually make a pretty strong distinction between arts and science - look at any academic institution and you’ll see that they are divided quite strongly into different faculties. Jiu Jitsu however, seems to have a foot in both departments. Insofar as it is a mechanical skill, based largely around making your body (and your opponents) into levers, fulcrums, wedges (incline planes) etc - it’s a scientific endeavor with objectively true and false answers to the questions we pose about technique. Insofar as it’s up to our choice as to which techniques we will employ and in what fashion, it’s a case of self expression where there is no right or wrong answer as to how one ought to act. Seen in this light it’s clear that there are times when there is a clear right and wrong way of playing the game, but just as many other times when there isn’t and that knowing the difference between the mechanical/scientific aspects of Jiu jitsu and the artistic/expressionist aspects is important for both teacher and student.

Strong performance at East Coast ADCC trials in Atlantic City! Team New Wave had a fine performance at the hotly contested ADCC East Coast trials today and yesterday. Big Daniel Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant led the charge with a 100% submission rate through to gold medal and winning his spot into the big show - ADCC 2024! Dominick Mejia @dominatormejia had an incredible showing - he performed like a human highlight reel over two days with many dramatic matches and dynamic moves. He won silver in a truly memorable display. Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl won all her matches by submission leading up to final but lost via takedown and negative pull in an action packed final - another amazing performance overall by this outstanding teenage prodigy that will only help direct her training for what is clearly an exceptional future. Oliver Taza won bronze in the ultra competitive 77kg division with many outstanding submissions along the way. Several of the other youngsters had great displays that point to a bright future ahead. Now we will all head back to Austin for preparations for upcoming shows and ultimately West Coast trials. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

They say position before submission, but another very important notion is PRESSURE BEFORE SUBMISSION. Pressure doesn’t have to start with the Classic positional pins of Jiu jitsu - it can be applied from any situation where you have more control over your opponent than he has over you - even in neutral positions. Pressure saps your opponents energy as as energy decreases an opponents will to resist decreases in proportion. When the will is broken, that’s when submissions really have their maximum effect.

Routine: When most people say that a person lives a life of routine they mean it in a mildly derogatory way to describe a boring person. It’s usually seen a bad way to live one’s life. I have no idea what the best way to live one’s life is - but I can tell you this with great confidence - if you want to build skills that can make you great at some activity - you will need to live a life dominated by routine. Building skills is all about consistency over time. Constant big swings and chaos in your life won’t allow this. You need structure in your life that allows you devote large amounts of time daily to skill acquisition with as few interruptions as possible - that means a life of routine. If your vision of life is bound up with learning skills that make you excel at some activity - you’ll need to live a life of routine long enough to develop those skills. Routine may be a dirty word to some, but it’s the path to greatness to those whose future is bound up with skill acquisition.

Learn new material all the time - but don’t forget to maintain your old strengths: There nothing more fun than learning new skills and some time soon the effort spent learning those new skills will pay off for you but understand that time devoted to new skills inevitably means less time working on your old skills and therefore a slight drop in performance. Don’t worry too much about this. Remember that it’s MUCH easier to relearn old skills than it is to learn new skills - so if your old moves decline a little as you seek new directions, a little time spent with them will soon have them back into top form.

The theoretical basis of the submission game in Jiu jitsu can be stated in a single sentence. USE A LARGE PERCENTAGE OF YOUR BODY AGAINST A SMALL PERCENTAGE OF YOUR OPPONENTS BODY TO CONTROL MOVEMENT AND EMPLOY LEVERAGE AGAINST A VULNERABLE POINT SUCH AS A JOINT OR ARTERY THAT WOULD RESULT IN INCAPACITATION OR SUBMISSION. This is everything we do.

Having a clear goal is half the battle: When you know where you want to be - you’ll find ways to get there. When you don’t know where you want to be, there isn’t a map or compass in the world that can help you. So too in jiu jitsu. Have a clear idea in your mind where you want to be at all times and you’ll navigate your way there eventually. When you start adding technical nuance that can help you get there efficiently, so much the better - it’ll make your path much easier and more efficient - but knowing the goal is the most important thing since your innate creativity and ingenuity will eventually figure out a path. Of all the goals in Jiu jitsu the highest is submission, but that’s too broad to be of much use in a match. Better to think in terms of the back and the mount - at all times you should be thinking in terms of getting there from everywhere. This simple insight can give direction to your game that’ll never let you down and ensure that you always grapple with a sense of direction.

How heavy an opponent feels on top of you is largely determined by how far you ca get underneath their center of gravity. If you can get under their center of gravity with your hips you’ll be shocked how you can lift and move people - if you can’t they’re going to feel very heavy very quickly.

Some moves come easily - others, not so much: I’m sure you’ve had the experience of going to learn a given moves that you’ve come to believe is important for your development; but then really struggling to get it to work. Even in drilling it feels clumsy and unnatural compared with other moves you seemingly learned much more easily. Our ability to learn new skills in Jiu jitsu isn’t evenly spread - some seem natural the first time you try them and others feel like a disaster waiting to happen. Don’t get discouraged by this. Remember - you aren’t judged by how good you are at a given move in a given time frame, but rather, by the excellence of the finished product when you’re at your peak with that move - sometimes that’ll be sooner, sometimes later. I’ve seen athletes look completely hopeless at a move when first trying it out but then two years later they were winning championships with it. Don’t be discouraged by a slower rate of learning with some moves - the construction phase doesn’t define you - only the finished product that that

There are many virtues that will help your progress in Jiu jitsu and indeed, in life. Courage, intelligence, creativity etc are all good traits to have that will help you towards your goals - but there is one virtue that stands above all others - PERSISTENCE. In particular, ADAPTIVE persistence. It doesn’t help to be persistent if you’re heading in the wrong direction - that’ll just take you further and further away from your goal. You must be persistent while heading in the correct direction. But how do you know you’re going in the right directions? By observing the results of your work and retaining the work that repeatedly lead to successful outcomes and rejecting or modifying the work that repeatedly lead to unsuccessful outcomes. In time you will adapt your practices in the face of evidence towards success and if you’re persistent with this, good outcomes are inevitable in the long run. Cultivate within yourself the virtue of adaptive persistence and let time work its magic to make you better at what is important to you, whether jiu jitsu or something else.

Make your opponent carry your weight whenever you can. Try also to make sure that when he carries your weight, he does so in a mechanically inefficient way so that he has to use muscles to carry the weight rather than sound structure/stance. This will tire him quickly. If you can make this a habit you’ll quickly fatigue opponents and a tired opponent is much easier to control and submit

Push and pull: Everything in Jiu jitsu starts with getting to grips and starting with a push/pull dynamic that off balances an opponent, breaks his stance and creates reaction which you can capitalize upon. In a closely contested match it will usually be the athlete who best uses the fundamental push/pull dynamic at the onset of every sequence who prevails. It seems like such a simple idea, but it takes real discipline to employ it every single time you come to grips and real skill to use it open the doors to attack upon an opponent who has cast iron defense

Victory in Houston!! Gordon Ryan put on a grappling clinic against the great Brazilian champion Patrick Guadio here in Houston in the main event of WNO Grappling Event tonight. Once again he called the method victory - arm bar (juji gatame) - an incredible feat against such a powerful opponent. Along the way he showcased his pressure passing style and pin transitions/control that make him such a difficult opponent to stop. Also tonight there were three very impressive title matches. Brazilian superstars Mica Galvao and Baby Shark had great wins against very talented opponents and Elisabeth Clay defeated Brianna St Marie in an extremely tightly contested match to win her title. Another great night for grappling - I hope you all enjoyed the show!!

A remarkable performance! South African stand out Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj won double goals at the IBJJF Pan American games today in both his weight category and Absolute division brown belt - every match via submission! It’s difficult enough to win double gold at such a high level event - to do so with a 100% submission rate is truly outstanding! Well done Luke! 🇿🇦🇺🇸🇿🇦

If you can get your hips under your opponents hips you can lift and move him at will. Practice the skill of lowering level and fitting your hips under his and you’ll be able to lift and move even very heavy people

Dual threats: We always talk about position and submission as though it is either/or; but in truth at the higher levels it’s the simultaneous threat of both together that usually creates the breakthrough you seek. When you’re behind an opponent and want to secure scoring position - threaten the strangle - your opponent will become forgetful of defending the rear mount when he’s battling for his life against submission and you’ll likely score. When you can get the strangle set in place - threaten the position - make him fight against the placement of your hooks, he’ll become forgetful of the strangle danger as he becomes preoccupied with defending rear mount, and that’s when you’ll sink the strangle. Two threats - attack with one will make any opponent forgetful of the other - and that’s when you’ll get your goal

Getting ready: This Sunday night in Houston Texas, Gordon Ryan will take in the formidable Brazilian world champion grappler Patrick Gaudio at the WNO Grappling event on @flograppling These two titans met before in an epic match at the IBJJF No Gi World Championships - it was a very tightly contested affair - Mr Guadio fought brilliantly that day and with limited time left on the clock he was ahead on points and seemingly heading towards a dramatic victory - with less than a minute left, Gordon Ryan turned it around and scored just enough in the closing seconds to take a very narrow win! Now the two will meet again, this time in a very different rule set and a longer match. Both athletes have changed a lot since their last meeting so there is definitely an element of the unknown going into this. Mr Ryan is coming back after some serious relapses with his stomach issues but has trained well in preparation for what should be a great rematch. Mr Guadio is a powerfully built athlete with legendary strength and explosiveness- he used that very well in the last match to explode up from bottom position and score on Mr Ryan - something very few of his opponents have been able to do. There are many other great great matches on that night also - it feature two mini tournaments at 170 and 155 pounds featuring some of the best competitors in the world - this should be a great show!

Starting up in Boston: My journey into instructional videos at BJJ Fanatics was helped immensely by my good friend and student, Placido Santos @placisantos who proved to be an outstanding demonstration partner (uke) and then student. If ever there was positive proof that instructionals can have a greatly beneficial effect on your game it was this young man. He went from a raw beginner to an excellent competitor and teacher in a very short time working on and from the videos we made together. As his skill level climbed he made regular trips to NYC to train with the squad in the basement, then Puerto Rico and now Austin Texas. The proof of his progress came at the last US ADCC trials where he was one of the outstanding athletes. Now Placido has made his jiu jitsu dreams a reality by opening his own school in the Boston/Westborough area! It is called @5stonesjiujitsu I taught a seminar in Puerto Rico just after the squad broke up to help out the little local school that had hosted us for the year - Placido wowed the local Jiu Jitsu crowd with the excellence of his teaching - I was extremely proud of his performance. If you want to learn modern jiu jitsu in the Boston/Westborough area with superb attention to detail and depth of knowledge - this is the place you want to go! Check it out - I always do when I’m there 🇺🇸🇵🇷

Today we had the honor of working alongside one of the greatest athletes in the history of the sport - the great Rodolfo Viera @rodolfovieira89 This man was a truly dominant force in both gi and no gi Jiu jitsu - winning both ADCC gold and multiple times IBJJF World Championships. It wasn’t just his record that made him a legend, it was the way he won that captured everyone’s attention - he was a peerless pressure fighter who could crush any guard and then work through his inescapable pins to submission. Now his primary focus is MMA but he kindly worked with the squad today in grappling and showed everyone he still has his skills! In addition to being a great athlete, he is also a real gentleman - it’s a true honor to have him here for a week

Direction of force: When it comes time to apply breaking pressure on a good one of the most important factors is DIRECTION OF FORCE. It easy to focus primarily on GENERATION of force ie trying to generate as much force as possible. That’s good, but lots of force applied in the wrong directions won’t do much good. Focus more on the most efficient DIRECTION to apply whatever force you can generate - that’s what usually gets the most decisive results.

All reversals and sweeps score the same: In most grappling sports there are rewards for amplitude when performing takedowns - the bigger the takedown - the more you score. In Jiu jitsu takedowns and guard sweeps, there is no reward for amplitude - they all score the same two points regardless of their form. You’re rewarded only for the fact that you went from bottom position to top position. So even a scrappy, ugly, stop-start reversal will score the same as a beautiful classical sweep. Keep this in mind at all times, because often there will be opportunities to simply come up from bottom and tackle an opponent or go behind them, or even just rush them down after a failed initial sweep attempt. Again, there only has to be a reversal of top and bottom position to get a score - so anything that does that is a win no matter what it looks like.

Finding balance: When you look at world championships competitions it’s often quite a shock to see how incredibly resistant the top athletes are to any type of sweep attempts. They just seem to be able to hang suspended in air, cartwheel, handstand and flip like cats back on to their base and prevent a score. Then the next time you’re in the gym and someone gets a sweep on you, you try to resist and fall like a one legged drunk. How does one develop that level of balance? Remember when you first learned to ride a bicycle? Did you have perfect balance when you started? No - you feel many times. Friend and family offered advice but what ultimately gave you the ability to ride in balance was persistence. The same is true of any balance based activity - skateboarding, skiing, surfing, ice skating etc. Theoretical advice can help to a degree but at the end of the day there are some ineffable elements where you simply have to go out and do the task long enough to be able to perform. As always, start small and build over time. Put yourself in a sweep applied with low to moderate force and learn to ride it. At first you’ll fall plenty of times - just like you did on your front lawn when you were a kid. Hang in there and soon enough you’ll be able to resist a sweep long enough to go into an effective counter!

You step on the mat alone: In Jiu jitsu and in life - you’re always surrounded by people offering advice and ideas - that’s fine. Most of the time they have good intentions and sometimes the advice is very helpful. Understand however, that it’s you and not them who has to do your work so make sure it’s your own inner voice that does most of the talking in your pre match time rather than the voices coming from the outside. You’ve got a skill set and a game plan based upon your body type and personality that’s been developing a long time - don’t compromise it by following commands from other personalities and body types that conflict with what you’ve built. Always seek to express who YOU are rather than other peoples conceptions of who you might be.

Work your way to a position rather than jump to a position: Superior position is always one of the major goals of the sport. As such many people don’t care too much how they get there so long as they get to the goal - but HOW you get there is important for your long term development. You want to WORK your way to a position - systematically working from grip to grip, hold to hold - your opponent under tight control throughout the movement. That’s not to say that you can’t have success jumping from one position to another - you definitely can - but it’s difficult to do this reliably and consistently as opponents will feel the space and lightness as you transition from one position to another and escape/counter in the transition. Long term it’s better to exert as much control in the transition as possible - that way you’ll be successful for a long time even when opponents know what you’re trying to do

This is a game where the addition of a single relevant detail can take your performance of a given move from mediocre to highly effective in a short time frame - so study hard! Many people are willing to work very hard physically but shy away from mental study. Hard physical work is great but much better when complimented by hard thinking about how to improve performance through more refined technique.

Gaining prior advantage: Jiu jitsu is founded upon the principle of advantage - WHENEVER POSSIBLE: PRIOR TO LAUNCHING AN ATTACK - BEGIN BY GAINING SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE THAT MAKES THAT ATTACK MORE LIKELY TO SUCCEED. There are many forms of prior advantage - you can break an opponents balance, break his stance, distract him, surprise him - the list is long. One of the best when it comes to sweeps and takedowns is to create an advantage by having your two legs on the ground to provide base, mobility and drive while you take one of your opponents legs off the ground so that he has substantially less base, mobility and drive than you do. This makes the chance of a successfully completed sweep or takedown far higher than you fight in an equal footing. Whichever method you select, begin by seeking prior advantage of some type any time you can - it always makes your task a little easier

Luke Griffith victorious in Poland! Outstanding South African jiu jitsu student Luke Griffith punched his ticket to the biggest show in grappling today at the European ADCC trials in Poland. Luke won the under 99kg division with a 100% submission rate - incredible for such a high level tournament. He has trained so diligently over the last year and despite ups and downs with injuries he came through today in outstanding style and guarantee his place in Las Vegas ADCC IN 2024. Daniel Manasoiu and Oliver Taza both won silver in their divisions and will go the next trials with a lot of confidence given the strength of their performances and the high submission/dominance they showed prior to finals. Congratulations Luke - it’s great also to see African jiu jitsu getting stronger and the growing internationalization of the sport!

Attack his stance first - everything else second: The strength of an opponents defense is directly proportional to the strength/integrity of his stance. The better the stance, the stronger his defense. Your goal then, is to break his stance prior to attacking. Understand that a good opponent will recover quickly whenever his stance is compromised, so once you’ve broken it - don’t procrastinate - attack! Push and pull are always the basis of attacking an opponents stance - all the major methods fall into those two categories - add the notion of tripping an opponent while pushing and pulling and you will be able to disrupt even a very strong stance. Make it your priority every time you’re about to attack and those attacks of yours will be much more successful!

If it ain’t tight - it ain’t right: The first goal when applying submission hold is to immobilize your opponent. It’s already difficult enough to apply a lock, don’t make it more so by trying to apply it on a wildly twisting and turning opponent. Use the tightness of your hold to immobilize him. Once immobilized the next problem becomes slippage. You will need to set a lever and fulcrum in order to break your opponent. If he begins slipping off the fulcrum this will become impossible. What make immobilization possible and slippage impossible is PHYSICAL TIGHTNESS. You will need a high degree of isometric tension around your opponents limb. Learning to set that tension and position yourself appropriately is a big part of your future success or failure. You learn this first in passive drilling. Don’t just repeatedly perform the move - with each repetition try to find the optimal body position that maximizes control and minimizes slippage whilst feeling for a sufficient degree of isometric muscular tension that does the job without exhausting you. Finding that physical and mechanical tightness is the key to progress in submission holds.

Your power is in your hips and legs: We humans are physically a rather feeble bunch compared with the other major mammals on this planet. One thing we do have going for us however, is the power of the hips. Your hips and legs are by far the strongest way to generate power and endurance that we have available - so it’s up to you to ensure that you make them the focus of your entire game. See you arms as just a means of connecting yourself to an opponent - but the engine room of the body is downstairs in the hips and legs. Let this simple truth guide all your training, whether it be jiu jitsu or your strength and endurance training.

Isolating limb: One of the core concepts of Jiu jitsu is that of attacking a vulnerable point of an opponents body with a larger percentage of your physical resources than he can muster with his physical resources. This means isolating a single limb and locking it with a substantial part of your body - preferably the legs and hips. Pinning an opposition good, but what will make you great is the action of going beyond pinning the torso and isolating a limb so that you get to the greatest goal of submission. Constantly look for opportunities to isolate a limb and surround it with your legs and hips - this is the path to ideal Jiu jitsu

Step on the mat with a purpose: Most people step on the mat to train with a sense of “come what may.” They approach with a reactive mind and just follow the action of the session. This is fine for those days you’re a little tired or distracted or just plain out of ideas - but the majority of your training sessions you want to have a proactive mindset where you approach the mat with a plan of what you want to achieve. This gives direction to your training session and almost always results in more work being done, more being learned and a clear idea of what you need to improve on tomorrow. Don’t step on the mat with your body first - lead with your mind prior to the workout and you’ll have a stronger sense of direction

Precision: The more precise you are with your mechanics the more effective your moves will be when applied with whatever strength you have. However, we have to be realistic. The more stress and chaos we are subject to in sparring and competition the harder it will be to maintain the ideal of perfect mechanics. Don’t despair. You don’t have to be perfect in application - just good enough to get the job done. Your goal in drilling is to get as close to perfection as you can. Your goal in sparring is to be good enough to get the result you seek. The more precise you are in drilling, the more there will be a carryover effect into your sparring that increases your precision; but be realistic, it’ll never be a perfect, pretty and refined as drilling so don’t be upset if your game feels a little messy and klutzy compared with your drills.

Victory in Chicago! The juniors had a great day at the big ADCC Open event in Chicago today. Daniel Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant won double gold to make an incredible ten gold medals at ADCC Open events this year. Almost allmatches by way of submission. Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl won double gold in the adult division in both weight and Absolute - all matches by submission in another incredible performance by the emerging 16 year old star. Teenage phenom Trinity Pun @trinitypunbjj won gold in adult weight division with another outstanding performance along with several other medals from their talented teammates. It’s great seeing these ADCC Open events become so successful - they offer athletes invaluable experience in the ADCC rule set as they work towards their dreams and goals. Congratulations to these outstanding youngsters!

The first battle is always inside your own mind: Whenever we are in a critical situation, whether it’s one where we’re are close to losing or close to winning your mind will naturally start to get excited. Excitement can often degenerate into panic in bad situations and tunnel vision in good situations. You always do your best work in a state of relative calm - jiu jitsu is no exception. When you get into a situation that evokes fear or excitement - win the battle to maintain calm inside your head so that you have a better chance to win the battle on the mat!

Surprise: of all the elements that can make for a successful entry into a move - surprise may be the best. There is a reason why sucker punches are the preferred weapon of street thugs - unexpected blows are always the most devastating. So too with jiu jitsu - if you can achieve a degree of surprise the likelihood of you getting a breakthrough are much greater. There is a problem however - how can you possibly achieve a degree of surprise in a sport where everyone knows all the main moves? Good question - you won’t surprise opponents with your MOVES - you’ll surprise them with the SET UPS. Try always to create an indirect approach to moves where you make an opponent believe you are going for one thing and attack with another. THE BETTER YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE AWARENESS THE MORE YOU WILL NEED TO ATTACK WITH AN INDIRECT APPROACH. Next time you’re sparring make an effort to perform a pseudo move prior to your real move. Divide your attack into false first movement and a second real movement - this is how you can preserve surprise in a world where most of the options are already known to both parties

Keep your knees between you and your opponent: The essence of bottom position in Jiu jitsu is to use your legs as a barrier between you and your opponent. This is what enables smaller, weaker people to wear down and defeat bigger, stronger people - for the legs of a small person are stronger than the arms of a bigger person. Your first instinct in this game when underneath opponents must always be to get your feet knees and hips between you and the other guy. Whenever you’re in trouble - retract your knees to chest and face your opponent!

am very pleased to announce the release of my latest instructional video AGELESS JIU JITSU: WINNING WHEN YOU’RE OLDER OR LESS ATHLETIC: TOP GAME GI This is the last of the series designed to cover top game in the gi for players who feel age or lack of athletic background is a factor in how they play jiu jitsu but want to increase their effectiveness. It gives a roadmap of technique selection and tactics to allow athletes with mobility issues to be highly effective against younger, faster and more mobile opponents. The gi is an incredible tool to bind up and control opponents and used well it can totally alter a mobility asymmetry between two athletes. As always the ideal is control that leads to submission and the submissions selected take advantage of the collars that function like a noose around an opponent’s neck at all times - whoever puts himself in a position to access that noose first is just a step away from victory. If you feel like this can help your game - check it out! On sale today at BJJ Fanatics. Link in my Instagram story and bio

Know thyself: Knowing what you’re good at is a key to victory; knowing what you’re not good at is a key to avoiding defeat. Knowing both is the key to continual progress over time in the training room. Accurately evaluating yourself is not easy - we know ourselves mostly through the words of others rather than self analysis but remember that others are usually either indifferent or have their own agenda when evaluating you. Learn to judge yourself through results rather than words - it’s always more honest.

Improving yourself: The path to excellence in all fields of life is skill acquisition. More than anything else it is your skill level in your chosen field that will determine how far you go. There are two paths to go about this. The first is to improve the skills you already have. The second is to acquire new skills. The first option is easier and far less time consuming. In general it’s much easier to improve what you’re already good at than to learn something totally new - so if you’re looking for fast results - this is the path to take. However, there are diminishing returns on this path. At some point the improvements become smaller and smaller as you try to wring more and more out of the move. At some point the improvements become so minor that a plateau is reached. For long term progress, you have to start incorporating new skills. It can be frustrating at first, as initial progress can be slow, but this is the only way to ensure long term growth. At any given time you should be walking both paths. Divide your short term projects around improving existing skills and your long term projects around acquiring new skills - this way you’ll always be pushing onward and upward

Victory in Florida! Giancarlo Bodoni had an outstanding performance last night in Fort Meyers, Florida last night in @bluecollarfc professional grappling event. The grappling invitational featured a truly outstanding field of all ADCC athletes so it really was the best athletes scrapping it out for a $25,000 prize. The field of athletes was incredible - there wasn’t a single easy match in the eight man bracket. Roberto Jimenez, Vagner Rocha, Elder Cruz, Roosevelt Sousa, Jay - Rod, Andy Varela are all ADCC trials winners and world championships veterans - at the end of the night it was Giancarlo who battled his way to the win! Another amazing performance from this outstanding athlete!! Now he travels to England for an absolute tournament featuring the best European, American and Brazilian grapplers - Giancarlo showing that he is one of the hardest working athletes in the game as well as one of the most successful!

Victory in Las Vegas! Nicholas Meregali performed one of the most impressive feats I have seen in Grappling tonight in Las Vegas. Two weeks ago he defeated the great double ADCC champion Kaynan Duarte - the man most people believe is the greatest no gi grappler on the plant outside of Gordon Ryan. Tonight he defeated the man most people believe is the best active gi grappler on the planet Victor Hugo. To defeat two such great champions in two weeks in two very different grappling styles is truly impressive. Both Mr Meregali and Mr Hugo showed they were a level above the rest of the field by quickly submitting both their first two world class opponents. The final was a tense tactical affair with Mr Meregali winning via sweep and subsequent top control - very impressive indeed especially given that he was considerably outweighed by his rival. What an amazing performance by this great athlete. In an age of specialists he is showing it’s still possible to beat the best back to back gi and no gi!

Thank you! Thanks so much to all the folks who came to support Marcelo Garcia last night at Xtreme Couture in Las Vegas prior to IBJJF World Masters. Over eighty people attended and will give Mr Garcia great boost as he recovers from cancer surgery over the next six months. Thank you all so much. It was a pleasure working with @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nicholasmeregali and @helenajiujitsugirl and watching them do such an outstanding job teaching. It was an honor to be part of such a great cause and for such a great man. Tomorrow Nicholas and Helena compete in what has become one of the biggest events of the year - there are also some really great grappling super matches in addition to the main event Grand Prix - keep your eyes on this one!

The only human super power - legs and hips: We humans are generally rather feeble creatures in comparison with the other mammals, but one thing we’ve got going for us when it comes to generating physical force is our hips. The rotation of your hips can create real force, add to this the strength and endurance of your legs and even the feeblest can generate a surprising amount of force. As raw beginners, Instinct makes us grapple with our hands and arms, but training will change this and make you grapple with your feet, legs and hips - a far superior methodology. The earlier you make the switch from predominantly upper body to predominantly lower body grappling, the faster you’ll progress. There aren’t many things you can truly trust in life, but your feet, legs and hips are three things that you can put all your grappling faith in

When your opponent knows the same moves you know and also knows the defenses to those moves - the single best way to get them to work is to distract him before the attack with an attack on his balance and stance. It’s very hard to break through well organized defenses, but if you create chaos first by attacking his balance you’ll soon find it’s much easier to breach a disorganized defense.

Seminar for Marcelo Garcia in Las Vegas: One of the greatest Jiu jitsu athletes of all time, Marcelo Garcia - four time ADCC champion and multi time IBJJF champion was recently diagnosed with stomach cancer and has undergone what appears to be a successful treatment. On Wednesday August 30 in Las Vegas his great friend and training partner Bernardo Faria has organized a super seminar to help raise money for post treatment expenses and related medical costs. The seminar will feature Bernardo, Gordon Ryan, Nicholas Meregali and myself. One hundred percent of money raised will go directly to Mr Garcia and his family. Marcelo Garcia gained his fame on the mats with many legendary performances and his dedication to the ideal of Jiu jitsu - winning by submission and fearlessly taking on bigger opponents in the absolute division. He inspired an entire generation of Jiu Jitsu athletes and massively helped the rise of No gi Jiu jitsu competition while also dominating traditional gi competition. He was more than a great competitor, he was the ideal of a true gentleman off the mats while a killer on the mats. In the tribalistic and fractured world of Jiu jitsu where often everyone sees anyone else from another school or another point of view as an enemy, he was one of the few who was loved and revered by all. It’s an honor to help in a small way at this seminar and try to help such a great man recover from yet another win against a the most formidable enemy we can ever face. The seminar will be before the Masters World Championships in Las Vegas - if you’re in town and want to support a great man and a great cause - come by and participate! Seminar will be no gi Jiu jitsu - seminar poster in my Instagram story for details

Giving your best: We tend to think “giving your best effort” in Jiu jitsu means giving your best PHYSICAL effort. Indeed, we usually equate the degree to which we are physically spent at the end of the workout as the basis of the value of the workout. There certainly is virtue in regular hard physical work, but don’t think it ends there. As the old saying goes, the hardest work is hard thinking. After your physical work you must do your mental work. Study is work. Indeed it is work just as important as your physical work on the mats. You must engage in study of yourself, techniques and great athletes. Mental study reveals the lessons of todays physical work and sets the agenda for tomorrow’s physical work. Hard physical work without study is like a strong but blind man trying to work on a task, only study gives your physical work the vision required to get efficiently to your goals

Breathing: One of the most fundamental operations of the human body is breathing. When breathing gets interrupted it will elicit reactions from an opponent in seconds. When you’re behind someone you can attack their breathing directly at the nostrils and mouth by simply cupping them with your hand; and you can attack their breathing indirectly by locking a body triangle tight around the waist in ways that compress the diaphragm. In the intensity of a match where athletes are short on breath at all times, even a small interruption to breathing cycles can be catastrophic. Learning to attack your opponents breathing is thus a big part of creating physical pressure that melts an opponent’s resolve and wins wars of attrition. It can create reactions that open up even the toughest defenses and leads to other, cleaner forms of submission

In an age of specialists: The game of Jiu jitsu has divided rather strongly into gi and no gi in the last decade, with most athletes making a choice to specialize in one or the other. Nicholas Meregali shocked the Jiu jitsu world just a couple of weeks ago by defeating the man most people considered the second best no gi grappler in the world, Kaynan Duarte in the most decisive way possible. Now he will compete just three weeks later in the @IBJJF IBJJF Grand Prix in Las Vegas in arguably the toughest gi competition of the year! Entered already are the great athletes, Victor Hugo, who will go in as favorite based on his outstanding performances earlier this year, Gabriel Rocha, Felipe Andrew, Gutemberg Peirera, Francisco Lonand others. This is a truly outstanding field. It will be a real challenge for Mr Meregali to try to win against the very best in both gi and no gi competition in such a short time frame. Ultimately we are all measured largely by the degree of difficulty of the challenges we take on - Mr Meregali has taken on one of the toughest challenges in grappling today - an all rounder in the age of specialists

Continuity: One of the great features of most elite Jiu jitsu players games is continuity. It seems that no matter where the action goes - standing, ground, top or bottom - there is no discernible break in their game - they just flow from scenario to scenario without pause. This is crucial to success as it ensures that they can maintain pressure against an opponent for the full duration of a match without interruption. If you have an opponent who knows they can relieve pressure by taking you into a position or scenario where you have noticeably less skill, he will definitely take the match there whenever he needs to take a break from the action and get some active rest. When you have continuity in your game across all the major scenarios this isn’t possible. You don’t need a vast array of moves to exhibit competence across the whole spectrum of scenarios in Jiu jitsu. Initially just a few high percentage moves will get you good results. Start mapping out the areas of your game where you have very limited skills and filling them in until you start to feel continuity across the whole game - you’ll soon feel the benefits in matches!

Speed: Speed is a wonderful attribute in most combat sports but in a predominantly ground grappling sport like jiu jitsu speed becomes a little more nuanced for the simple reason that you usually can’t really move very quickly on the floor. Rather than try to make yourself faster - take a different approach - instead of trying to make yourself faster focus on making your opponent slower. Remember - there are always TWO ways to win a race. You can make yourself faster or you can make the other guy slower. In truth, it is the second option that is generally preferable in Jiu jitsu. Speed is largely determined by genetics and decreases with age. Slowing someone down through grip and positioning is determined by skill and is the way of longevity. There are some scenarios in Jiu jitsu where speed is an important asset - many takedowns in standing position, toreando passing are good examples. However, if you have close body contact with an opponent on the floor, the ability to slow the other fellow down will typically prove more important than the ability to speed yourself up

Where you’re strong and where you’re weak: As long as your elbows are tight to your torso and pointing down towards your hips, your arms will feel very strong - even if you aren’t normally considered a strong person. As soon as your elbows are taken out of position over your shoulders and away from the torso and pointing away from the hips - you will feel weak even if normally you’re considered a very strong person. What we call strength on the mat is mostly due to stance and positioning. What we perceive as weakness is most due to failures or imperfections in stance and positioning. The goal in Jiu jitsu then, is always to break an opponent’s stance and take them out of position so that knees and elbows are extended away from the torso and neck turned or tilted; whilst at the same time preserving your own stance and positioning. Raw strength is a good thing, but it can be greatly increased by stance and positioning and greatly decreased by the destruction of these

The internationalization of grappling: Twenty five years ago grappling was a sport completely dominated by one country - Brazil. As time passed The United States became a powerhouse with many outstanding athletes and it started to become a two country sport. Recently however, Australia, Canada, England, Poland and other nations have become very strong and putting out world beaters. Today at the @aiga.global grappling event in Kazakstan the new expansion of talent and involvement was dramatically illustrated when the Eastern European team Universal Fight defeated a very talented team comprised of ADCC standouts 4-3. This is a remarkable achievement. It’s impressive to win even a single match against a team of highly ranked ADCC athletes - to win a team event shows that you have talent in depth. Of the ADCC athletes Giancarlo Bodoni, Cole Abate and Dante Leon were able to win and do so via submission, but four of the Universal Athletes were able to win via points against very talented Jiu jitsu athletes and showed the world very clearly that they have arrived and are ready to compete at the highest levels. This internationalization of grappling is a very good and healthy thing for the development of the sport. It ensure the future growth of grappling both in terms of following and technical development. Each nation tends to build its own unique strengths into their game and force adaptations and evolutions that spur new growth and development among all competitors. Congratulations to Universal Fight on an excellent performance today and to @aiga.global for giving the athletes an excellent venue to show their skills

Daniel Manasoiu wins ADCC Open in Vancouver: Big Dan @jiujitsugiant continued his impressive run at the ADCC Open events of 2023 winning his eighth gold medal with another double gold in heavyweight and absolute divisions with almost all wins via submission. It’s great to see these events giving young athletes the chance to develop experience in the ADCC rule set in preparation for the real thing at ADCC trials coming up over the next few months. Well done Dan!!

Symmetry: do you need to be able to perform your major moves on both sides of your body with equal skill? This is a question I’m often asked. The human body itself is asymmetrical. Almost everyone is either right handed or left handed and we heavily favor one side. Your jiu jitsu will inevitably reflect this fundamental fact. Most great champions are considerably better at performing their favorite moves on one side than the other. Indeed, I would go further and say that in most cases it’s better for most people to focus mostly on their preferred side for their major offensive moves so that they can get the training volume to create a truly strong move that will be effective at championship level. I’d rather have a world beating right hand Guillotine and no left hand Guillotine than an average Guillotine on both sides. In some cases, especially defensive moves, you might need symmetry. For example a side elbow escape. You never know which side of the body your opponent will pin you so shouldn’t you be equally good on both sides? Even here I would argue that side symmetry is required but that move symmetry is not required. For example, after my hip replacement I still had an acceptable right side elbow escape but my left side elbow escape dropped to truly feeble levels. However, I compensated by switching focus to left side high leg escape which I could still perform at adequate levels of competence. In this way I was symmetrical in the POSITION , but not with MOVES. This is the most natural and effective way for most athletes to develop over time.

Jiu jitsu super stars vs Team Khabib! There is a fascinating grappling competition coming up this weekend in Kazakstan at the @aiga.global grappling show. Teams from Dagestan and China will face off against an elite Jiu jitsu team chosen by ADCC head @mojassim80 His choice of athletes is very impressive! The team features Giancarlo Bodoni and Luke Griffith from New Wave, Izaak Michell, Dante Leon, Cole Abate, Fabricio Andrey, Gabriel Sousa, Zach Kaina and John Hansen! It’s an extraordinary team with tremendous talent in every aspect of Jiu Jitsu and coming from very different gyms with different styles but working as a team against the very impressive Eastern European grappling styles! Match formats are unusual - three five minute rounds where athletes have to win a majority of rounds to win or submission at any time wins outright. Being In Kazakstan it’s being contested at altitude so endurance will be a big part of it! The rules are an interesting blend of ADCC and IBJJF scoring which will benefit the wrestling heavy Eastern European style. This should be very interesting! I like the idea of a Jiu jitsu super team with very different backgrounds coming together in a far off location and a unique rule set against very tough opposition. The event will be shown on @flograppling and should be a great show!

Height: Winning a battle for height will often prove to be of the greatest importance in certain situations in Jiu jitsu. Sometimes you win by getting higher and on top of an opponent - sometimes you win by getting lower and underneath the center of gravity of an opponent - which one you choose will be dependent on what you’re trying to achieve and what your opponent presents to you. What won’t change however, is the need to threaten both against good opponents. Fake going high and then dive underneath - or threaten going under and then quickly pop up on top. It’s the dual threat that always does best!!

As long as you’ve got a foot and leg between you and your opponent you’ve got a line of defense and counter offense: Sometimes you feel your opponent has gotten a move on you and you’ll have to concede a score. Be confident that as long as you’ve got a leg between you then you can use it to elevate and opponent, create and maintain space, establish some degree of control through connection and use this to first stop an opponent and even counter them. Sometimes what seems like a tenuous line of defense can turn out to be surprisingly effective!

Seeing progress: One of the hardest things about jiu jitsu is the feeling that you aren’t making progress despite all your efforts in training. It’s natural to feel this way - you train in a room with other students who are learning the same moves you are and who are familiar with your game. As you progress they also progress at a similar rate and in similar directions since you’re all products of the same room. Just as a car on the highway next to you traveling at the same speed as you are appears stationary from your viewpoint even though you’re both moving forward very fast, so too your progress can seem stationary when everyone else is moving at roughly the same speed as you. Don’t despair - the only times you go backwards in Jiu jitsu is when you don’t train at all for extended periods of time. It’s damn near impossible to train regularly with commitment and not make solid forward progress. While it’s true that not everyone progresses at the same speed and for some athletes in some training programs it’s possible to make remarkable progress in a relatively short time, don’t worry too much about your learning rate vs their learning rate. Remember that’s anyone’s progress can be derailed by unforeseen issues, injuries or impediments. HOW FAST YOU PROGRESS IS NOT NEARLY AS IMPORTANT AS HOW LONG YOU PROGRESS. Don’t despair over rate of progress - take heart in the knowledge that if you train longer and more consistently you’ll overtake all those who started faster.

Pressure over time: Jiu jitsu is the art of control that leads to submission. Submission of course, comes from the application of submission holds - but the truth is what really makes the submission holds work in practice is pressure over time that breaks down an opponents mental will to resist and physical ability to resist through fatigue. It is in the context of PRESSURE OVER TIME that submission holds have their greatest and most consistent effect at the highest levels. When you are engaged with someone much lower in level than yourself, or if you catch an opponent by surprise, the submission hold itself is enough for victory, but in a tough bout against an opponent who knows how to defend himself it will be the precursor of pressure that makes the submission hold work

Victory in Austin!! The New Wave team had an outstanding performance here in Austin Texas at the WNO grappling event hosted by @flograppling Teenage phenom @helenajiujitsugirl Helena Crevar won via heel hook vs talented Australian Healy Dayan. Oliver Taza @tazagarami continued his impressive form winning a hard fought match against a rival from a higher weight division who had defeated him twice in the past. In the main event Nicholas Meregali @nicholasmeregali took on the great two time ADCC champion Kaynan Duarte of ATOS. It was truly a clash of titans. We have always considered ATOS our toughest rivals and Kaynan one of the Uber elite grapplers of the world. After a strong early offensive Mr Duarte won the initial exchanges but Mr Meregali came back strong and ultimately took down, passed mounted and finished with a superbly applied kata gatame stranglehold for an epic victory. This was truly one of the most impressive performances of Nicholas Meregali’s career and showed the incredible progress he has made in no gi Jiu jitsu in a very short time. To do this against such a great man as Mr Duarte was truly impressive. There were many other great performances tonight with very impressive victories to grappling legends Ffion Davies, Dante Leon, Felipe Pena and Nicky Ryan to round out a truly great night of grappling! I had the pleasure of seeing my sensei Renzo Gracie @renzograciebjj who was in Austin for the show - it was wonderful seeing him again - thank you always Renzo for your guidance over the years and the great start you gave me and all your students. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Counting down: Tomorrow night in Austin Texas @flograppling will host a fantastic night of grappling. Headlining the event will be a bout between two jiu jitsu icons - Kaynan Duarte and Nicholas Meregali. This will be their first no gi encounter. Mr Meregali is a pyrotechnical submission hunter - one of the best in the sports history - but Mr Duarte is one of the best athletes in the sports history and a superb tactician who has two ADCC gold medals to prove it - this will be a great match! Teenage phenom Helena Crevar will take on exciting Australian grappling prospect Healy Dayan a student of Australian grappling legend Lachlan Giles who now trains at B team - she has shown a very strong positional game in competition here in the US so this match should be excellent! Oliver Taza will take on Sebastian Rodriguez on short notice. Oliver has been on fire in ADCC Open competition and will bring that good form to the arena tomorrow. There are many other great matches on the card featuring legends like Felipe Pena, Nicky Ryan and Dante Leon - keep your eyes on this one - it will be 🔥🔥🔥

The pin is a means to an end - not the end itself: In grappling pinning is a truly crucial skill. Learning to immobilize opponents is one of the keys to finishing them. Without immobilizing first it’s very hard to consistently enter into submissions. However, don’t stop at immobilization - that’s the path but it’s not the destination - the destination is submission. Make sure when you’re practicing that you always seek to go beyond holding opponents down and go into finishing scenarios. This can be frustrating at first, since the extra movement almost always results in a diminishing of your control and opponents will often slip out of the pin. You have to get past this hurdle and learn to take the risk of extra movement to get the highest reward

Focus vs myopia: When you start to enter a given move in jiu jitsu, there is a natural tendency to focus everything on the execution of that move. This is not a bad thing - you’ll need mental and physical focus to get it to work against a strongly resisting opponent. However, don’t let your focus degenerate into myopia where you can’t see past the the move you’re trying to execute. Remember always that against skilled resistance you’ll most likely need a follow up move or two. So even as your focused on that initial attack, keep a little reserve for a potential follow up just in case the first move doesn’t get completed.

Impressive day in Arizona!! Yesterday in Arizona the ADCC Open event was held with over one thousand competitors showing up for what is fast becoming the most popular no gi competition circuit. The juniors went out in force under the experienced direction of Oliver Taza @tazagarami Big Daniel Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant had another outstanding performance winning double gold yet again as the stand out athlete of the event. He had nine matches and won all but one via submission. Oliver Taza won gold in his division with a superb display of leg locking skill. Hannah Griffith @hxnnah_jade won gold as did teenage phenom Landon Elmore @landonelmorebjj In addition Abraham, Davis Asare,
Trinity Pun and Reese LaFever all won bronze for a performance that won New Wave the best team trophy once again at ADCC Open. I am delighted to see the success of these ADCC Open events as they give developing athletes from across the nation a great venue to ready themselves for the ADCC World Championships - the most most prestigious event in grappling - and to gain very valuable experience in this rule set. Congratulations to everyone who got to the podium!!

Isolation: Submission is based around the notion of isolation. Your goal is to isolate one limb from the other (right leg from left leg, left arm from right arm) and then from the torso. Left on its own, a single isolated limb is easily overcome. The further a limb is taken away from the torso and from its opposite limb - the weaker it becomes. This is how stronger opponents can be defeated by weaker opponents. If you can consistently pick and isolate a limb and get it extended out and away from the torso, victory via submission will often come your way

Offensive asymmetry is the goal: One of the fundamental goals of Jiu jitsu is to create offensive asymmetry, that is, to put yourself in positions where you can attack your opponent much more readily and in more powerful fashion than he can attack you. So for example, in a self defense fighting situation getting mounted on an adversary will allow you to strike with fists and elbows much more effectively than an opponent underneath you can strike back. In a grappling situation the rear mount/back creates the greatest asymmetry. Once you get behind someone all your submission attacks become significantly easier whilst an opponent is left with only a few low percentage offensive options and is essentially one hundred percent defensive while you are one hundred percent offensive - this should always be your goal

In grappling there is definitely some truth to the adage that you should take your time when your winning and move with speed when you’re losing. Of course no one sentence will cover all the scenarios you’ll find yourself in - but it’s a solid general rule to follow

It’s been a pleasure hosting the very talented Jacob Couch @thehillbillyhammer who has been training with us the last two weeks in preparation for the upcoming Arizona ADCC Open this weekend. Everyone knows how good this fellow is at Jiu jitsu - we learned this week he’s also a great character and one of the funniest people to have in the room. My favorite story was when he convinced the people at @flograppling that as a hillbilly he is unable to read or write and therefore couldn’t sign a contract - I don’t know what’s better - the fact that he said it or the fact that they believed it! 😂😂😂 It was great having him here - now the competition is getting close so everyone will be heading to Arizona for what should be another great ADCC event with over a thousand competitors signed up!

If you can make an opponent stumble you can take him down: Takedowns on an opponent in good stance are never easy. Takedowns on an opponent stumbling out of balance due to some preliminary attack are much easier by comparison. Creating a stumble can be done many ways but one of the best is the use of your feet - ashi waza - just as stepping into a curb mid step will trip and stumble you in everyday life, so too a well placed/timed foot will cause you to stumble. If you can then time a takedown in the midst of a stumble what previously seemed very difficult can now become surprisingly easy

The real test of match intensity control is when you’re in trouble: You’ll often hear me advocating a fairly relaxed demeanor when engaged in a grappling match, even a very high intensity one. Anyone can be relaxed and calm when they’re winning and in good position - the real test comes when your in trouble and your opponent is attacking well and has you under pressure and close to scoring or even submitting you - THAT’S when you’ll see if you can control your physical intensity levels well. We all have a natural tendency to tighten up and over exert ourselves when we feel a threat, and more threatened we feel the worse it gets. Learning to relax so you don’t burn out and can make good decisions in these situations is a good differentiator between average and very good athletes. Next time you’re in trouble on the mats see how calm and relaxed you can be rather than just trying to instinctively explode out of everything - it’s an attribute that’ll pay big dividends the higher you go in the sport.

Movement creates space: They say never mistake movement for action - there’s a lot of truth to that - nonetheless there are times in jiu jitsu where movement for the sake of movement can furnish a reward. If you can create movement when you’re in a bad position then that movement will often create space and misalignment - and that can create the conditions you need to escape. Sometimes it can be very hard to employ escapes when an opponent is locked tight to you - movement can create just enough looseness to perform the escape or at least create an action/reaction sequence that will facilitate escape. You don’t want to go crazy and dig yourself deeper into trouble with poorly directed movement, but a judiciously applied roll or turn is often just what you need to loosen things up a little prior to your escape

Defensive responsibility: In a sport where you and an opponent simultaneously launch attacks on each other it’s crucial that you maintain defensive responsibility at all times. Don’t let this turn you into an overly conservative or timid athlete - you want to carry the spirit of attack into every match. The hardest times to be defensively responsible are Gene you’re mostly focused on attack. Most people can either attack OR defend - but the best athletes merge the two so that they’re defensively aware even as they press their attacks and ready to launch immediately into offense even as they’re fending off an opponents attacks. Anyone can think defensively when they’re defending and anyone can think offensively when they’re attacking - but the best think defensively even when they’re attacking and offensively even as they’re defending

Life and jiu jitsu: Many of the lessons of Jiu jitsu mirror everyday life. Since you were old enough to listen you’ve been told that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. This is true of Jiu jitsu also. The longer you leave the task of escape - the harder it gets. Early identification of oncoming problems will save you a vast amount of trouble on the mats. Escaping a bad position is much easier when the escape begins AS the opponent is getting into a dominant position rather than AFTER he gets there. Thus the key is the mental act of RECOGNITION of danger as much as the physical act of escaping after the fact. Learning the escapes is crucial to success, but so too is early identification and reaction, and if it’s done consistently can make make many escapes unnecessary

If you can break an opponents stance/balance, then everything else gets easier. If you can’t, even the smallest actions will always be a struggle. Most of this game is the battle to break an opponents stance whilst preserving your own - everything else follows from this.

Adjustments: In the chaos of a match it’s actually quite rare that your first positioning for a given move will be correct. Too many athletes get to a given attacking position and immediately attempt to complete it when their positioning is not optimal. The result usually isn’t good. When you understand that the first entry into the move gets you in the door but doesn’t represent exactly where you want to be, you’ll take that extra time to make your adjustments and work patiently into better leverage position. It may take a little longer, but the result will be a big increase in effectiveness. Don’t just enter - enter and adjust - understand that your first attempt usually isn’t optimal and that just a few small movements can convert it from something that almost works to something that definitely works!

The better a move starts - the easier it gets finished: Every move in this sport is a series of steps. Complete Failure at any one step will derail the whole move - a sufficient degree of imperfection at any one step reduces the likelihood of the subsequent steps being completed. The worst is when there are noticeable imperfections in the first steps as these carry over in to all subsequent steps and now you’re forced into two directions - you now have to simultaneously redo that step to remove the faults and move on to the next step - that’s never easy. So when you make that first step - make it decisively and crisply - the better it is the easier all the others. Just as mistakes made early in a journey to a destination tend to be more damaging to navigation than mistakes made near the end when you’re close to the destination, so too, with the moves of Jiu jitsu

Dilemmas: Whenever you can - attack in pairs of moves rather than a single move. If possible, choose a pair that go in opposite directions so that as opponent defends one he walks into the other. For example, when getting past an opponents defensive arms you can attack inside the arms towards the centerline or outside the arms at an angle towards the back - the more an opponent invests in defending one, the more vulnerable he becomes to the other. Play these two off against each other and you’ll find it much easier to get past resistance. This foundational principle is at the heart of all good jiu jitsu.

Taking opponents down from behind is lot easier than taking them down from in front: Taking a skilled opponent down from neutral frontal positions is never easy and often gets strongly countered. Getting behind them first and then taking them down is usually considerably easier and the counters generally less problematic ( though of course Garry Tonon proved an exception to the rule by countering directly into a match winning leg lock!) Standing moves that get you behind an opponent are thus highly valued in Jiu Jitsu - duck unders, slide bys, throw bys, arm drags etc are all excellent methods of getting behind a standing opponent and making your job of taking them down into controlling positions on the mat much easier and safer. Make sure you make a concerted effort to slip behind opponents at all times in standing position. Even if you don’t succeed it will often open doors to more conventional frontal takedowns and if you do succeed, you’ll make your job a lot easier and less risky

Undermining athleticism: It’s a great thing to possess good athletic traits. They will definitely help you make progress in any sport including jiu jitsu. Much more important in jiu jitsu however, is the ability to UNDERMINE AN OPPONENTS ATHLETICISM. If you can shackle an opponents movement it won’t be long before victory is yours. One of the very best methods is to control both legs. Just as cowboys begin control of a powerful steer by roping its legs, so too, a good grappler seeks to tie up both an opponents legs when it’s time to control him. When you’re confronted by an athletic speedster, look for every opportunity to tie up both his legs and you’ll find his speed and balance are severely impacted in ways that permit control that leads to submission

If you can get an opponents feet off the mat you own him: Everything we do in grappling presupposes contact with the mat. Imagine trying to grapple in zero gravity - you couldn’t perform moves effectively because you have nothing to base upon or push off from. When you leave the mat you have to wait until you you land before you can be effective again. It doesn’t matter how athletic you are - if you can’t push off the ground it’s very difficult to express that athleticism. Whenever you can - lift your opponent off the mat. The most energy efficient ways to do this is always with the legs. Work hard upon the skill of getting opponents up off the mat for brief periods of time and use that time to press your attacks - unless he’s truly a superb athlete capable of back flips or aerial cartwheels there’s not much he can do to stop you until he’s grounded again - and by then it’s usually too late.

Negate first, attack second: Nothing is riskier than attacking an opponent who is simultaneously attacking you. If you have a big skill advantage this can work, but if you are well matched the result can go either way. A safer strategy is to begin by NEGATING YOUR OPPONENTS OFFENSE. Usually this is done by a combination of stance, positioning and grip. If you can first shut down an opponents ability to attack, then once this is achieved you can focus on your own offense with little distraction. Think about daily life - when you go to perform any given task you’ll find it much more difficult if you’re being distracted and interrupted by someone as you try to perform than if you have no distractions. The same is true in Jiu jitsu. Try shutting down your opponents ability to grip you or get into threatening positions first and THEN enter into your attacks - it’s much easier when you can focus on what you’re doing rather than worry about what the other guy is doing

Anyone can look calm and composed when they’re winning, but it’s how calm and composed you are when you’re in trouble that will do more to determine how well you do in your toughest matches. Every escape must begin with a mental commitment to composure, for only a calm mind can solve problems efficiently and every escape is just a solution to a problem applied under pressure.

Pressure to the back: They say that to a man with a hammer in his hand, everything looks like a nail. This is usually said to warn people of being too focused on a single thing and limiting your viewpoint and options as a result. In the case of Jiu jitsu however, heavy focus on the back has no real downside. If you can create a constant pressure towards the back throughout a match, you will experience a lot success. The back can he take. From anywhere - standing, top or bottom - and the result is always good. Make it a habit to pressure behind an opponent at all times from all positions and you’ll find yourself winning far more than if you just drift from position to position and follow the opponents actions

You can never go wrong in Jiu jitsu is you focus on getting mounted or rear mounted. There’s a thousand different directions you can go at any given time in a match - some are good, some aren’t - but two directions that are always good regardless of context are mount and rear mount. So if your stumped for direction - just focus on those two and you can never go wrong.

Victory in Thailand!! Garry Tonon won via second round submission against the outstanding undefeated Russian Sambo/Wrestling specialist Shamil Gasanov at Lumpinee stadium Bangkok. It was a hard fought victory with a perilous start to both first and second rounds as Mr Gasanov showed his wrestling mastery of front headlock combined with knee strikes on the ground (allowed in Asia). Mr Tonon had to adapt his jiu jitsu escape mastery to defend and counter attack from a position of disadvantage and was able first to fully reverse and take his opponent’s back and then in the second round slip into a rolling knee bar. Mr Gasanov showed the courage and mental toughness associated with Russian fighters from the Caucasus and despite a fully locked out knee bar applied with tremendous pressure initially refused to submit. Mr Tonon had to go back to one of the foundational principles of our leg lock game - double trouble - to immobilize and control such a tough opponent. There is only so much courage can do in the face of physics however, and eventually he was forced to submit to avoid catastrophic injury - giving Mr Tonon an epic comeback victory against the odds. Congratulations to Mr Tonon on a great win that showcased both his skill and heart and also to Mr Gasanov who fearlessly went into grappling exchanges against one of the best grapplers in MMA. Thank you so much to all who helped get Garry ready. This bout was a testament to all the years of leg lock training going back a long way with students and training partners both past and present who helped that journey. Thank you to all our followers who have followed that journey alongside us. Garry needed all his skill honed through that journey to win this victory - thank you to all who helped and followed over the years.

Countdown: Garry Tonon successfully weighed in for his bout tomorrow night against the very talented Caucasus Russian grappler Shamil Gasanov tomorrow morning local time (evening in the USA). The event features four different combat sports - Muay Thai, Kickboxing, Jiu Jitsu and MMA. All four are represented by the very best. Muay Thai icon Superlek is the main event, Mr Tonon is the co-main event. Also featured is a jiu jitsu bout between Tammi Musumeci, talented sister of Jiu jitsu phenom Mikey Musumeci against the very dynamic Amanda Alequin - this should be fireworks! I always like these multidisciplinary events - the only minor drawback is that MMA and Jiu jitsu matches will have to be fought in a ring rather than cage which is not optimal, but worth it here given the opportunity to see the very best Muay Thai and kickboxing talent in the homeland of the sport. Hope you all enjoy the show!

Thailand: We are counting down to the big @onechampionship event here in Thailand. It will be fought in legendary Lumpinee Stadium Bangkok, one of the great homes of Muay Thai and the headline bout will feature one of my absolute favorite current Muay Thai fighters, the outstanding Superlek Kiatmuu9, truly one of the technically proficient and exciting strikers in the world today. As such, all the bouts, including the MMA bouts will be fought in a ring rather than a cage. While I believe that a cage is much better suited to the nature of MMA fighting than a ring, it’s very much understandable why in Lumpinee they went with traditional ring, especially when a boxer of Superlek’s stature is the main event in front of Thai audience. A ring brings some unpredictable chaos into MMA bouts when you get close to the ropes and corners, this can be good and bad. Undeniably some of the greatest MMA bouts of all time have been fought in rings - think of all the classic Pride matches - so this will be a very interesting show for this alone. Most of all, it’s an honor to be part of a show in Lumpinee, which stands in the history of Muay Thai as Madison Square Garden does in the history of boxing. Now it’s back to training at the local Muay Thai gym and their ring!

On the road again: Flying out to Bangkok, Thailand for Garry Tonon’s upcoming MMA bout for @onechampionship against the very tough Russian Shamil Gasanov. Mr Gasanov is an excellent wrestler and grappler and combines this well with robust striking - he is undefeated in MMA and defeated one of the highest ranked athletes in OneChampionship in his debut! He is an excellent exponent of the Sambo/wrestling/kickboxing synthesis that has proven so effective for Caucasus Russian fighters. It’s a long flight! But growing up in New Zealand gets one used to that! Looking forward to getting back to Thailand - there is a martial arts spirit and pedigree there that is unrivaled. Trading in the dry heat of Texas for the humidity of South East Asia! I’m looking forward to it

You can’t learn all the details in a day. Furthermore, the addition of a single detail is easy enough to learn in theory in less than a minute, but to build it into a skill that you can employ under extreme pressure in live training and competition may take months. So take your time with details. Build them slowly and methodically into your mind first and body second. They really will make a difference to your performance - but not today so much as further out into your tomorrows.

Climbing the rope: When you go to climb a rope you don’t just magically spring up to the top of the rope - you get your grips and climb step by step to your goal at the top. So too, in grappling. You generally start at the extremities of the body - the hands or head if you are standing or bottom position and the feet if you are in top position, and then you climb progressively to the center of the body, gaining ever increasing control as you get closer to the hips, spine and head. Don’t start at the destination. Start at the extremities and climb your way there.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video AGELESS JIU JITSU: WINNING WHEN YOU ARE OLDER OR LESS ATHLETIC: BOTTOM POSITION GI. In this video I look at the techniques and tactics most suited to an older jiu jitsu player, or one with a limited athletic background/abilities, and how they can build a game that enables them to be very competitive against much younger or more athletic training partners. There are definitely some techniques that are easier for such people to learn and employ and tactics which make their execution more effective. I have put out no gi videos on this topic, but I also want to cover gi Jiu jitsu as well, since many athletes in this category train predominantly in the gi and the gi offers very significant advantages in terms of control and pace control that can greatly benefit older and less athletic players. Used well, the gi adds a whole new layer of control possibilities over faster and more mobile opponents and can be used to tie them up, slow them down and inhibit their movement advantage. In addition, it adds the single best weapon that mobility compromised players have against younger, stronger and faster opponents - collar strangles. If this topic sounds like something that appeals to you - check it out - today is release day! Link in my bio and story

Once a move is properly set - NOW it’s time to use your strength! People often talk about jiu jitsu as a sport where the application of strength is irrelevant or even bad. This is not realistic. Strength plays a big role in the outcomes of any match where the skill level of the athletes is near parity. What is true is this. Strength applied from bad tactical positions is irrelevant or bad. Strength applied wastefully is bad - but strength applied to finish a move that has been well set is good and greatly increases the chance of success. So if you feel you’ve done a good job of locking a move on tight with good efficient mechanics and sound positioning - don’t hold back - use whatever strength you have to seal the deal!

It’s a game of levers and fulcrums - so when it’s time to apply force - APPLY IT AT THE END OF THE LEVER AND BE SURE THAT THE FULCRUM IS IDEALLY POSITIONED. When using levers and fulcrums a difference measured in inches can make a substantial difference in force. Take a little extra time to set the fulcrum and find the end of the lever - you can make a substantial improvement in performance in a minute with this simple insight alone

The basis of an opponents defense will always be his STANCE. It stands to reason therefore, that if you want to be successful with your attacks, BEGIN BY ATTACKING AND BREAKING HIS STANCE and only then go into the attack itself. Attacking a fortified defensive defensive position is dangerous and costly work - attacking a position whose defensive walls have been broken down is easy. Begin every attack with an attack on the opponents stance and your Jiu jitsu will go to a higher level.

A path in the wilderness: Jiu jitsu sparring can seem like a confusing mess as you get twisted upside down, left, right and every which way. The add to that the thousands of different options you could use, but every time the thought of applying one of them occurs to you the situation changes so rapidly that now the opportunity is gone and you’ve to choose again. This is why it’s so important to have a small set of major or favorite moves (tokui-waza). When everything seems confused, they bring order back into the picture. If you know where you need to be in order to execute a move that you really believe can win it for you - you’ll find a way to get there. As a light house guides a ship in the darkness, so too, a move that you understand well and have faith in will guide you towards it no matter how confused your situation in a match.

Great night of grappling in Las Vegas! The @ufcfightpass Grappling Invitational out on a great event here is Las Vegas tonight featuring a tournament and several high profile super fights under EBI rule set. Teenage blue belt phenom @helenajiujitsugirl Helena Crevar took on black belt champion Emily Fernandez and won with a an excellent stranglehold from the back, showing the audience her incredible potential for the future. Nicholas Meregali @nicholasmeregali had a match against the great ADCC champion Cyborg Abreau. It was a close fought battle with Mr Meregali initiating all the attacks but Mr Abreau survived to force over time where Mr Meregali won via juji gatame armbar. In the tournament Dan Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant showed everyone the impressive improvements he has made to his game. He won his first two matches with the best submissions of the night - two beautifully applied leg locks. In the finals he had a great match against former team mate Nicky Rod. It went to over time where there was a dramatic moment where Mr Manasoiu came very close to locking in a juji gatame arm bar, but Mr Rodriguez showed good escape skills and presence of mind to escape and then win via stranglehold. In the main event Craig Jones squared off against Felipe Pena. Both men are mostly known for their guard game, but in this match neither wanted to play bottom position and opted to most grapple in standing position presumably so that they could save energy for the over time. Overtime was interesting. Mr Jones got a good early escape in the first over time round which proved decisive as neither could escape the other after that, thus Mr Jones won a tough tactical match via ride time. Once again it’s great to see the UFC putting their resources behind grappling. I’m very happy that the audience got to see the rapid improvements youngsters Helena Crevar and Daniel Manasoiu have made and how they are climbing rapidly towards their goals. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

If you can feed off your opponents defensive reactions - you’ll never be at a loss for the next move: Resistance to every move you attempt is the norm in combat sports. No one is going to let you get your moves for free. You’ll have to fight against resistance for every move you ever attempt. So plan your game around the next move(s). When you have instant follow ups to the expected resistance you’ll never stop at resistance as most people do - you’ll move on at a rate that will will soon overwhelm your opponent’s ability to keep up - and THAT’S when you consistently win.

Counting down: We had a great workout at UFC Apex center tonight in Las Vegas in preparation for Thursday night UFC Grappling Invitational. @nicholasmeregali @jiujitsugiant @helenajiujitsugirl were joined by Gordon Ryan who is starting a long road back to health now. We were joined by the prodigious wrestling talent @romanbravoyoung who is also competing and my great friend and student @bzglick Mr Young used to train with us sporadically back in the blue basement so it was a pleasure to see him again. With him came UFC legend @dominickcruz - watching those two workout was something special! Tomorrow is weigh in day and then the big show Thursday evening!

Friends and mentors: Mentors can have a powerful influence on your development in Jiu jitsu. One of my most important mentors when I began Jiu jitsu was IBJJF world jiu jitsu champion, ADCC champion and UFC champion - the inestimable Matt Serra @mattserrabjj He was a dynamo in the gym - one of the very few Americans of that era who could prove a real match for the best in the world. He inspired me and everyone else in that room to get better. Last night he and old friends Din Thomas and John Rallo stopped by for dinner. Matt is in town to do the Joe Rogan @joerogan podcast! Let me tell you something - Joe Rogan is a very talented and well trained comedian, but Matt Serra is the best natural comedian I ever met in my life! Between the two of them this is going to be an instant classic of humor and jiu jitsu! I can’t wait to see this one! Anyway, it was great seeing my old buddies from the pre-basement days once again! Thank you always Matt for being such a good jiu jitsu influence on all of us and taking everyone’s expectations for what they could achieve to a higher level.

Step by step: Jiu Jitsu is a game of incremental progressions towards a goal. The goal is always submission, but to get there you’ll need to to pass a chain of events and steps that can stretch out very long at times. It’ll start with initial contact and grip and progress through ever increasing body contact and in most cases increasingly dominant positions characterized by your ability to either get behind your opponent or get past his legs into upper body pins. As you spar always think in terms of the next steps. You know the goal - what’s the next step? What do you have to do to complete that step? If you complete that step what’s the next step after that? This is the mindset you’ll need to work with at all times. The long distance vision is always clear and simple - it’s the myopic vision of the next step that’ll be less clear to you in the heat of sparring - but work within this pattern every day and soon enough things will become clear to you

Getting ready: Nicholas Meregali getting ready for his upcoming match at @ufcfightpass grappling event next week. He has been making great progress in developing his no gi skills but he is facing a truly formidable opponent - the great Roberto Cyborg Abreau - one of the premier No gi champions of this era. The event will be in Las Vegas and features a tournament with many outstanding athletes such as Wagner Rocha, Roberto Jimenez, Felipe Andrew, Daniel Manasoiu, Gabriel Arges and two time ADCC finalist Nicky Rod and several super fights including one with teenage phenom Helena Crevar with main event being the titanic match between Craig Jones and Felipe Pena!

Committing to your attacks: Sometimes when we attack we do so anticipating failure - this immediately becomes a self fulfilling prophecy. Entering into an attack without sufficient commitment to carry it through to completion is almost always a guarantee of failure. When you go into an attack with the intention of winning with it - go in with the commitment required to win with it. Even if you’re faking an attack to set up another you’ll need sufficient commitment to creat the APPEARANCE that you’re going in to win with that move. If mechanical inefficiency is the most common PHYSICAL reason why moves fail in Jiu jitsu, TIMIDITY is the most common PSYCHOLOGICAL reason for failure. Moves applied with excessive timidity are as apt to fail as moves that lack sound mechanics. That doesn’t mean going crazy in the gym - it just means recognizing what level of force application is required to get the job done and making sure that timidity doesn’t put you below that force requirement. Make your calculation and go!

Pushing past resistance: Everything you do in jiu jitsu, you do against resistance. Your opponent knows most of your moves and the counters to them. Learning to overcome resistance is one of the great keys to consistently good performances on the mat. When it comes to dealing with resistance there is a middle path that you must learn to steer. You don’t want to quit on a move at the first sign of resistance - you’ll never complete any moves that way. Nor do you want to persist so long on a move that’s been stopped that you exhaust yourself or fall into a trap. Finding that middle found is a lifelong journey. You can learn a move in minutes but it’ll take you years to figure out when to persist with it and when to switch to something else when applying it against a resisting opponent. Make sure you pair your moves with another move that works in the opposite direction. That way you play them against each other when you encounter resistance. Then is just a matter of experimenting over time to see how far you should go with one until you switch to the other.

Brothers and sisters: At the recent Dallas ADCC Open there was a truly outstanding family performance - Luke and Hannah Griffith - brother and sister from South Africa won first place gold - Luke went the extra distance and won double gold by taking the Absolute division as well as his own weight category. @luke_griffithjj @hxnnah_jade I’m always impressed by athletes who make big changes and sacrifices in their lives to get to the dreams. Traveling all the way from Africa to Austin Texas to train certainly is a good example of this! I’m happy to see the global expansion of Jiu jitsu. Brazil, America and Europe are the powerhouses but it’s great to see countries like Australia, Canada and England develop quickly as well - now you can add South Africa to that list of countries with emerging stars! Congratulations Luke and Hannah 🇿🇦🇿🇦

Quick movements get you TO a good position, but it will be isometric endurance/tension and locking yourself into the geometry of your opponents body that will KEEP you there. The value of getting to a good position is lost if you can’t maintain it. The skills of maintaining a position are never going to make a highlight reel but they are among the most important for winning matches. Your ability to gain a good position is only as useful as your ability to keep it long enough to exert pressure and progress into even better positions or submission holds. Focus upon shutting down your opponent’s ability to move in the ways that might enable him to escape. Every escape begins with a first step - so attack that first step with your body positioning and tension and if you do your job well, you won’t have to worry about the subsequent steps.

Awareness: When we think of awareness in Jiu jitsu we usually think of awareness of our defensive responsibilities and our attacking opportunities. These certainly are the most important types of awareness in the sport. There is another type of awareness however, that never gets discussed. This is MAT AWARENESS. This is the awareness of where you are positioned on a crowded mat. It is this type of awareness that makes you a safe training partner on a crowded mat. It’s easy to get so focused on your opponents that you lose track of where you are and start crashing into other people or accidentally kicking or elbowing them. When you have a room full of people who have food mat awareness everything runs smoothly. When you have a room full of people with no mat awareness it’s a disaster. Not only does mat awareness have value for safety, it also has a deeper self defense value. In a real fight you must be cognizant of your immediate surroundings and people or objects around you, because they can play a crucial role in what happens. Avoiding tunnel vision and having a good sense of what’s going on around you is an essential self defense skill that you can practice every day on the mat by making yourself conscious of the people and movements around you as you grapple. Train yourself to be able to follow conversations of the people on the sideline, what positions the people next to you are in, where you can expect them to be ten seconds from now based on their current movements. This kind of mental training will make you safer on the mat AND on the street

Victory in Dallas!! Team New Wave had a great day at the big ADCC Dallas Open yesterday. The event had well over a thousand competitors from all over the nation and once again showed the impressive work @mojassim80 is doing building a grass roots competition league that enables athletes to compete under the ADCC rule set in preparation for ADCC trials and the Olympics of grappling - ADCC itself. There were many outstanding athletes and many outstanding performances. Our team was able to show the fruits of their hard training in preparation taking four gold medals and many other medals and winning the Adult Team Award with a score almost double the next highest team . Current ADCC champion @giancarlobodoni Giancarlo Bodoni surprised everyone by signing up last minute and took gold with a masterful display both standing and on the ground. @tazagarami Oliver Taza had a truly impressive day. He was in the most stacked division of the event which featured many outstanding athletes who’d been to ADCC or medaled at trials. Not only did he win gold - he did so with a submission rate of almost 85% - a truly impressive performance in the most competitive division of the event! @helenajiujitsugirl Helena Crevar showcased here devastating submission arsenal once again in both teenage and adult divisions - winning double gold with a submission rate over 90%! South African brother and sister @hxnnah_jade Hannah Griffith and @luke_griffithjj Luke Griffith took three gold medals between the family. Hannah won her weight division with a great display of positional prowess. Luke won double gold with a crushingly dominant 100% submission rate performance in two divisions in a very memorable performance, showcasing his impressive technical development and powerful submission arsenal. It was great seeing so many competitors and supporters at the event - perhaps most impressive of all was the depth of talent on display. There were many cases of unknown athletes defeating prominent athletes proving that there are many emerging talents in this fast growing sport!

As one part of the body gets heavy - another part must get light: Sometimes your opponent will put crushing top pressure on you. From underneath it often feels like his weight is immovable. Be assured however, that as an opponent focuses his weight and pressure in one area it can only be done by sacrificing weight and pressure somewhere else - your job is to find that lighter area and do your work there. Here you can see a situation where as my training partner commits forward to put pressure on my head and shoulders, his legs become light and thus elevation becomes easier. There are many other situations in Jiu jitsu where similar themes can be used. Stay calm under weight and pressure and locate the lighter areas that must inevitably emerge. Once you identify them they will be your escape/attack route

What’s next? This is a sport of moves. We learn moves and try to apply them against opponents who also know the moves and their counters. We persist until either we or our opponent gets the breakthrough. Who wins in these situations is usually determined by who integrates moves together best. If we both know the moves and counters it’s going to be the one who sets moves up and combines them better into sequences that are difficult to follow for an opponent. Accordingly, focus on the move you’re currently performing but make sure in the back of your mind you’ve got at least one and no more than three follow up moves mapped out and ready to be employed. Don’t focus on the next move so much that your performance of the current move degenerates to a level where it simply won’t be effective, but just enough that there won’t be a delay in transitioning to that next move should the current one fail.

Getting ready: Every gym workout is future focused. Your goal is not to win today but to tomorrow, not to be perfect now, but to edge closer to a perfect tomorrow. When you take this mindset you’ll take the risks you need to take in the gym so that in the future you’ll be confident enough to use them without hesitation on stage; you’ll experiment with new moves and tactics that can broaden your future repertoire. How you do today is inconsequential compared with how a future you does in a much more important setting

Extension: Almost all of Jiu jitsu is performed in a compact stance. A big part of being defensively responsible in the sport is maintaining that compact stance. Accordingly, when you can get an opponent extended - it’s usually a good thing as it represents the opposite of what we normally see as good stance. Look to stretch your opponents knees away from his elbows whenever you can. He wants to be compact - you want him extended. Who consistently wins this simple preliminary battle often goes on to win the contest.

When the action is is exhausting and your tired and confused - it will be be your acquired HABITS that bring you either victory or defeat. Training is all about building the right habits and eliminating the wrong ones. Pay heed to your daily training because right or wrong - that’s where your habits are formed

Strive for precision in drilling - you’ll never be able to fully replicate that level of precision in sparring, but higher your precision level in drilling, the higher it’ll be in sparring and if you pass a certain threshold of precision - it’ll be a winning technique

Lever and fulcrum: Many of the major moves of this game involve using your body and your opponent’s body as lever and fulcrum. This is one of the major means by which smaller/weaker people can overcome and defeat bigger/stronger people. Just make sure you use lever and fulcrum to maximum advantage. Adjusting the position and height of the fulcrum and always using the end of the lever can mean big improvements to the force you can generate. Make a habit of adjusting lever and fulcrum PRIOR to applying force - it will shock you how much of a difference it can make to moves you’ve been using for a long time.

A balanced game: Make sure your game is evenly balanced between offense and defense. Of course we all love the idea of offense and wish that we could always be attacking - but the hard reality is that if you’re engaged with tough opponents you’ll be tested every moment and it’ll be the quality of your defense that determines whether you win or lose. So make sure you study deeply in defense to maintain a well balanced game. Athletes whose game has an offensive bias do well at lower levels when their offense overwhelms opponents, but struggle as they rise and have to match better opponents where they are attacked as much as they attack. Stay balanced in your training time between defense and offense.

Control begins with grip - if you control an opponents hands, wrists or elbows he will find it very difficult to grip you whilst you have grips on him. If you can get that initial advantage it helps steer the rest of the engagement in your favor. Make a serious study of your initial contact. Don’t just grip for the sake of gripping. Grip with a purpose and a direction. Get control of his hands, wrist or elbows whilst denying him the same and you’ll always be off to a good start.

Don’t be satisfied: When you stop an opponents move in its tracks it’s always a good feeling, but don’t be satisfied with good when great is right around the corner. As soon as you stopped an opponent’s move, switch your mindset from defense to offense and take advantage of the fact that whenever a move fails your opponents posture will almost always be compromised. This make your offense much easier. So program yourself to attack in that window of opportunity. When you stop your opponent - don’t stop yourself - this is the time to move immediately into your own attack!

Isolation: All submission holds presuppose the idea of isolating a limb/neck from the rest of the body in a way that enables you to enact breaking pressure/strangulation. The idea is to get a big percentage of your body to fight against a small percentage of your opponents body. It’s difficult to overcome the unified strength of an opponents entire body - but much easier to overcome the divided strength of a single limb that is being held apart from the rest of the body.

Your toughest matches will always reveal where your game is weakest. Use them as a laboratory to know yourself better. Knowing yourself and your strengths and weaknesses is one of the cornerstones of continued progress.

Double World Champion!! Outstanding teenage phenom Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl won double gold at the IBJJF World Championships in California yesterday. She won both her weight division and absolute division in the teenage blue belt category. She won all matches via submission with a heavy emphasis of triangles and arm bars in an excellent display of her attacking style. When Nicholas Meregali was preparing for his WNO gi match we began morning gi classes balanced with afternoon no gi. After the match Helena continued her gi training with just a single training partner every day as the rest of the class reverted back to no gi training for upcoming matches. She showed excellent focus and discipline throughout that preparation and successfully applied many of the moves and tactics she worked in her preparation. Well done Helena!!

Angle, angle and more angle: The single best place to be in combat sports is directly behind your opponent. However, it’s very difficult to get behind someone with skills since they’ve been taught from the first day never to concede their back. So typically you’ll have to work with ANGLE - where you move away from frontal positions and off line to the side - it’s not as dramatic and decisive as the back, buts in most cases it’s more than enough to get good work done or at least create a reaction that’ll enable you to attack successfully. Make a habit of creating angle on opponents - it doesn’t always have to be a huge angular change, often even a small change in angle can create impressive results. As your opponent tries to re-align himself with you there will be a window of opportunity for you to enter. You’ll find that the game becomes a lot easier when you attack from angle rather than straight through the front door

It’s a game of high pressure decision making - if you can stay composed throughout you’ll have a big advantage over opponents that can’t. Composure always helps decision making - practice keeping composure the same way you practice all your other skills - it’s every bit as important

Decisions are easier when you work with priorities: Jiu jitsu gives you a thousand possibilities to work with every second. With so many choices available and so little time to make a decision is can be difficult to know which options to commit to. Make it easier for yourself. Make your decisions BEFORE the action. Lay down a set of outcomes in order of desirability and let that ordered list be your decision maker. For me - I have a simple motto that guides the vast majority of decision making in Jiu jitsu - NOTHING BEATS THE BACK - in any situation where I’m presented by multiple competing options this simple rule makes the decision for me. Then it’s just a matter of creating a short list of other options arranged in order of desirability to create second, third, fourth and fifth and you’ll immediately have a sense of direction and decisiveness in every jiu jitsu situation

Increasing your opportunities by changing your angle or orientation: It’s very difficult to attack through the front door on a defensively sound opponent. Their entire stance is set up relative to your current position and location to stop you being able to execute any attacks. However, if you were to change the angle or orientation of your body relative to him, then his stance will need to be changed to address the change you’ve made - and in the time he makes that change he will be open to attack. Sometimes it’s just a matter of getting a small angle on an opponent, other times it’s about totally changing your body orientation - one of the most common and effective means of doing this is to completely invert your body. This completely changes the relationship between your positioning and his and can open big avenues of attack. Get used to inverting under an opponent - moves that seemed impossible just a few seconds before suddenly become a lot easier

Great night of grappling in Austin! @enigmajiujitsuofficial held another great night of grappling action tonight here in Austin with many of the New Wave and RGA Austin students competing. Among many memorable matches for our team some of the standouts were wins for teenager Landon Elmore @landonelmorebjj who won via heel hook against an equally talented young rival Nathan Gerrard. Another of our talented teenage students Adam DeGraff @andrewdegraffmagic won via heel hook against talented rival Jacob Norton. Abraham La Montagne @abraham_the_mountain took on B team’s very athletic Sterling Mellman and won via toe hold. In the main events section, young Reese LaFever @reeseis_bjj took on B team standout Bobby Sandhu and won via heel hook. Then Helena Crevar, the outstanding teenage blue belt, took on impressive B team adult brown belt Diana Rooney and won via heel hook. In the co-main event Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj took on Pat Shahgholi from 10th Planet and won via rear strangle. In the main event Oliver Taza @tazagarami had an epic forty minute war double overtime ADCC match against the very tough and talented 10th Planet athlete Andy Varela - Oliver prevailed showing great skill and heart to win. Great stuff from the whole team and showing how much progress they are making in such a short time. It was great to see so many local people coming out to compete and watch - grappling is really taking off here in Austin! Thank you to Enigma Grappling for giving our students a venue to showcase their growing skills!

Combining two moves into one: One well applied jiu jitsu can be a real threat - when two moves are combined into one the threat can become overwhelming. Arguably the best move when it comes to co-joining moves is the triangle. Once you lock a triangle you immediately attack with simultaneous kimura, juji gatame arm bar, ude gatame straight arm bar, wrist locks - all kinds of madness. Defense becomes far more difficult than usual because of the restrictions created by the triangle and the fact that you’re under threat of a strangle the whole time you’re struggling to defend yourself. Jiu jitsu has many such opportunities to turn two moves into one - make sure you look to incorporate them into your game! Here teenage blue belt phenom @helenajiujitsugirl Helena shows excellent form in combining the effects of triangle and arm bar together to get another win

Physiologically there is little to tell apart fear and excitement. They create similar outward effects - sweat, shallow breathing, adrenal response etc - but internally they feel totally different. One will invigorate you, the other will paralyze you. They are very close physically but diametrically opposed mentally. Learning to transform fear into excitement is one of the great keys to performance. Some people seem to do it effortlessly, for others it’s a real struggle. It’s not fatal if you can’t, I’ve seen great athletes perform at the highest levels while afflicted with fear, but it is more difficult for them than for those who seem to relish the stage and see it only as inducing excitement without fear

Top position in Jiu jitsu is a constant battle to get past the feet, legs and hips and get up to the head and shoulders. It doesn’t matter whether you’re in front of him or behind him - the classic positional battle of Jiu jitsu ends with control of the head and shoulders. This simple imperative gives you a sense of direction - a positional pole star that always makes it clear where you need to be headed at any moment. In a complex world of grappling moves it gives a simple vision that will always hold true

Your face tells the story: When you engage in sparring it’s good to stay as relaxed as possible to get the task done - that doesn’t mean you’ll be limp - sometimes the task requires great tension - but most of the time you can be a lot more relaxed than many believe. This relaxed demeanor creates better endurance and better movement quality, both essential to success. The part of your body that manifests tension first is the face. If your face is screwed up with tension then it’s pretty clear the rest of your body will be also. Try to keep your face relaxed and you’ll find it’s easier to keep the rest of you relaxed. If the eyes are the mirrors of the soul, then the face is the mirror of your overall tension level - keep it calm and it has a calming effect on everything else. If you wonder whether you’re too tense while sparring - study your face on film and it will tell you the truth immediately

Immobilization is one of the great keys to submission success: Finishing a submission hold on a tough moving opponent is never easy. If you can immobilize then prior to and during the execution of the lock or strangle your chances of success rise dramatically. Many of the best immobilizations come from trapping your opponents head and shoulders between your knees. This leads to many upper body submissions. Note that you need only immobilize the relevant parts of the body. So for a juji gatame arm bar you need to immobilize the head and shoulders, for heel hooks the area between his hip and knee. When I say immobilize, understand that you’ll never be able totally an active opponent - you just have to immobilize part of his body long enough to apply the hold, if you can’t immobilize even the relevant part of his body, at least slow it down to a speed where you can create sufficient pressure in the available time to get a submission. Stop him or slow him, if you can’t you’ll need a very quick execution of the lock that tends to lack the kind of control needed to beat the toughest opponents

Relax into your moves: When you’re learning a move it’s natural to want to try your best in applying it. When most people try their best they equate this with greater physical effort which usually manifests itself as greater muscular tension. This almost always results in lowered performance. When you learn, try to resist the urge towards tension. Try to perform the move with the minimum effort to get the job done. Don’t be hopelessly limp of course, but try to finesse your way through the move rather than using all your horsepower. In sparring you’ll need to apply tension as the critical completion phase of the move approaches but the entry and initial execution you’ll still want to be pretty relaxed. Get used to that feeling of relaxed efficiency in drilling - you can always add horsepower later in sparring - that’s the easy part - getting it done with finesse is the more difficult aspect

Submission goals: Your arsenal of submissions is a big part of defining your overall game. Which ones you choose to be your main weapons is up to you - but what is NOT up to you is the areas your submissions must cover. You must have at least one lower body joint lock, one upper body joint lock and one strangle from front and one strangle from back and one (either lock or strangle) that you can do from a scramble situation. This is is your minimum requirement. Again, you get to choose which ones you adopt, but there’s no choice in application areas - you HAVE to be competent in all these!

Signs of success: In Jiu jitsu you’re always striving for goals - some small, some big. One of the major goals in bottom position grappling is to off balance an opponent as often as possible - the more off balance he is - the easier he is to attack. But what is a simple sign that you’ve succeeded in off balancing him? WHEN YOU FORCE HIS HAND TO THE MAT. Forcing your opponents hand to the mat is one of the very best set ups from bottom guard position. If his hand is one the floor than he definitely won’t even be attempting to pass your guard until he recovers. I addition, the hand on the mat indicates a broken stance and extension - two of the surest signs that a well chosen attack is much more likely to succeed than normal. Once you recognize signs it’s a lot easier to pick your moments to attack!

Victory in Oklahoma City! We had a great night here in OKC at the WNO Professional Grappling event. Young Davis Asare @davis_asare won his debut professional bout against the outstanding American wrestler Nick Heflin. Mr Heflin also trains Jiu jitsu and merges it very well with outstanding wrestling pedigree. Mr Asare was able to use the threat of his emerging submission skills to get dominant positions and was very nearly able to finish with a strong looking strangle hold, but Mr Heflin showed impressive mental and physical toughness to survive until time expired. Nicholas Meregali took center stage in the main event against the great two division WNO no gi champion Pedro Marinho in a gi match. Mr Marinho showed his explosive speed early and lunged for Mr Meregali’s back, but Mr Meregali has been working his defense and counter offense skills relentlessly and used these to score top position. From there he made full use of his rapidly developing top pressure game to take mounted position and finish with the only submission he allowed himself to use tonight - the triangle. His level of technical mastery is truly impressive to watch. He really does make the gi as exciting as any no gi event! Thanks so much to the fans of OKC who came out in force tonight to watch a great night of grappling! I hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Time to fly: Heading to Oklahoma City for the big WNO show tomorrow headlining Nicholas Meregali vs the WNO no gi champion Pedro Marinho - in a professional gi Jiu jitsu match! I’m excited to see gi Jiu jitsu taking center stage in a professional show - the soul of Jiu jitsu is always control that leads to submission - it doesn’t matter if it’s done in a gi or no gi - as long as you stay true to the soul of the game it’s going to be a hit! Both of the athletes are known for their risk taking, match ending, don’t give a damn submission hunting style - this should be a great match! There are many other great matches on the card - check it out on @flograppling tomorrow night!

The triangle will always be among the most pure examples of the Jiu jitsu ideal of pitting your legs against your opponents upper body. Your opponent may be bigger and stronger than you overall, but his arms are not as big and strong as your legs - use this simple insight as often as you can - and nothing does it better than the triangle

Movement creates opportunity: The hardest times to apply submissions are on a static opponent who’s limbs are thoroughly contracted. Movement almost always provokes an opponent into extension of the limbs and an extended opponent is much easier to submit. Keep your opponent moving - if this proves difficult - move around your opponent - both will provoke an opponent into reaching and extending his limbs - and if you’ve been practicing your submissions diligently - that’s all you need to attack!

Following movement: Most of the time when we drill submission moves it’s done in a rather artificial situation where the move is applied and the partner taps. In reality there will be a great deal of resistance and one of the most common forms of resistance is that of rolling/twisting/turning out of the lock. It’s very important then, that you practice applying the lock through 360 degrees of motion to follow the opponents movement while maintaining secure control and then finishing in a completely different position. Getting used to this act of following defensive movement while maintaining the integrity of the lock is a key part of developing realistic submission skills that will work in tough sparring sessions

Victory in Denver! Teenage phenom Helena Crevar impressed everyone today at the ADCC Open in Denver Colorado. She won the teenage division and then entered Adult Advanced in her weight category and the adult advanced absolute division. She won gold in both. Even more impressive - she won every match of the day via submission and in less than half regulation time - an incredible performance from such a young athlete. She trains like a true professional and shows a maturity in the gym and competition far beyond her years. As always she exhibited the full range of submissions from strangles to arm locks and now her rapidly developing leg lock game. Oliver Taza had a great day winning gold in his weight division as part of his preparation for ADCC 2024 and showing his smooth leg locking skills combined with improved standing skills. It’s great to see these youngsters going out and getting the experience they need to get to their goals!

If you can break their balance you can break their stance and if you can break their stance you can break whatever else you want…

It all starts with one move you have trust in: For every given scenario in Jiu jitsu, bottom mount, bottom half guard, top side control, standing position takedown offense etc etc you can’t really be effective until you develop at least one move that you have strong confidence that you can successfully apply on someone your own size and skill level. One move in which you have real skill and confidence is worth far more than a dozen moves that you don’t believe you can apply against a tough opponent. Finding that first move for all the major scenarios in the game is a big part of your initial progress. Of course as you gain in expertise you’ll need more than one big move, but you’ve got to start somewhere. Which one you choose will be mostly determined by three things, your coaching influences, your body type and your personality. I always suggest to select from the most well known and high percentage techniques of the sport first rather than something exotic or trendy - yiu can always build that into your game later. There are ten thousand moves out there - but you need to start with a small set of trusted moves - at least one per major position/scenario of the sport. Once you find them they become your weapons that you carry into battle every time you step on the mat!

Your best move is only as good as your ability to get yourself in a position to apply it: When most people think of their best move they think in terms of how good they are at EXECUTING the move. That certainly is in important, but that won’t help you at all if you can never get to the starting position for the move. In practice is is at least as important to be able to steer the action towards your favorite move. START your study with execution - but make sure you COMPLETE it with set ups and ability to maneuver your opponent INTO the move

This is a sport where your performance of one of your favorite moves can be dramatically increased in a very short by the addition of just useful piece of information - always keep an open mind and a desire to learn more and you’ll rarely get stuck in performance plateaus

Continuity: We judge our Jiu jitsu mostly by the quality of our performance of moves - but in truth, the more important factor is the quality of the CONTINUITY BETWEEN OUR MOVES. For one move to work against high level opponents it must be perfect. But if you can string moves together in sequences the pressure of multiple attacks compounds their effect on an opponent and makes a breakthrough much more likely. Once you feel you’ve reached competence in performing a move, immediately start investigating ways to team it up smoothly with others so that you develop a good sense of continuous attack - because that will be the more important thing quality to win tough matches

Another impressive win for teenage phenom Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl last night in Houston Texas. Helena defended her 145 pound title and won in less than a minute via kimura - showing once again her shockingly high submission rate in competition. In the last few months she has impressed everyone with the versatility of her submission attacks - almost every type of lower body locks, upper body locks and strangle holds. When you can attack the whole body - it’s very difficult for an opponent to defend!

am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video: AGELESS JIU JITSU: WINNING WHEN YOU’RE OLDER OR LESS ATHLETIC: TOP GAME: NO GI. In this video I look at how players who feel they are somewhat athletically compromised by age or injury or just a lack of athletic background before beginning Jiu jitsu can develop an effective no gi top game that enables them to be highly competitive against younger and more athletic opponents. Athletic ability is not delved out equally and doesn’t last forever so it’s important to understand that if the body is somehow lacking, your mind must make up for that lack with sound tactics and technique selection. There are ways to approach the game that require less speed, flexibility and muscular endurance that are nonetheless highly effective even at the highest levels; and by focusing on this aspects you can extend your effectiveness further than many believe is possible. All of the techniques selected require little to no athleticism and are encased in a game plan designed to inhibit movement and slow a younger and more athletic opponent down to a pace and positions where control is possible and knowledge rather than speed or explosiveness become the deciding factor. If this sounds like something your interested in, check it out at @bjj.fanatics Link in my story and bio

Get to the end of the lever: This entire game is a complex web of applied mechanical and biomechanical insights bound within strategy and tactics - and foremost among those mechanical insights will always be lever and fulcrum. When a given move has its basis in the principle of lever and fulcrum - MAKE SURE YOU WORK AT THE END OF THE LEVER - don’t settle for the first grip you get - adjust until you are working with the most leverage possible - it makes a real difference. Here, outstanding teenage phenom Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl does a fine job of getting to the end of the lever and the result? Another great win!

Against good opponents the first move rarely scores - you will be judged primarily by the quality of your second, third or fourth attack that actually gets the breakthrough. Having said that, don’t get lazy with those initial attacks. If they are not performed with real commitment, or at the very least the appearance of real commitment, they won’t provoke the responses that make the second, third or fourth attack succeed. So even if you expect them to fail and are using then only as a set up to a later attack - go in with commitment. Only then will the opponent respond in ways that make the later real attack succeed

Aussies on the loose!! I am always impressed by the degree to which jiu jitsu students devote themselves to the sport. Many travel vast distances to train - none more so than the Aussies who have to traverse thousands of miles to come to Texas and train with us. In class today the Aussies were in force! My first great student Georges St Pierre used to come by bus from Montreal to New York every weekend when he was starting out - these crazy guys went even further and crossed the Pacific Ocean!! I was extremely impressed by the degree to which Jiu jitsu has grown and developed in Australia when I was there recently - I’m not surprised given the dedication I see with these traveling Aussies! A big hello from to the jiu jitsu players working out under the Southern Cross in Australia and New Zealand - keep up the good work - you guys always punched way above your weight division in every sport - jiu jitsu will be no exception! 🇦🇺🇳🇿

Re-learning is much easier than learning: I am often told by students that they fear learning new moves because when they do their performance level falls with their old moves. There is some truth to this. Whenever you focus on something new, it is always to the detriment of something old. You have only so much of an attention span and once you start paying attention to new techniques it’s normal to feel yourself slipping backwards in the performance of your old moves. Don’t worry - it’s much easier to relearn a move then to learn it from scratch. If you aren’t quite as sharp with an old move that you used to favor because you’ve been focusing on new material, it doesn’t take long to hone your skills back into shape. Once learned, knowledge is easily recalled. Keep pushing boundaries with your skill set and have faith that you can always bring old skills back to top level with a little renewed focus any time you need them back

Control makes opponents predictable: When an opponent stands in front of you it’s anybody’s guess what his next action will be. If you have no physical control over him he can do whatever he wants. The second you put hands on him you now exert a degree of control - and as a result, his options shrink. The more control you exert over his movements, the fewer options he has as to what his next move will be - and the fewer options he has - THE MORE PREDICTABLE HE BECOMES - and an opponent whose next move can be accurately predicted is a MUCH easier opponent to defeat. Thus ever increasing physical control is the key to taking the unknown out of combat and creating a sense that you know what your opponent will do next. Once you can accurately predict the next move from a very limited set of possible options that an opponent must choose from, then you can make yourself look like a Jiu jitsu oracle who can foretell an opponent’s next move - that’s when Jiu jitsu becomes something special. There’s nothing mystical about it - it’s based on physical control - levers, fulcrums and wedges - but its effects appear magical

Victory in Costa Mesa! Outstanding juniors Daniel Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant Davis Asare @davis_asare and Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl all won gold at the big ADCC Open grappling event in Costa Mesa yesterday! Daniel won double gold - weight and absolute division. Helena also win double gold - adult - 65kg and teenage division (she just turned sixteen but often competes in adult divisions as well. Davis won -83 kg division. All three had extraordinarily high submission percentage. They have all been training very hard and got to showcase their rapidly growing skills on the west coast! Congratulations! 🤗🤗

I am very sad to see that the great Robson Gracie Snr, father of my teacher, Renzo Gracie, has passed away. Years ago Mr Robson Gracie would periodically come up to New York to see his son and stop by the blue basement. When he came we were all expecting a fire breathing dragon given the nature of his sons! We were completely wrong. Mr Robson Gracie Snr was a remarkably gentle and quiet soul. When he came into the room he was an observer who watched, studied and gave encouraging advice from his vast experience. One day after class he spoke to us through his son Renzo and gave an insight that I never forgot. He said that the true intent of the martial arts was not to make the strong stronger, but to make the weak sufficiently strong that they can stand up to anyone and walk with dignity and confidence in a rough and tumble world. It was a beautiful statement from a martial arts master who had overseen generations of the best combat athletes. He saw the early days of his art, made great contributions to its advancement, raised icons of a new generation of Jiu Jitsu representatives and saw Jiu Jitsu’s expansion from a local family art to an international sport with a global following. Stay strong Renzo and family 🇧🇷🇧🇷🇧🇷

Pressure will always reveal your weaknesses: I am often asked by students what they need to work on - the best way to assess what you need to work on is to spar with a partner who can subject you to severe pressure. Just as water poured into a vessel will immediately reveal a leak, and a great weight will immediately reveal a weak link in a chain - so too, pressure will break your game at its weakest point and tell you immediately what you need to work on. I don’t recommend subjecting yourself too often to great pressure, but it’s definitely something you need periodically to show you were you need to do the most work for the future.

Getting work done: It’s always great seeing two of my favorite people in Jiu jitsu - the great Bernardo Faria - co founder of @bjj.fanatics and one of the best competitors of his generation - and Brian Glick - one of my original students stretching back to the beginnings of my career. We talked today about age and jiu jitsu, the relationship between training and technique development in the gi versus no gi and filmed the AGELESS JIU JITSU video that sparked the conversation. Back at it again tomorrow!!

Gravity: We tend to think of gravity as our friend when we are on top and our enemy when we’re on bottom - but if you play things right gravity can be a trusted friend when playing from bottom too. The method is to disturb your opponents balance. If you can do this, gravity will stumble your oops and force him to base out to recover - and that will create a temporary break in stance that enables you to penetrate the toughest defenses and get the breakthrough you seek. If you make gravity your friend only when your on top you’ll miss a thousand opportunities to win - learn to attack your opponents balance and gravity will be your friend wherever you are.

Getting the crew back together! I’m filming in Boston this week with @placisantos @bzglick @bnzaiii on the final installment of the AGELESS JIU JITSU series for Jiu jitsu athletes who feel they lack athleticism due to age or perhaps a lack of athletic background or injury - this one features bottom position in the gi. After a long day of filming I’m definitely not feeling ageless 😂😜😂 Now we will get some dinner and get ready for more filming tomorrow 😜

Daniel Manasoiu victorious in Ottawa at ADCC Open! Big Dan Manasoiu had a sensational day at the Ottawa ADCC Open today winning double gold - nine matches six submissions - to show how much progress his game has made in recent months. Mr Manasoiu is a heavyweight who moves like a lightweight - I train heavyweights the same way I train lightweights as I believe many people have a tendency to underestimate what big people can do in terms of agility and movement - Mr Manasoiu is a good example of this. Now he heads to California for the next ADCC Open in Costa Mesa next weekend - there are many talented athletes booked for that event so keep your eyes on that one! Well done Daniel!!

Strangling from the back with or without collars/lapels: When you’re training or competing in a gi and you’ve done a good job getting behind your opponent and it’s time to end it - I’m sometimes asked - is it ok to strangle with your arms the same way you would in a no gi match and forsake the collars? It’s not wrong to use naked strangles when using a gi, you’ll see it done occasionally even at high levels, but it’s not optimal. Collar strangles by their very nature are inherently more efficient than even the best naked strangles. The collar is the perfect strangle implement. It is like using a purpose designed tool to complete a task rather than an improvised tool - they’ll both do the job, but one does the job much better. Train yourself to use the gi when strangling. It will enable you to incorporate bodyweight and leg strength into your rear strangles - a big advantage over naked strangles. In addition the collar penetrates the opponent’s defensive jaw positioning far better than your forearm ever could. It’s there - it’s better - use it.

This a sport where seemingly insignificant shifts of position of a hand, a foot, your hips or head, can mean the difference between a move working or not moving, and hence, between victory and defeat. Better to study a few moves deeply then, rather than many moves in a shallow fashion. You will be rewarded for the DEPTH of your knowledge more so than the BREADTH of your knowledge. Once you discover which moves have potential for you - study deeply and relentlessly. There is no end to improvement - even for moves you’ve been performing for years. There’s always something more than can potentially improve your performance. You can skimp on many things in life but study and practice is not one of them.

If you can break their stance you can attack at will: Everyone wants to attack arms, legs and neck - that’s great, but do yourself a favor - attack their stance first and THEN their limbs. That way you’ll have a much easier time against skilled opponents who would ordinarily stop your attacks. Your opponents defense always begins with stance. If you can take that from them they will have a difficult time stopping the next direction of attack!

Ambidextrous moves: Quite often I am asked if students should aspire to become equally adept at moves on both sides of the body. My answer is that in the case of defensive moves where the opponent chooses which side he attacks, you ought to be ambidextrous with your moves. So for example, in the case of escapes from side pins, you ought to be equally adept on both sides since your opponent may attack from either. If you can only perform escapes from side pins on your right side and he pins you on your left - you’re in trouble - so practice on both sides. In the case of moves where you get to choose which side you apply the move from - say a guillotine strangle - it’s ok to be expert on one side and not on the other. Most champions can only perform their favorite offensive moves on one side. A good general rule is that most defensive moves ought to be ambidextrous whilst most offensive moves can be mono-dexterous. Remember that for most moves it’s better to be truly excellent on one side than average on both sides. The human body itself is not symmetrical and in most cases, neither will be your jiu jitsu - most of all - make sure you are not AMBISINISTROUS - which is a little known word that denotes someone who is completely unskilled on BOTH sides! 😂😂

Relaxed tension: Jiu jitsu is a physical game. People often pontificate about how size and strength don’t matter and it’s all about pure leverage etc etc. The fact is, you’ll need a lot of exertion to enter into and complete effective moves on a skilled opponent. We all have a tendency to go all in on exertion to a point where it becomes very counterproductive. The key is being able to manage tension appropriately. You don’t want to be a rag doll - you’ll never beat anyone that way. Nor do you want to be under continuous maximal tension, you’ll quickly get exhausted after a strong start and lose as time passes. The best athletes discern when they can lower tension to a level appropriate to the second by second situation they find themselves in. They also put a cap on how long they’ll allow themselves to take their engine to the redline - too long and you’ll overheat. The best visual guide to tension is the face. If your face is contorted with exertion for long periods of time and in situations where nothing is happening - something is wrong. The best athletes have a zen like calm to their face for the vast majority of the match - even in situations that are pretty intense. They reserve their redline energy for the few times it’s really needed in a match try hard to follow this example. It can be difficult when starting but it’s very important for your long term development

Whatever your weight is - make sure your opponent feels every ounce of it: We typically think of weight and top pressure as the methodology of bigger athletes, but in truth, everyone, even the lightest, should do their best to use their bodyweight constructively to tire and immobilize opponents. The most important elements in your success or failure in this regard will be the robustness of your connection to the opponent, the placement/positioning of your body relative to your opponent and the duration of the pressure you create. This means you’ll need a solid grip, your weight positioned on a part of your opponent’s body that is ill suited to carry bodyweight (for example, his head) and riding skill to stay there long enough to cause fatigue. If you can get these elements in place you’ll make an opponent regret being underneath you regardless of your size and weight!

Fixating on where you want to be is half the battle: To a person who doesn’t know where they want to be jiu jitsu is a confusing mess. To a person who knows where they want to be but lacks the technical skill to get there, Jiu jitsu is a frustrating mess. Take heart however, just the act of mentally fixating on your positional goals will get you to them more often than you’d think. In a match there are myriad opportunities made available by the chaos of action that enable the athlete who keeps laser like focus on goals to identify opportunities and act on them immediately. As they say, a good plan enacted immediately is better than a great plan enacted later. So too in jiu jitsu. A decent move performed now is better than a mechanically perfect move performed too late. Just having that mental focus of where you want to be at all times will enable you overcome some shortcomings in technique and use opportunity as the path to the goal rather than mechanical perfection. Know where you want to be at all times and when at any time an opportunity presents itself - you’ll be ready to get to your positional goals

Finding your moves: Jiu jitsu gives you a huge array of moves to choose from - far more than you could ever hope to master in one lifetime. This means you must choose which you shall focus on - and those choices will define your jiu jitsu. Sometimes you’ll be shown a move and the first time you try it it feels like a natural fit for you. Other times you’ll try a new move and it feels like it just doesn’t suit you. Sometimes you can work through those initial feelings that this move is not meant for you and through hard work and perseverance make it an effective part of your arsenal. Sometimes if a move feels inherently awkward, just put it on the shelf for a while. I’ve seen athletes reject a move out of hand on first meeting, then several years later when they were in a different place mentally and physically try the same move a second time and felt it was now something they could feel as a natural fit for their game. If a move doesn’t come naturally to you, don’t discard it completely and immediately - let time work it’s magic either by working and studying hard to improve your performance or by playing a waiting game and trying it again in the future when you’ve changed a little. Remember however, that you don’t have to excel in every move - only enough to be effective against your opponents, so don’t be afraid to put moves on the shelf if you’ve given them an honest try but it just feels unnatural to you. Finding a balance between acceptance, rejection and investing time and work into projects that initially show little promise can be a tricky business. Don’t despair - time will almost always reveal the correct answer

If you could only have one…Thankfully Jiu jitsu gives us many fine choices when it comes to submission holds. All the major holds are very effective. They all have their strengths and weaknesses. If you had to choose only one for the rest of your life - make it the rear strangle. It stands above all the others in terms of effectiveness, application under all rules sets, grappling, fighting, self defense - it’s the best in all of them. Nothing is as certain once it’s locked in place. Nothing else creates such an imbalance between the offensive potential of your position versus the vulnerability of your opponents. With most submission holds you can choose whatever you like when it comes to building your arsenal - with the rear strangle it’s not a choice - IT’S A REQUIREMENT. Make sure you study it deeply

Any time you get your arms cinched around the neck and one arm whether from front or back or side, you’ve got a truly formidable control that is also very close to several submissions. Look for it when ever you can - it’s almost always available from any neutral or dominant position other than closed guard or open guards where the opponent can control distance. Once attained - you immediately become a true menace to your opponent and he will have to get defensive immediately. It’s a rather simple grip to apply (though controlling it for long periods of time against a skilled opponent isn’t so easy) that costs you little in terms of risk and effort and yields great rewards - look for it every time you spar!

Not all grips are equal: Grip is the foundation of all grappling sports. If you can’t get an effective grip on someone, none of the moves are possible. Any time you can grip an opponent - he will be able to grip you too - it’s important therefore, to know how to impose a better upon him than he has upon you. Some grips confer a greater degree of control than others. Even from identical grips, there are subtle positional tricks that can confer advantages to you. Your goal is to attain a grip that offers you greater control over your opponent than he has over you. Whether you have attained this goal will be immediately apparent when you try to move and control each other. If you are roughly same size and skill level but your grip makes it easier to move and control your opponent, then it’s likely you’ve got a better grip than him. Don’t be satisfied with any grip - work hard to get a dominant grip whenever possible. Remember - in a world where everything begins with grip, your job overall gets significantly easier when you start every engagement with a better grip than the other guy

If you can get an opponent off the ground with controlling grips - you own him: In order to initiate any kind of meaningful action an opponent must have contact with the mat - if you take that away from from him he can’t do anything until he returns to the ground. One of the very best ways to render an opponent momentarily helpless is to lift off the mat - how they land is up to you. There are many ways to do it - make sure you have at least one that you can perform very well - it’s an incredible weapon to have in your arsenal

Israel Adesanya: Last night was a night of personal triumph for Mr Adesanya. He decisively defeated a career nemesis, the great Brazilian kickboxer Alex Pereira and regained his title as the best middleweight in MMA. Perhaps even more than this, Mr Adesanya furnished an extremely important lesson to the martial arts world that merit consideration. On the face of things it would seem that going into the fight last night Mr Adesanya was facing an onerous task. The two athletes had met three times before. In kickboxing, Mr Pereira won via KO and a unanimous decision. Then he followed his rival into MMA and KO’ed him again to take away his title. On the surface it would seem Mr Pereira had his number. Three fights - three decisive wins. This leads us to a crucial lesson - THE RESULTS ALONE NEVER TELL THE WHOLE STORY. When most people watch a fight - they only remember the result. By that logic Mr Adesanya didn’t stand a chance last night. However, in two of this fights, Mr Adesanya had been doing extremely well before being caught by the impressive punching power of Mr Pereira. There was definitely enough in the first three fights to show that Mr Adesanya was capable of winning despite the lopsided results. Again, THE RESULTS DON’T ALWAYS TELL THE WHOLE STORY - AND ITS THE WHOLE STORY THAT FURNISHES THE ENDING. Mr Adesanya taught us all a lesson in reading the whole story rather than the summary - don’t count yourself out based on past results alone - often the truth is much more nuanced than that - make your assessments on the whole picture to get a more real appraisal of what you can do and what you need to do. Very often you’ll see that you’ve got a better chance than many people believe.

The power of strangles: There is no more certain method ending a match or indeed, a fight, than a well applied strangle. It takes time to get the position to apply it but that time will be well rewarded with the highest possible chance of victory if you can get there. Strangles are innately superior to joint locks in so far as their effects are absolutely certain. Make sure you develop at least one strangle from back and one from front that you have absolute faith in - they will surely become your primary weapons

When in bottom position - Attack their balance first and everything else second - this simple insight will make you far more effective when working underneath a fought opponent. Like all simple advice, it sounds easy, but making it work in practice takes discipline. Actively seek to off balance at every opportunity until it’s a habit!

Take your time when your opponent is carrying your weight: Speed is a wonderful thing and nothing makes the highlight feels more than a speedy entry and completion of a move. However, there is a lot to be said for taking your time whenever your opponent is carrying your weight. This will quickly exhaust even the strongest and fittest opponents of done well. Remember - once they get tired they’ll slow down, so you won’t need much speed to stay ahead and look faster than normal. Next time you can feel your opponent straining under your weight - slow things down - you will almost always be pleased with the results

If you want to win more - use your feet more! The game of Jiu jitsu is primarily fought with hips legs and feet and only secondarily with shoulders, arms and hands. Make sure always that your training and technique selection reflects this fundamental fact. The more you actively seek to use your feet to connect, move and off balance opponents - the more success you’ll have. We spend the majority of our lives in a hand dominant world - but the world of Jiu jitsu is foot dominant - make sure you play like it

One move - many applications: I would rather a student was familiar with ten variations of one move than ten different moves. Why? Because variants of a move are usually very similar to each other. As a result proficiency in one leads to rapid progress with the others. In addition, each variant provides a solution to an opponents resistance to the previous variant, so that you will have the ability to apply the move against skilled resistance - the single most important element in the successful application of moves in sparring and competition. This will garner far better results than superficial knowledge of many different moves. Get a small number of moves that you can excel in - develop many variations of each to cover the many variables you’ll have to cope with in sparring and you’ll be on a winning path!

Turning good into great: Positional dominance is a wonderful thing in Jiu Jitsu. It is very important however, that you adopt a maximizing mindset with regards positioning. Don’t settle for a GOOD position when a GREAT position is well within your reach. Here, Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl has gotten to the mounted position - that’s very good - but she does not settle for good - note how she focuses on walking her opponents arm up into extension that takes the position from good to great and opens up many submission holds. Take the extra time to take your favorite pins from good to great and you’ll take your game overall from good to great!

Young guns in Liverpool: The New Wave juniors have been on a rampage in local Jiu jitsu and now they’re going international. @luke_griffithjj Luke Griffith, @jiujitsugiant Dan Manasoiu, @davis_asare Davis Asare and teenage phenom @landonelmorebjj Landon Elmore traveled to Liverpool,England this week to compete in @grapplefest Mr Griffith was fighting for the 100kg Belt. All four athletes won via submission - three heel hooks and an arm bar! Luke won the title via heel hook, Dan won with his trademark heel hook, Davis via a well controlled arm bar and Landon via highlight reel flying kani basami into heel hook. Amazing work again from these hard working athletes!!

Using your strengths: We all have moves that we favor and feel more confident using. Pretty soon your training partners and opponents will figure out what they are. Don’t think your strengths become useless once your opponents realize what they are and develop counter measures - they just have a different function. Now they can be used not as direct attacks but as a means of creating predictable defensive reactions from an opponent that you can capitalize upon. If you have a powerful armbar from guard that opponents fear and posture away from this will create opportunities for sweeps to the rear as opponents overreact to the initial threat. As you develop favorite moves, be sure to develop auxiliary moves around your favorites that take advantage of exaggerated defensive reactions - that way you get twice the value from those favorites of yours!

I just completed my first 10,000 miles of driving - a feat you all probably did by the age of fifteen 😂😂 I never drove before other than a very brief stint in California in the 1980’s since I lived most of my adult life in New York City where a car is a major liability for most people. In the short time I’ve been driving I’ve been hit twice and had a few major near misses 😂😂 I have definitely developed a healthy respect for what you have all been dealing with your whole lives - driving is an expensive and time consuming business where it seems the only certainties are depreciation and accidents and ever increasing costs! 😂😂 I think perhaps I was wiser than I thought to avoid it all these years! I still love cars and love seeing a nice American V8 or German Turbo 6 race by me - but damn I have to say I admire the patience and resilience you all must have to have done this every day for decades and logging up many hundreds of thousands of miles (maybe over a million for some of you) Well now I’m about to get back behind the wheel to go teach another class 😜😜

Everything is easier when you get behind opponents: Whenever you feel you need a simple sense of direction in the middle of a tough match - it can be staged in three simple words - GET BEHIND HIM. Everything gets easier when you’re behind an opponent rather than battling him face to face. Opportunities to get behind are everywhere - standing, ground, top or bottom - they are always there. Make sure you have a set of trusted methods of getting behind from all the major scenarios and you’ll never lack a sense of direction on the mats!

If you can make an opponent carry your weight in an inefficient manner for extended periods of time - you will exhaust him to a degree that moves that wouldn’t have worked on him at the start of the match will start working on him. Of all the weapons you have at your disposal - time is one of the most significant - learn to use it well and your effectiveness on the mat will skyrocket

Victory in Florida! Nicholas Meregali @nicholasmeregali won double gold today in Orlando at the annual IBJJF Pan Ams event. It was one of the most dominant displays of gi Jiu jitsu since the legendary Roger Gracie performances of 2009-10. He won every match by submission from mount or rear mount save the final of open class which he won by sweeping, passing and mounting his very talented rival. It is incredible to think he did this with less than three weeks preparation after focusing primarily on no gi Jiu jitsu for the last year. His jiu jitsu skills and charisma are unmatched on the gi competition circuit and he showed this weekend that he is continuing to improve. Well done Nicholas Meregali - that was one of the most impressive displays of championship Jiu jitsu I ever saw!

Victory in Florida! Outstanding New Wave athlete Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl won double gold today at the IBJJF Pan Ams in juvenile blue belt division - both weight division and absolute. Here she is with her proud parents who do so much to support her training and competition preparation. The teenage phenom won every match by submission with not a single point being scored on her in a blistering display of positional pressure and submission skill. In addition, BJJ icon Nicholas Meregali advanced to tomorrow’s open weight finals with a devastating display of his submission skills - winning every match by strangle or suffocation from mount or rear mount. Tomorrow he will contest his weight division and the absolute final! It’s been great watching the matches today - so many talented athletes in all weight divisions, belt levels and age brackets! Keep your eyes on events tomorrow!!

Sometimes there’s a lot going on when it seems like there’s nothing going on: A strange thing about jiu jitsu is that there can be periods where the two athletes seem inactive, but underneath both are engaged in a tight contest for advantage that few can see even though it’s all happening in front of them. It is very much a sport only those who’ve spent a lot of time in similar situations can understand that both are vying for advantage even though it appears to the casual observer that nothing is happening. Sometimes can be something like a battle for inside head position, or top hand position - elements that don’t look like much but which have a big impact on who will dominate the next scoring exchange. Learning to see the importance of these small battles within a larger war is a good sign of your technical progress. Remember always that Jiu jitsu is like life - the quality of your start in any endeavor has a big impact on the degree of difficulty of a successful finish - so don’t be afraid to take your time in these seemingly inactive periods - establish your advantage first and THEN go into the big moves.

Getting ready: Nicholas Meregali @nicholasmeregali has been showing his immense skills in the gi these last three weeks getting ready for the Pan American Jiu Jitsu tournament this weekend in Orlando Florida. He and @helenajiujitsugirl will both compete this weekend. It’s been a blast going back into the world of gi training after a long period of no Gi specialization! Good Jiu Jitsu is good jiu Jitsu regardless of whether gi or no gi - if it embodies the spirit of control that leads to submission it’s all good!

It ain’t over until it’s over: There are many times in jiu jitsu when your opponent will get into scoring/submission positions on you. The more layered your defensive abilities the better you will do. The best athletes can be taken all the way into what appears to be hopeless situations and still navigate their way out and get back on the attack. If you can do this it will have a crushing effect on your opponents psyche. There are few feeling in jiu jitsu worse than getting to your best position and being on the cusp of victory and having a skilled opponent finagle his way out and immediately counter attack. The majority of your ability to do this is knowledge/skill, but undeniably some of it is psychological as you have to keep a calm mind under crises situations. You don’t want your first experience of this to occur in competition - make sure you practice it regularly in the gym with partners who can turn the heat down so that you can start without getting crushed and build intensity as your skill rises. If you can prolong scramble long enough you can exhaust opponents physically and break them mentally with their own favorite moves - this is high level Jiu jitsu indeed

Prolonging the action: We all tend to think of Jiu jitsu in terms of moves and the execution of a given move, but against skilled resistance your success or failure will be determined not so much by the execution of any given move but rather your ability to seamlessly INTEGRATE moves together so that a tough opponent who counters the first two or three will be overwhelmed by the fourth. The ability to prolong the action by stringing moves together is a sign that you’re gaining real jiu jitsu skill. Don’t execute a move and stop - even as you execute a move be mindful of what comes next and you will soon find that success on the mats finds you more often than before

Take away your opponents ability to resist one step at a time: The game of Jiu jitsu is all about first degrading your opponents offensive abilities (by taking him to the ground and securing top position either by takedown or sweep and then getting past his legs into dominant upper body pins) and then degrading his defensive abilities. A key part of this second aim is to pin your opponents arms down so that he has to defend himself with only one arm (and in some cases - no arms). This truly has an impact on an opponents ability to defend himself. It’s hard enough to defend a bad position at the best of times, when one of your arms is trapped it’s even worse. Once you’ve taken away an opponents offensive ability - train yourself to to go further and undermine his defensive abilities. Understand that this usually means some kind of trapping of his arm(s). It doesn’t take much to do this - but it adds a LOT to your ability to slice through the toughest defenses and get a submission victory!

When it’s time to go - go! Speed is a wonderful thing in combat sports, if you have it, god bless you, but if you don’t, rest assured that the race doesn’t necessarily go to the fastest - but to the one who STARTS FIRST. Speed won’t do you any good if you are indecisive. A slower player can get to a destination first if he starts first and doesn’t hesitate when the opportunity arises. A fast athlete can end up in second place to the desired destination if he is indecisive when it’s time to go. You don’t have to be the fastest person in the gym in jiu jitsu, but you should strive to be the fastest decision maker and once a decision is made, the fastest to act on it - that will more than atone for any lack of physical speed you may have

Your power is in your hips: When it comes to generating physical power for we humans, the legs and hips should be your focus. Use your hands and arms to CONNECT to your opponent, but let your hips generate the HORSEPOWER. The most obvious use of this principle is in throwing people, since the act of getting hips under an opponent’s hips in order to lift is easy to observe; however, the same idea pervades almost every aspect of the sport - so make sure it pervades every aspect of your game!

Proactive and reactive mindsets: Traditional jiu jitsu was centered around a reactive mindset where you let an opponent take the initiative and you capitalized on mistakes he made during the match. In very long matches against less experienced opponents this works very well. In modern jiu jitsu with shorter duration and very well trained opponents there is generally a push towards a proactive mindset where you initiate and get an opponent following your lead. In truth there have been great champions using both methods, so I believe it’s wrong to try to say one approach is inherently superior to the other. Try to develop both aspects into your game. When you are matched against much bigger and stronger opponents the reactive approach may well be better. As you age the reactive approach often gets better results. The proactive is best when you are matched evenly in size and skill. Ultimately you’ll need both to fully develop your game, though it’s natural that your personality will determine which of the two you favor - aggressive confident athletes typically favor the proactive approach and less assertive, patient or Underdog mentality types typically favor the reactive approach. So develop both, but recognize that you’ll probably favor one over the other, but that different circumstances and advancing age may change your mind as to which you’d rather make use of

The basis of an opponents defense is his stance - if you can consistently break his stance you can defeat him with your choice of techniques - if you can’t, it will feel like attacking a castle wall. Study stance - how to maintain it, change from one stance to another as the situation demands, and break the opponent’s stance and the rest of Jiu Jitsu becomes much easier

If you can beat the elbow - the back is yours: The back is generally the best place to be in a no gi grappling match. Your opponent knows this and will always put roadblocks between you and his back. One of the most important roadblocks he has are his elbows. As long as he keeps you between his elbows - there is no back exposure. Learning to beat his elbow by going under it, around it or over the top of it is this one of the great skills of the sport. Whenever you’re in front of an opponent keep asking yourself how you can get past his elbow, because if you do, your on the path to victory. Even the most vigilant opponent will at some point get forgetful about the elbow as the barrier to the back. If you move appropriately at that moment you’ll be on his back in a flash - and that may very well be all that’s needed to turn the match in your favor.

Age and jiu jitsu: It’s a question that at some point, we all have to ask - how will increasing age affect your approach to Jiu jitsu? Let’s start by breaking this down into three questions. First, what do you LOSE in jiu jitsu as you age? Second, what do you KEEP in jiu jitsu as you age? Third, what do you GAIN in jiu jitsu as you age? In my experience you will lose speed, flexibility, mobility, cardiovascular endurance, explosive strength and robustness (resistance to injury and ability to come back quickly from injury). You will keep most of your isometric strength (especially grip strength) within normal range of motion. You will gain patience and mat wisdom. Of course there are things you can do to reduce these losses as you age, but understand that no one has ever beaten father time and you are unlikely to be the first. As you age your game must evolve in ways that reflect your answers to these three questions. Try to develop a game that does not rely too heavily on the attributes you are starting to lose but rather is based upon the attributes you keep and gain. This still gives you a lot leeway to work with. Do your best to keep your physical body preserved as well as you can, but understand that time will inevitably change you physically and be prepared to adapt accordingly along the lines of your answers to the three questions

Making waves: The talented juniors of New Wave had another great night of local competition tonight here in Austin. @reeseis_bjj Reese LeFever won the lightweight tournament against very talented opponents and won every match by submission in a superb performance that showed his hard work in training has has great effects. @davis_asare continued his incredible weekend of work - he competed three nights in a row in three different events and won every match mostly with highlight reel submissions! It’s great to see the combination of ambition and hard work working its magic! As always keep your eyes on the distant horizon but your mind on the next practical step and you’ll be amazed at what you can accomplish!!

Working towards dreams: Outstanding New Wave juniors @davis_asare and @helenajiujitsugirl had great performances here in Austin today. Mr Asare won his tournament in his usual convincing style and Ms Crevar continued her amazing run by winning the brown belt title via stranglehold from mount - an incredible feat for a sixteen year old developing athlete. It’s great to see this path - starting local, building skills and experience that will enable to take successive steps to higher and higher levels until you’re where you once dreamed of being. I watched this progression in a young Georges St Pierre and Gordon Ryan and it’s the path you must all follow on your own journey in whatever quest you’ve assigned yourself. Build a dream, create a plan and follow it long enough to see it become reality!

Jiu jitsu, age and athleticism: As in Jiu Jitsu, as in life - you don’t get to work with the body you want, you must work with the body you have. Yes, there are many things you can do to improve the physical capabilities of your body, especially if you have time to work with, but age or a lack of athletic background sometimes mean diminishing physicality that can undermine your ability to perform many of the moves of Jiu jitsu. In these cases it often makes sense to focus on the aspects of Jiu jitsu that are within your current physical reach - at least until you make improvements to your physical abilities. As you progress further in age this becomes an imperative. Indeed, not only must you be more selective in the moves you choose to utilize, you must even become more selective in who you train with and how you train. Every student must learn to adapt their jiu jitsu to their body and their body to Jiu jitsu - as you age or if you have no prior athletic background this will require a greater level of adaptation on your part. Seek to use moves that do not exceed your current mobility level and train with partners who can work around your physical limitations. There are many very good moves that work at the highest level that require very little mobility or flexibility or speed or explosiveness to be effective - focus on these and you’ll be shocked how effective you can be in the mat with younger, fitter and more mobile opponents!

I am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video AGELESS JIU JITSU: WINNING WHEN YOU’RE OLDER OR LESS ATHLETIC. This video is designed to help jiu jitsu players who feel compromised by either their age or a lack of athletic background and who find performing many of the moves of Jiu jitsu problematic but still want to be effective. There are certain moves, positions and tactics that can enable older or slower, less mobile players to be very effective against younger, fitter opponents - this video lays out a game plan for exactly that. I always felt that this was an area I could help people with since I am approaching late fifties in age and I have a crippled leg that always severely compromised my mobility on the mats. Despite that I was able to develop a game that made me quite effective and I would like to be able to do the same for other people. If you feel like age or a lack of athletic background is affecting your learning, maybe check it out and see if it can help! Link in my Instagram bio

Details: This a game where one small adjustment to what you’re doing with a given move can mean the difference between success or failure, between winning and losing. It’s natural then, to obsess over details and try to learn as many as possible in the quest to improve your performance. Remember however, that the human mind has its limits and you won’t be able to remember much under the heat and stress of a competitive match. As such, you must learn to balance the need for detailed knowledge and the reality of our cognitive limitations. Don’t try to learn vast amounts of detail immediately. Rather, pick out two or three key details that have the most positive impact on your performance and focus on those - you can always add additional details later after you’ve thoroughly imprinted the first set of details. Working in this manner is the best way to make quick and positive progress.

Ashi waza!! There’s nothing like a foot sweep to show the true nature of Jiu jitsu. Of all the techniques in Jiu jitsu, judo and wrestling, it’s hard to beat foot sweeps for the best expression of maximum efficiency and best results for effort expended. That feeling of catching an opponent mid step on a weightless leg and letting gravity do the work for you is the best feeling in the sport. Most takedowns are grueling affairs with a lot of effort and risk involved. Foot sweeps minimize risk and maximize reward like nothing else. They can be a little frustrating initially as there is some timing skill involved, but like all good things - the potential rewards more than justify the delay in gratification - make them part of your skill set!!

New Wave juniors on fire - Austin Jiu Jitsu getting strong! Last night the @blackwidowinvitational grappling event was held here in Austin and many very talented local competitors came out to show their skills! There were both super fights and an open weight tournament. @luke_griffithjj @davis_asare @helenajiujitsugirl and @landonelmorebjj came out for New Wave. Davis, Helena and Landon all won via submission and Luke Griffith won the open weight tournament, every match via submission to take the trophy! It was really good to see the developing talent here in Austin. Last year at the world championships the relatively small city of Austin won more ADCC medals than any other city in the world! It’s great to see the effect this is having on young local athletes as they start their own climb towards their goals!

If you can present and frame the problem you’re trying to overcome in a clear and well defined way - the chances of a good solution go up dramatically. If you seek solutions - start with a clear articulation of the problem!

Pajama party: Filming my latest video in Boston with the inestimable Brian Glick @bzglick my long suffering student from NYC days and a true jiu jitsu treasure. We are filming video on Jiu jitsu for older and less athletic players - I feel like this is one thing I am truly qualified to teach because I’m an old cripple! 😂😂 Nothing makes me happier as a coach than seeing an older or less athletic student taking on a much younger or athletically gifted opponent in the dojo and giving him hell - that’s when you really see the magic of jiu jitsu!

Filming in Boston! It’s been great as always working with two of my favorite students Brian Glick @bzglick and Placido Santos @placisantos on a new video in the gi! It’s crazy cold here in Boston with a big snowfall today - it’s been a long time since I walked in heavy snow! Now it’s time for dinner and then back to work tomorrow!

First responsibilities: You have many responsibilities in Jiu jitsu on the path to victory, but it’s important to understand that some take precedence over others. Why? Because until some more fundamental responsibilities have been addressed, you can’t move on to the next. In bottom position your first responsibility is always to ensure that YOU KEEP YOUR LEGS BETWEEN YOU AND YOUR OPPONENT. Only then can you hope to prevail against bigger, stronger opponents from underneath, only then can you make bottom positions prevail against top. Your ability to get your legs between you and your opponent and keep them there long enough to attack successfully is the first responsibility of bottom position. Like any other basic responsibility - don’t lose track of it and make damn sure you satisfy it before you try to move on to anything else. In your training make sure you master this to a sufficient extent before moving off into other skills because none of those other skills will be worth a penny if you can’t first get and then maintain your legs between you and your opponent.

Great night of grappling in Costa Mesa: The big WNO grappling show had some great action tonight. Unfortunately we came up short in our two matches. Giancarlo Bodoni lost a decision to current champion Pedro Merinho when Mr Merinho completed two nice takedowns. JT Torres had an impressive comeback win showcasing his well known positional skills. In the main event Felipe Pena won a very tightly contested thirty minute bout against Nick Rodriguez. It was a titanic bout that was so evenly matched that neither could complete an attack. Mr Rodriguez got very close with two guard passes and two nice leg lock attempts. Mr Peña got close with two attempts to take the back, one of which was very close. It was was a very difficult match to score but the judges favored Mr Pena - either way it was a great match and both athletes did very well to press their attacks against such tough opposition. It’s great to see a big venue being filled for a Saturday night of grappling - this sport is growing well!

Sad news: Gordon Ryan will have to pull out of the WNO grappling super fight with Felipe Pena scheduled for this weekend in Costa Mesa. Mr Ryan was afflicted with severe stomach issues that resulted in a severe and quick weight loss/dehydration along with severe nausea and associated symptoms. He tried hard to shrug it off and bulldoze through it but to no avail. Even very mild workouts left him totally exhausted and physically debilitated. It was a tough call as both athletes had invested a lot in preparation for this match and expectations were high, but I believe it is the correct call. This match deserves both athletes in peak physical condition. The good news is that the event still has amazing matches scheduled for the fans. The great JT Torres returns to competition and Giancarlo Bodoni takes on world champion Pedro Merinho for the 205 point world title. The main event has been switched to Felipe Pena vs Nick Rodriguez. This should be a great match. These two had an epic match at ADCC with a Nicky Rod taking a closely fought victory via guard pass. This time however it’s a totally different rule set and thirty minutes long. Both are very physically imposing but in very different ways - one is fast and explosive, the other isometric Pythonesque strength. This should be a great match!! Keep tuned to @flograppling for updates for schedule, pre-match interviews etc

Strangles are almost always the better option: Submission is the soul of Jiu jitsu. There are two types of submission hold in the sport - joint locks and strangles. Both are essential to the game and your development, but if you have a choice - in most cases, go with strangles. Strangles have a greater degree of certainty associated with them. A courageous and determined opponent can simply refuse to submit to a joint lock if he is willing to take the damage, but refusal to tap to a strangle won’t affect the outcome - even the bravest opponent will simply pass out. In addition, there is something intrinsically better about a method of ending a match that is less damaging to an opponent. A strangle causes no lasting damage if applied within the rules of the game - a joint lock on the other hand often causes damage. Strangles are more gentle in application and result (unless of course applied with bad intentions outside the sport). Jiu jitsu expects you to train toward mastery of both - but if fate should ever give you choice between them - bet on strangles over joint locks in most cases

Getting work done: It’s late night here in LA and Giancarlo Bodoni @giancarlobodoni is getting ready for his title match against powerhouse title holder 205 pound WNO champion Pedro Merinho. With him is Aussie grappling icon Kit Dale @kitdaleofficial who very generously comes in every night to help preparation. Its always a great feeling for me to connect with Australians in Jiu jitsu and Kit Dale has a been a great representative for many years so it was a pleasure to work with him!

It all starts with grip: Gripping is the first interaction you have with your opponent in every single match, sparring round and indeed, every single exchange from your first day in jiu jitsu until your last. It is the single most common action in the sport and yet shockingly, the least talked about, discussed and taught. How you grip determines how you act. The quality of your opponents grip gives you an immediate read as to what skill level he possesses. The better you get, the more you will identify GRIPPING as the basis of victory. If you can dominate the grips you won’t dominate any other aspect of the match; if you can, you will have the initiative in every exchange between the two of you. Don’t just grab opponents - have an idea of what you want to accomplish first and then grip second, in accordance with that idea. Once you grip - move into the plan - don’t grip and stop - even the best grips won’t last long, so grip and move. Having a strong grip is a good thing, but not nearly so important as grip placement and the ability to go from one grip to another in rapid succession. It may not be the glamorous skill in Jiu jitsu - that lack of glamor is why no one cares to teach it or learn it - but nothing surpasses it in importance

The fight for position: “position before submission” is the great cliche of Jiu jitsu. Like most cliches it is an over simplification but with a lot of truth to it. There are two great positional battles in Jiu jitsu. The first is the battle to get past the legs into chest to chest positions. The second is to get past the elbows to chest to back positions. There are others, but those are the two most important. If you can win those two battle consistently, you’ll win a lot of matches - this I can promise you. Look at your opponents elbows for what they are - an obstacle to be flanked. Make that a habit and you’ll make winning a habit!

One of the central insights of Jiu jitsu - fight them with your legs! One of the central tactical messages of Jiu Jitsu is this - whenever possible - face your opponent and grapple him with your legs. This is particularly important when underneath opponent because if you know what you’re doing the strength of your legs can make up for the usual disadvantages of being under an opponent. AS LONG AS YOU’RE FACING YOUR OPPONENT AND HAVE YOUR LEGS BETWEEN HIM AND YOU EVERYTHING IS USUALLY OK AND YOU’LL BE ABLE TO BOTH DEFEND AND ATTACK. The moment an opponent gets behind you or past your legs defense becomes considerably more difficult and offense is largely lost. The single biggest shift that must occur when you begin Jiu jitsu is the shift from everyday life where we are all upper body dominant; to lower body dominant on the mats. Only when this shift has been made can your jiu jitsu progress according to your potential

The moment of opportunity: So many times in a match their is a moment where both athletes can score, both are vulnerable and both can attack - victory in the exchange will go either to the one with the stronger single attack or the best follow up attack(s) - so make very sure you practice both approaches

Go the extra distance when you pin: Great pinners in Jiu Jitsu always seek more than the basic position - they seek to additionally break their opponents posture and stance by getting opponents arms extended. If you can do this you greatly increase both the pressure of the pin and the chance it can be converted into submission. Next time you get into a solid pin, remind yourself to go further and get your opponents arms extended!!

Amplitude: There are few things in martial arts more impressive than a well executed high amplitude throw where an opponent is taken up and then down straight to their back with momentum. Most martial arts reward this with a high points score. Jiu jitsu is the exception to the rule. All takedowns in jiu jitsu score the same regardless of amplitude. The smallest trip scores the same as the biggest back arching throw. Interestingly, ADCC is the only major rule set that gives different scores for different takedowns - however, it does not reward amplitude - it rewards POSITION - if you land outside your opponents guard you get an extra score. When it comes to takedowns, Jiu jitsu scores the AFTERMATH of the takedown - where you land and how much control you can exhibit on your opponent post takedown. Once you shift the emphasis from the takedown itself to the aftermath of the takedown, it becomes a very different game.

Chasing dreams in Austin: Oliver Taza @tazagarami and Helena Crevar @helenajiujitsugirl along with Davis Asare @davis_asare led the New Wave team to a great night of local Jiu jitsu here in Austin. Oliver and Helena won title belts at the @enigmajiujitsuofficial Enigma Grappling show. Many of the juniors competed tonight and gained the valuable experience needed to go from small to great over time. It’s always great to watch them go out and apply what they train so hard to do every day in the gym! Congratulations everyone - back at it again tomorrow!

We had the pleasure of hosting this super talented young athlete today - Cole Abate @coleabatejj of AOJ. He was in town visiting family and stopped by. This young man has tremendous skills, great work ethic and a deep passion for the sport - all the ingredients required for greatness! He impressed everyone with his game today! With young athletes like these the future of Jiu jitsu looks very bright indeed!

If you can put their weight on their heels…Sweeping athletic opponents is never easy, but understand this - athleticism is determined by more than genetics - on a second by second basis in a match the single biggest determinant of your athletic potential is your STANCE. It doesn’t matter how athletic you are, if your stance is compromised you will struggle to engage in athletic movement. Nobody is athletic when their weight is placed awkwardly on their heels. Even the most gifted opponents can be made to stumble and fall under those circumstances. Look to set your opponents weight on his heels when you want to knock him backwards and your task will be MUCH easier

Most of the good things in jiu jitsu occur when you misalign yourself with your opponent: It’s difficult to get most of the moves in Jiu Jitsu when you’re directly underneath them and lined up with their centerline. Everything gets easier when you shift out to the side a little and get on your side rather than flat on your back. These movements are small and easy to ignore when watching, but they have great significance in improving your performance. In addition this kind of shifting off center is what enables you to enter into moves without flexibility or dexterity and thus are the best hope for less athletic or older practitioners to enter into moves. Next time your feeling stuck start with a shift out to the side and THEN enter your move - you’ll be surprised how small changes can garner big results

The quality of your offense in jiu jitsu is proportional to the quality of your connection to your opponent. If you can latch on with tightness you can be very effective, but looseness of connection will create failure before you even begin the technique. Cultivate connection and your jiu jitsu offense will have a great foundation

Know what you want before you make contact but be prepared to work with what you get given if you can’t get your first choices - in this respect Jiu jitsu mirrors life

Start at the extremities and work to the core: The best control of the human body is at the hips and head - if you control both of those then you truly control your opponent. The problem is that the head and hips are difficult to get a hold of. This means that the typical pattern of Jiu jitsu is to initiate contact at the extremities - the feet and hands - and work methodically up the limbs to the hips or head. It’s rather like climbing a tree or a rope - you have to climb to get to your goal. Get used to this type of action - it will form the basis of every engagement you make in the sport

Juniors on the prowl!! Talented new wave Jiu jitsu juniors went onstage tonight along with senior Oliver Taza at @f2wbjj big event in Downtown Austin! @davis_asare @helenajiujitsugirl @landonelmorebjj and Reece LeFever all via submission tonight against some very tough and talented opponents from B Team. Oliver Taza won via perfect outside heel hook against talented 10th planet athlete Ben Eddy. Now these talented youngsters are loose in Austin Saturday night! I’m way to old to keep up so I’m going home to chill 😂😂😂

The action truly starts when you get angles on your opponent - show me an athlete who can consistently get angles on opponents and I’ll show you an athlete who wins and lot more than he loses. Everything is easier with angle!!

The power of pins: Probably the quickest method of fatiguing an opponent is to make them carry your weight inefficiently. The most inefficient way to carry bodyweight is with your head and shoulders. Any position that forces an opponent to bear your weight on his head and shoulders will exhaust him over time. Pins are a fine example of this. Get your chest over his shoulders and face and he will struggle under your weight. That struggle is exhausting. Pinning like this is a precursor to submission. Tired opponents always quit more easily than fresh opponents. Don’t pin for points - PIN FOR PRESSURE - and you’ll have a game that opponents fear

When it comes time to carry the weight of your opponent it is not the strength of your muscles that is most important, but rather, the strength of your STANCE. Whatever degree of functional strength you bring to the scenario you’re engaged in will always be proportional to the strength of your stance. Perfect your stance for all the major scenarios you can expect to find yourself in in a match, learn to move well from one stance to another in accordance with the unfolding action - and you’ll always feel stronger than you look!!

Old friends: One of my favorite things is seeing old friends again. Chris Weidman was one of the most talented MMA athletes I ever worked with. He came to train with me when his first jiu jitsu coach (and my great mentor) Matt Serra suggested he come in to work with me in the blue basement. Chris had the goal of beating the man many believed at that time was the MMA goat - Anderson Silva. It seemed an impossible goal. Mr Silva was literally toying with his opponents at this time. Mr Weidman was an exceptional student who learned moves with ease and moved like a welterweight despite being a big middleweight. The first time we worked together was the Tom Lawler fight which Mr Weidman won in seconds with a devastating Darce strangle. Then he defeated Demian Maia and Mark Munoz, endured a terrible shoulder injury and surgery and then began one of the most impressive fight camps I ever saw to get ready for the challenge of his life against the great Anderson Silva. He went on the shock the world by convincingly winning two fights against Mr Silva. After that we drifted apart and worked together only once more - for his thrilling match against Kelvin Gastulem, where once again Chris Weidman showed his grappling skill - winning with a beautiful kata gatame strangle. He came into Austin today to work on his grappling! It was like old times! He did a fine job studying some of the recent changes in submission grappling and showed that brilliance of his that I saw so many times years ago in the basement!

Time: There is always a short time before the big event where your physical work is complete and now you have to wait to step up to the challenge. In that time keep your message to yourself simple and clear. Don’t let complexity dull your direction now. Every match has a simple theme running through it - keep your mind on that theme. Victory in any given match up will come from adherence to one or two simple ideas that confer you advantage over your opponent. For example, if you have a speed advantage over him, focus your thoughts on how speed can bring victory. See yourself as initiating action and moving away from threats with your speed. Picture your passing using methods where speed is a factor, such as toreando passes. In bottom position visualize yourself in open guards that allow speed of movement, rather than slower positions such as half guard or closed guard. When the action is close keep your thoughts simple and clear and the path to victory will be shorter and clearer!

Study: You are engaged in a sport where one seemingly small detail can mean the difference between a move working or not, and where if a move works it can mean winning and if it doesn’t - losing. So study deeply. Many athletes are not afraid of hard physical work, but shy away from hard mental work. Your work doesn’t end when class is over - that’s when study time begins. Get that one insight that improves your performance in a key area and your performance tomorrow may benefit immensely. Hard mental work makes the physical work much easier!

If you want to feel stronger than your opponent - fight his head, arms and shoulders with your feet, legs and hips - that is the surest way to make strong opponents feel weaker and average opponents feel weak.

Angle is everything: It’s hard to make frontal assaults in this game. All your opponents best defenses are directly in front of him. Seek always to get a preliminary angle - it doesn’t have to be a big angle - even small angular change makes a noticeable difference. Angle will often shorten the distance to a target, get you outside their main defenses, or force them to adjust their position in ways that let you catch them on the hop before their stance is reset. Don’t just step in. Step out to an angle first and THEN step in - make this a habit and you’ll be much more successful at much less cost.

The single most important desiderata with sweeps and takedowns is to begin by BREAKING YOUR OPPONENTS STANCE. If you can do that, you’ll be able to takedown even very athletic people, if you can’t, you’ll not only likely fail but be strongly countered by good opponents. No one is strong or athletic in a broken stance. Break his stance and his balance will soon follow.

Ideals of Jiu jitsu: At its core jiu jitsu is concerned with the use of mechanics and tactics to overcome greater size, strength and aggression. As such, it adheres to certain foundational principles that guide our behavior on the mats. One of the more important principles is this - whenever faced with opponents of greater size and strength, try to make the match a fight between your legs versus their upper body. The human body has an obvious discrepancy between the strength and endurance of the lower body and upper body. It doesn’t matter how much bigger and stronger an opponent is than you - it’s very unlikely his arms are stronger than your legs. As such, always try to fight your opponents upper body with your legs to the greatest degree possible. One of the clearest expressions of this foundational principle is the triangle hold. It uses both your legs to strangle an opponent and control his head and one arm. It can be done from virtually anywhere and has many variations. Here, middleweight Giancarlo Bodoni uses it in the ADCC World Championship to successfully strangle a heavyweight in the open weight division. Harness the inherently greater strength of your legs to fight the inherently weaker strength of your opponents upper body and victory will often find you

Mechanical perfection: Chasing perfection in technique is a path to both heaven and hell. The closer you get, the better your performance. It can come at a heavy price however, the desire for perfection can paralyze action when athletes keep waiting for that perfect opportunity for the perfect technique that just never arrives, or hold back from trying a move for fear that it won’t be perfect. Make sure the chase for perfection plays a positive role in your development rather than a negative one. Relentlessly pursue ideal form in drilling and do your best to replicate that sense of perfection in sparring and competition, but temper this with the understanding that it doesn’t need to be perfect - just better than your opponents ability to defend it - so don’t hang back when the time comes - go into the technique with confidence!

Sydney Australia: It’s been a great experience coming back to Australia to see my family and catch up with the jiu jitsu scene here. Australian jiu jitsu is rapidly expanding in size, enthusiasm and skill. Australia has always excelled in sports as evidenced by their impressive pound for pound performances in the Olympics and many other high profile sports over many generations so it’s not surprising to see them make great progress in Jiu jitsu. Thank you so much to all the people who came out to see our approach to Jiu jitsu - it was a pleasure to meet you and talk about our game. Australia is as beautiful as ever - here I am In Sydney harbor. I’ve always had a very fond association with Sydney - it was the first big international city I ever travelled to when I was a youngster leaving New Zealand for the first time. It’s grown greatly in size and sophistication since those days but still retains its beauty and charm. Now I’m at Sydney airport waiting for my flight back to the US. I’m sad to leave this great land and my family, but very excited to get back to training in Texas and see my students as they get ready for big upcoming challenges! Looking for to returning here in the future!! 🇦🇺🇦🇺

I am very pleased to announce the release of my latest instructional video with @bjj.fanatics Thos is the third and final instructional in the STANDING2GROUND series which features jiu jitsu standing position and takedown skills. This third volume covers UPPER BODY TAKEDOWNS which featured so prominently in the award winning performances of my students in the ADCC 2022 World Championships. Upper body takedowns have several notable advantages in Jiu Jitsu competition - they largely avoid the danger of upper body submissions as you attempt takedowns and offer much better probability of scoring after the takedown due to tight upper body connection in the critical aftermath of a takedown attempt. My students made upper body takedowns the basis of their standing game and had great success with it - perhaps you can too!! Link in my Instagram bio

The power of upper body takedowns: The most commonly applied and scored takedowns in no gi grappling are lower body takedowns - tackles to the legs - usually single leg and double leg variations. While there is no doubting the effectiveness of these techniques, they do have some issues in the context of no gi grappling. First, the contact they make is chest to thigh. This means that upon contact with the ground you lack upper body control. This always creates scramble conditions that make scoring under Jiu Jitsu rules very problematic against a skilled and experienced opponent. Second, the lowered head and arm positions create dangerous amounts of head exposure (guillotine) arm exposure ( kimura/Darce/armbar) and back exposure (sprawl and go behind). It is very prudent to add upper body takedowns that begin with chest to chest or chest to back contact that greatly reduce the dangers of prolonged scrambles and submissions as you attempt takedowns. In the no gi context these typically require a blend of wrestling, judo and jiu jitsu skills adapted to Jiu jitsu scoring criteria. It is a fascinating part of the game and one that Jiu jitsu must incorporate if it is to progress towards it’s potential in takedowns suited to its unique rule set. You will often see my students utilize upper body takedowns when possible due to the advantages I mentioned. Best of all is to blend both upper body and lower body takedowns to create a dual threat that opponents will find very difficult to contend with. Most Jiu Jitsu students have a solid understanding of upper body grips from their guard game - once they learn some principles of positional advantage in standing position they can usually adapt fairly quickly to gain competence on their feet with those same grips. My students where able to showcase upper body takedowns to medals at ADCC 2022 - with training they can work for you too!

Happy Birthday Mum!! Hanging out with my dear Mum who gave me everything she could - born in the USA, raised in New Zealand and coming together in Australia 🇺🇸🇦🇺🇳🇿 Thank you so much for raising us Mum - if i could give my students half of the effort and care you gave us I’d have a gym full of champions. Thank you also to all the many Australian jiu jitsu students who came to seminars that I taught while here on short notice and at crazy times and locations and showed just how passionate and dedicated they are - it’s been an honor and a pleasure to help where I can.

Oh yeah!! Just finished teaching a jiu jitsu seminar in Brisbane Australia and a very generous student gave me a New Zealand All Blacks rugby jersey!! Screw the rash guard - I’m wearing THIS home!! 😜😜

Helena Crevar - an outstanding talent: Recently a very talented female teenage athlete, @helenajiujitsugirl Helena Crevar, just fifteen years old, began training with us in Austin Texas. She has applied herself very well, rapidly making the shift to twice a day daily training and showing very admirable maturity and determination on the training mats. She has very supportive parents who come to every session and offer a very impressive level of support. Yesterday she had her first local competition against an adult 2x world champion and won in over time via takedown - despite only working takedowns upon her arrival here in Texas a relatively short time ago, showing her hard work and excellent learning ability combined with her excellent ability to apply knowledge under pressure on stage in match conditions against strong opponents. Well done Helena! Here she is in victory and then hanging out with fellow New Wave junior phenoms Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj and Davis Asare @davis_asare after the win!

Seeing an old friend in Melbourne - the story of John Donehue: Many years ago when I began training in New York City I would often hear of a talented Australian grappler with a very similar name and story to mine - so similar in fact that many people thought we were the same person! Over a decade later I was teaching a class when a very well mannered man introduced himself to me as John Donehue - I finally met my grappling doppelgänger! We became good friends. Mr Donehue had an impeccable grappling pedigree. He is a Sixth degree black belt under the great Rigan Machado and one of a handful of people who got a black belt from legendary Judo/catch wrestling icon Judo Gene Labelle. In addition he was a student and training partner of the great Iowa wrestler Rico Chiaperelli and worked extensively with the legendary RAW MMA team in the early days of MMA. As such he has a very unique perspective and approach to grappling that encompasses Jiu jitsu, catch, judo and wrestling at the highest levels. His grappling knowledge is extraordinary and so is his insight into the early California Jiu jitsu and grappling scene. Here in South East Melbourne I taught seminars today at his school - it was wonderful to see what a great job he has done raising excellent students who were able to quickly absorb the material we went over. If you’re ever in Melbourne this a great place to train!!

Victory in Thailand! Garry Tonon showed his developing MMA grappling mastery with a beautiful kimura/sumi gaeshi takedown into submission in less than two minutes against tough and experienced Johnny Nunoz in Thailand in the @onechampionship event. Good Grappling is always exciting - but even more so in the context of MMA. Mr Tonon showed the brilliance he is renown for with a beautiful improvised takedown and use of the cage to get the position required for the finish. Congratulations Mr Tonon - flawless victory!! 😜😜

Congratulations to Gordon Ryan and Giancarlo Bodoni! These two incredible grapplers just won @flograppling Best Male Athlete 2022 (Gordon Ryan) and Breakthrough Grappler 2022 (Giancarlo Bodoni) awards! It was an incredible year for both men in ways that were both very different and similar. Both relocated to Austin Texas as part of a broken team. Both were regarded as unlikely candidates for a great 2022. Mr Ryan was reconciling himself with the notion of retirement due to a severe stomach problem and had fallen away from competition and even training was very difficult and frequently interrupted. Mr Bodoni was coming of seven consecutive losses in relatively minor league local no gi competition. Their diligence and perseverance allowed them to claw their way back into the game - small steps in the gym followed by smaller competitions. Mr Ryan began with exhibition matches and Mr Bodoni started with local competitions against unknowns. Both put in huge amounts of work and made changes to their game that kept them progressing forward. In the biggest show in grappling history - ADCC 2022 - both shone like stars. All that unseen hard work put them in a mindset where they could not be beaten. Watching that progression from such an unpromising start to such a dazzling conclusion in such a short timeframe will be forever one of the most impressive displays of training commitment I saw in my career. Congratulations to both of you! No one deserves it more!!

Homeward bound: At Austin airport waiting for my plane for the long haul to Australia to see Mom (Mum) and family. It’s been a long time! Looking forward also to seeing jiu jitsu friends old and new and doing my best to help out the burgeoning Australian jiu jitsu scene! One day when I get some time I will go the land where I was raised, New Zealand - I miss the beauty of that great Island where I grew up. This will be a thirty hour flight when all is said and done - I hope I’ve still got what it takes to hit the ground running 😂😂😂 More likely I will have to be dragged off the plane unconscious and mumbling incoherently about grappling moves 😂😂😂 See you there!

The back is truly one of the key grappling positions, but like any good position, it can be made even better by going the extra distance and Trapping your opponents defensive arms - making a good position great. When it comes to pins, don’t settle for just the position itself - get the position AND trap the opponents arms and you’ll convert the pin to a submission much more often!!

Staying compact: This is a sport that generally punishes extension. In general you’re better off in most situations keeping your elbows and knees close to your core and to each other. If you just work with this simple desiderata in mind - KEEP YOUR ELBOWS AND KNEES CLOSE TOGETHER AND CLOSE TO YOUR BODY - you’ll do better on the mats. As you grow in sophistication you’ll add the idea of inside positioning but that’s a longer story for a another day. Stay compact and you’ll stay alive - stay alive and you’re always in the fight!

Favorite moves: All great athletes have their signature moves. These form the basis of their attacking game. Once you develop one solid attacking move it will force opponents to react to it in predictable ways. This will enable you to develop follow up moves that counter your opponent’s counters to that original move. Thus does the original move function like the trunk of a tree and from that trunk grows multiple branches and from them more branches until a complete tree grows and emerges. In this way a few favorite moves can create great growth across your entire game. I usually discourage athletes from trying to FORCE a favorite move. It will usually come to you naturally and organically as a response to your body type and personality and coaching lineage. Once you have a few favorites they will form the bedrock of your offense. Add appropriate supplements to those moves in response to opponent’s resistance and soon you’ll have a complete offensive game that fits you as naturally as your favorite clothes

Your legs are your life line: This sport is all about how to use your legs to control your opponent. Your legs are the strongest strongest element of your body and have the best endurance. If you can develop your coordination and flexibility in your legs the strength and endurance are already there. When you can use your legs as confidently as your arms and your feet as confidently as your hands - you’ll be a very difficult person to defeat on the mat!

Fighting your way out of trouble: If there is one certainty in Jiu jitsu it’s that your opponent will create every bit of havoc and trouble for you that they can. The typical pattern will always be one of you constantly having to dig yourself out of trouble and then get back on the attack. When we drill we typically just practice moves assuming we are in control of the action, but the reality is that in sparring and competition we are rarely in control of the action. Usually it’s a back and forth battle where you’re defending against your opponents attack with you working hard to shut it down and then trying to establish your own attack. This pattern is maintained until one of you fatigues or one of you can establish a position or move that exceed the others ability to defend. Get used to this sense of back of forth struggle. It’s exhausting and frustrating but it’s the essential nature of the game. If you can’t accept and embrace that, then you cannot expect to do well

Highly effective, but not universally effective: There are some moves in Jiu jitsu that are highly effective but not universally effective. What does this mean? It describes a move that works extremely well for those people whose body type supports the move, but doesn’t work at all for those people whose body does not support the move. A good example would a body triangle. If you are blessed with relatively long and thin legs and your opponent has a reasonably slim waist, a body triangle is extremely effective as a means of back control that is generally superior to basic hooks. Anyone can use it, should use it. However, a body triangle may well be impossible for students who have short, thick legs or an opponent with a large mid section. In these cases you can’t even get the move started. So what should we do? Should we focus on universality as the trait of our move selection? Or is it better to learn the most effective moves and just apply them cases by case where applicable? I do think there is a lot to be said for having a universal game, but I’m also a realist and understand that some moves (such a body triangle) are just so damn good that you’d be handicapping yourself if you didn’t use them when you could. Remember, moves don’t have to work for everyone in order to work for you.

Fight them with your legs: One of the most fundamental aspects of Jiu jitsu is it’s philosophy of always seeking to match your legs against your opponent’s arms whenever possible. All the best positions and submissions in Jiu jitsu involve you connecting your legs to your opponent’s upper body to take advantage of the fact that the human body has a basic asymmetry between upper body strength and endurance versus lower body strength and endurance. If you can consistently match your lower body against an opponents upper body you’ll have a great advantage even when you’re smaller than your opponent. Make it your mission to always lead with your legs and you’ll go far in this game!

Giving it everything: When we think of giving it everything in some aspect of our life, whether it be in jiu jitsu or anything else, we typically think in terms of a single big challenge in which we give our all to prevail. So for example a very tough match in which we give everything we have to win. Certainly this is admirable and indeed necessary for your toughest matches, but the more difficult and important aspect of giving it everything is to do so over TIME. Most people can give everything they have for a ten minute match, but very few can give everything they have for ten years of a training program that prepares them for the biggest ten minute match of their life. Yet it’s who gives everything for ten years that will determine winner of loser, rather than who gives everything for that ten minutes. Your skill level is more important than anything for determining the outcome of your matches, and high level your skills are will be determined by your commitment over lonely years in gym workouts that no one sees rather than the few minutes you spend in front of an audience.

Using the power of your hips: In most respects the human body is not particularly impressive in terms of generating power, but the hips and legs are a notable exception. When you can harness the power of your hips in a constructive way, you’ll find your combat effectiveness greatly increases. One of the best examples of this comes when athletes use their hips effectively against takedown attempts. Aggressively checking and stopping an opponents takedown with your hips and then pulling him onto your hips to lift and rotate him enables you to strongly counter takedowns and many forms of wrestling based guard sweeps. Probably the most commonly used variation of this is uchi mata. You’ll need an upper body connection, usually an over hook, but it’s the lower body that supplies the horsepower. Learning to quickly fit your hips into and under your opponents hips provides you with a tremendous source of power that you can call on at a moment’s notice and turn defense into offense

Happy New Year! 2022 turned out to be quite a year! I hope the next year turns into a great one for you and that you are able to work closer towards your goals in Jiu jitsu! Keep working hard, constantly monitor your progress so that you can continue and improve in the areas that are creating progress and remove the elements that aren’t. Understand always that patience is a true virtue and that no matter how hard you try, you need time to manifest improvement. Have faith that consistent improvement and time create a union that will take you further than anyone thought possible. Wishing you all the best from Austin Texas!!

Control his hands and wrists and it’ll be difficult for him to control you: The basis of connection in Jiu jitsu is the HANDS and FEET. It is through these that we begin to connect to an opponent in ways that enable us to use the more powerful legs, hips and core to actually move an opponent around, but it all begins with hands and feet. It stands to reason then, that if you can control an opponent’s hands, it will be difficult for him to connect effectively to you. Best of all is when you can consistently control his hands to shut down his attempts at connection, whilst at the same time you are able to quickly transition to your own effective grips so that you shut down his offense while enabling your own. When you come out to grapple, start at the the opponents hands and wrists and you’ll negate his offense while setting up your own

Raising the revs: Any time you enter into a scramble with an opponent and neither of you has definitive control over the other and one has the threat of gaining advantageous position - you’re going to have to raise your energy expenditure to cope with the situation regardless of whether your the attacker or the defender. As the attacker it’s worth the extra energy expense because of the chance of a score. As the defender it’s worth the energy expenditure because you don’t want to concede a score. The question becomes - at what point do you stop the scramble because it’s costing you too much energy and the probability of a favorable outcome has diminished to a point where it makes more sense to stop scrambling? Its never easy to answer these questions. There are too many variables so each has to be answered on a case by case basis, but one thing can be said in every case - the athlete who can PROLONG A SCRAMBLE while keeping energy expenditure within acceptable limits has a huge advantage in a competitive match. Anyone can pace themselves in a controlled situation, but only the best can do so in a chaotic situation

Clarity of purpose: I truly believe that one of the great reasons why classical Brazilian Jiu Jitsu is so successful as a martial art is it’s incredibly simple and clear basic directive. You can explain it to a total neophyte in two minutes and it’ll make intuitive sense to him. In fact it’s so clear that I believe if you took two completely untrained people with no fighting experience of similar size and strength and explained the basic directive of Jiu jitsu to one of them but not the other, the one who had been taught that basic directive would have a considerably higher chance of victory if they fought each other, not because he has gained any skill - he hasn’t - but just because he now has an effective and proven SENSE OF DIRECTION while the other only has his instincts. When one person has a sense of direction and purpose in a crises and the other doesn’t - I’ll put my money on the fellow with a sense of direction and purpose every time. What is this basic directive of Jiu jitsu? It can be stated in a single sentence. WORK YOUR WAY TO THE MOUNTED POSITION OR REAR MOUNTED POSITION AND FINISH YOUR OPPONENT. It doesn’t matter whether it’s grappling or fighting. If you follow that simple directive and have the skills to do it against the resistance of your opponent - you’ll be a very difficult challenge indeed. Remember always that every rule, point allocation, recommendation, technique and tactic of Jiu jitsu Bia just a means to satisfying this basic directive. Never lose sight of its clarity and you’ll always know what to do and how to train and prepare.

Glamor skills versus working skills: I think it’s fair to say we all have an innate preference for glamor moves in Jiu Jitsu - moves that wow a crowd and a spectacular flair to them. Certainly these are fun to learn and can occasionally bring great results, but the simple truth is that the vast majority of both your TIME and your SUCCESS on the mat will be the result of foundational skills. These are the skills that make the application of the glamor moves possible. You’ll never see guard retention in a highlight reel, but all those spectacular arm bars and triangles and sweeps from guard that do feature on highlight reels would be impossible if you couldn’t hold guard long enough to actually apply them. Think about it in terms of numbers. For every minute of glamor moves you apply you’ll spend twenty minutes in the set up phase. Your training must reflect this. Ask yourself if a given skill “what skills underly this skill?” Once you figure that out spend much more time on those underlying skills than the surface skill. This is how you build a game with a solid foundation that will work against tough opponents

Advantage: A central theme of Jiu jitsu is this - WHENEVER ENGAGED WITH THE OPPONENT ALWAYS TRY TO GAIN SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE LAUNCHING YOUR MAIN ATTACK. The first form of advantage most Jiu Jitsu students learn is POSITIONAL advantage and certainly this is one of the mo important forms of advantage in the sport, but it is far from the only one. Learn to exploit every Avenue of advantage - balance, grip, postural, tactical the list is long. Here, Nicholas Meregali has an opponent hopping on one leg while he is on two, if he can add a balance advantage and a postural advantage the takedown will be inevitable, if not, at least he has gained tactical advantage. Don’t just attack - get advantage prior to attack - this is the spirit of Jiu jitsu

Happy Holidays to you all!! I hope wherever you are that the holiday season finds you healthy and happy. Thank you all so much for following the fortunes and philosophy of my students as we all try to make progress both in our personal development and also the development of the art itself. Wishing you the best!! 🤗🤗🤗

The first thing an opponent requires to be effective is balance - if you attack that at every opportunity you can wreak havoc with whatever plan he had to beat you with and at the same time, make every move you intended to beat him with much easier to execute

Pressure over time is the single surest route to victory: You can win some matches with a brilliant opening sequence, you can win some by surprise, some by tactics, but let me tell you - you’ll win most by PRESSURE OVER TIME. If you can create sufficient physical pressure for sufficient time you’ll exhaust and frustrate an opponent to a degree where his resistance level drops below a certain threshold and moves that wouldn’t have worked ten minutes ago suddenly start working. The higher you go the more this becomes true. Become a student of pressure and the effects of time and you’ll become a consistent winner

Home: In early January I will go home to see my Mother in Australia. It’s been a very long time. Australia had very strict Covid laws that prevented my usual family visits for a long time, then I had to get started with a new team in a new location and get them ready for the ADCC World Championships. In that time I’ve been a good coach - but a bad son. Now it’s time to go and see Mom (in New Zealand and Australia we say “Mum” in the British fashion rather than the American “Mom”). I will probably fly down early to mid January and spend a week or two there. I always love that journey and seeing my dear Mum and family - it’s a long journey but a good one!I’m also looking forward to seeing more of the incredible growth of Jiu Jitsu in Australia and New Zealand that has gotten them such great results in international competition in recent years! See you soon Mum!

Time and change: When I was coaching Georges St Pierre many years ago at the peak of his MMA career two of his toughest rivals were scrap pack legends Jake Shields @jakeshields and Nick Diaz @nickdiaz209 They were some of the most difficult opponents to game plan and prepare for due to their great skill sets. Now years later it was great to have them join the squad for grappling workouts while we were in Las Vegas recently. They both still have extremely impressive skills! Life has a strange and wonderful way of creating intense rivalries that fade with time and get replaced by the realization that we all have much more in common with each other than we have differences. I was struck by how different the personalities of Jake, Nick and Georges were in some ways, but in the ways that count for Jiu jitsu, they were very similar!

If you can stay calm when everyone else is overly excited you’ll have an advantage before the action even begins…

Students old and new: In Boston filming an upcoming video with trusty friends Placido Santo @placisantos and Brian Glick @bzglick Brian was one of my most talented students over many years in the blue basement in NYC. His jiu jitsu story is one of my favorites. He was so delicate and fragile looking when he first began training over twenty years ago that on two occasions I took him aside and told him I thought it would be wise for him to stop training and find an easier and safer recreation. I have never been so happy to have been proven wrong as he developed a truly deep and impressive game both gi and no gi. Like many of my early students he chose not to compete but always he was in the gym through the MMA era with Georges St Pierre and the grappling era with the early squad all the way through until we left for Puerto Rico. It’s been a blast reliving old memories and teaching alongside him today. Tomorrow the three of us are back it! I’m sure you’ve all got your crazy friends at Jiu jitsu class - I think part of the appeal of jiu jitsu is the lunacy of the people around us and the reflection it offers for our own lunacy to be doing such a crazy sport! 😂😜😂

Oh sh*t…just landed on a Boston winters night to start filming a new instructional video 😂😂 Light snow and ice on the ground - damn - I was getting used to that Las Vegas winter weather 😂😂

Victory in Las Vegas: The UFC ran a great grappling event here in Las Vegas tonight. Gordon Ryan won a tightly contested victory in a dramatic over time against former Team mate Nicky Rod. Mr Ryan showed his attacking prowess in the over time with Mr Rodriguez playing a cagey game to avoid submission and get to over time. In over time both men showed their riding prowess but it was Gordon Ryan who prevailed and won via greater riding time. There was some confusion in the final round as the referee appeared to let the match continue after time had expired as Nicky Rod worked for a stranglehold but the mistake was noted and the win awarded to Gordon Ryan. In the second super fight Dan Manasoiu won via mounted asphyxiation against Ricardo Evangelista. Luke Griffith had a brilliant night, getting to the finals of the absolute tournament after entering on only a days notice. He lost a thriller to Mason Fowler by just a few seconds in triple overtime. Overall a great result for the team. It’s great to see grappling on @ufcfightpass and great to see the youngsters getting closer to their goals! Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Vinny Magalhaes had to withdraw last minute from his super fight with Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu in the UFC Grappling Invitational @ufcfightpass after complications with his weight cut (UFC set a limit of 235 pounds). He has been replaced by the great Nicky Rod @nickyrod247 - two time ADCC silver medalist and one of the very best professional grapplers in the game today. Originally Mr Rodriguez was to compete in the Open Weight Tournament, but he stepped in last minute after the UFC was informed of Mr Magalhaes situation. This will be a rematch - the two former team mates met in the final of the ADCC World Championships earlier this year - Gordon Ryan won that encounter via heel hook, but this is a new match. Importantly, it will be fought under different rules - EBI Rules - Nicky Rod recently won the EBI Open Weight tournament in spectacular fashion - every match via submission, showing the world his prowess in this rule set. As former sparring partners each knows the others game very well land what they have to do to win! The size, speed, flexibility, mobility and strength advantage will go to Nicky Rod, he weighed in around 230 pounds to Mr Ryan around 220, but Gordon Ryan is a true master of technique and uses it to exert unprecedented levels of control over even the most physically formidable opponents - keep your eyes on this match!! Mr Rodriguez’s place in the tournament will be taken by the very talented young South African grappler Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj He takes his place among a very talented field under EBI rules in matches of eight minute duration. In addition Dan Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant will take on brilliant Brazilian world champion Ricardo Evangelista @ricardoevangelista - both men are huge heavyweights well over 250 pounds but who move like lightweights! The great MMA fighter Miesha Tate @mieshatate will take on Bia Mesquite @biamesquitajj one of the greatest female grapplers of this era in the co main event superfight! This will be a great event hosted by the @ufc It is wonderful to see the worlds premier MMA organization getting involved in professional grappling! Tune in tomorrow night!!

For every person who believes you have the ability to get to your goals, there will be a thousand who doubt you - make sure you yourself don’t become one of those thousand - in a world of doubters stay true to your self belief

Counting down: The UFC will be coming into the world of professional grappling this week with UFC Grappling Invitational on @ufcfightpass at the UFC Apex center Thursday night December 15 featuring Gordon Ryan vs Vinny Magalhaes as main event and Meisha Tate vs Bia Mesquita along with a super fight featuring The Jiu jitsu Giant Daniel Manasoiu vs Ricardo Evangelista and an Open weight tournament packed with grappling talent including the smallest athlete of the event - Oliver Taza. We have been training at the Apex center in preparation - heading back there now! Keep your eyes out for this new show!

For every minute you spend on the mat in competition, you’ll spend an hour by yourself waiting in preparation in that last twenty four hours. Make sure your comfortable being alone and make sure whatever inner dialogue you have in that time is taking you in the right directions. You compete in front of a crowd, but you prepare largely alone - learning to be comfortable by yourself in a stressful and unfamiliar environment is a big part of success

Victory at IBJJF World Championships! Luke Griffith of New Wave Jiu jitsu won the Brown Belt division at the world championships today. Luke moved from South Africa to Austin Texas around seven months ago after losing a match at the European/African ADCC trials. Since then he won the second European ADCC trials, represented at the 2022 ADCC World Championships where he went 0-0 with three time gold medalist Yuri Simoe, won two out of two professional WNO grappling matches, became Pan Am IBJJF Champion and now World Champion! He is a truly amazing student with a prodigious work rate and great determination - well done Luke!! 🤗🤗

There is no one move, no one position that confers guarantees of victory. In a world where every move has a counter what confers victory is THE QUALITY OF EXECUTION OF A SERIES ON INTEGRATED MOVES AND POSITIONS AT A RATE THAT IS FASTER THAN YOUR OPPONENTS COUNTERS - this is the path to victory

Make it a little easier for yourself: In Jiu jitsu the basic lines of defense for most scenarios are pretty well known. For example, in standing position your opponents head, hands and elbows/forearms are his initial lines of defense - to get into offensive positions you’ll have to work past them. Every one of the major scenarios has similar initial lines of defense. If you know what they are, you know what you’ll have to get past in order to attack effectively. Once you gain this knowledge and act on it, the game becomes easier. Remember, it not your ability to perform the moves of Jiu jitsu that counts - it’s your ability to perform them AGAINST KNOWLEDGEABLE RESISTANCE that counts. Learn what you have to fight past and you’ll get there much more often!

Most athletes aspire to BELIEVE they will win before going in to a match. The best athletes don’t believe they’ll win - they KNOW they’re going to win. But what happens when you have two athletes who both “KNOW” they’re going to win prior to the match? Well, that’s when shit gets interesting…

Layers of defense: When an opponent goes on the attack his offense will achieve a certain depth - sometimes it’s a rather superficial attack that you can stop early before it gets too far. Other times it’s a powerful attack that tests the depth of your defense. Many athletes defend the initial lines of defense well - but the best athletes can defend well all the way to the last lines of defense and stop an attack even at a point where most would have given up and conceded a score or even a submission. Arrange your defense in layers. Categorize your defenses in terms of early, middle and late stage and pay them equal attention. Don’t be satisfied with saying “I won’t let my opponent get me in that position” or “don’t get there in the first place.” Rest assured - a good opponent WILL get you into bad positions and you better have a more effective response than these cliches. Put yourself in critical late stage defense regularly under light pressure and try to work your way out, increasing pressure as your skills rise. The ideal is to have equally robust defense from the first line of defense to the last!

Reaching: All grappling begins with grip. That means both athletes will have to constantly reach for each other in order to establish grip and connection. Every act of reaching involves risk, since you are compromising your stance, but you can’t refuse to reach, since then you’d never be able to attack and win. So the question always becomes - HOW CAN I MAKE CONTACT WITH AN OPPONENT IN A WAY THAT DOES NOT CREATE AN UNACCEPTABLY HIGH RISK? Much of the answer will be bound up with the other elements of your stance and position - your head position, elbow positioning, the position of your other arm, distance and angle etc. Here you see Giancarlo Bodoni and Lucas Barbosa reaching for their respective grips. Both are careful to match head height as they do so to lower risk. Giancarlo shows his confidence in allowing his elbows to extend further forward while Mr Barbosa plays a more conservative retracted elbow position. Learning to find your balance between the need to reach and attack versus the need to remain defensively responsible and not over extend yourself into vulnerability is a huge part of your development

Let the position do the work for you: You’ve fought hard to gain a good position - it’s natural to want to take advantage of it by quickly launching into a submission - but if the submission should fail you will generally lose that position. Don’t just think position to submission. Think about position - pressure - submission. The real value of position is more than just an opportunity to submit an opponent. It’s real value is THE PRESSURE THAT ROBS AN OPPONENT OF THE WILL AND VITALITY REQUIRED TO ESCAPE THE SUBMISSION WHEN YOU CHOOSE TO APPLY IT. Spend some time building pressure and the submissions will be much easier than if you just go as quickly as you can to the next step.

The battle for elbows: One of the strongest positions that the human body can hold is your elbow held right to your hip. This creates a very strong structure that an opponent will find extremely difficult to dislodge. The further your elbow drifts away from your hip - the weaker your arm becomes overall. A big part of grappling then, is the battle to create conditions where your arms are in a strong position close to your hips whilst your opponents elbows are in a weak position extended away from his hips. If you can reliably create this circumstance, you’ll have a very considerable physical advantage over your opponent. Under hooks are one great way to make this happen, as you can see here as Nicholas Meregali works hard to pull an opponents elbow out and away from his hips to create openings for his famous attacking open guard game. Always look for opportunities to get an opponents arm extended while keeping your own retracted - you’ll feel strong to your opponent and be in a great position to attack!

Isolation: Whenever you go to attack an opponents arm or leg, the vast majority of his immediate defense will always come from the OTHER arm or leg. Therefore you must become adept at isolating your opponents hand from his other hand, or his foot from his other foot so that they cannot support each other. Learning to interfere with the other arm or leg so that it can’t be used for defensive purposes is a big part of effective arm locking and leg locking. Don’t get tunnel vision on the arm you’re attacking - pay attention to the other arm or leg as well and you will be much more successful with your arm and leg locks

What you look for - you will see: In Jiu jitsu as in life, if you have a preset idea of what you want and believe, you will tend to see that in whatever is in front of you. If you believe the back is among the best attacking positions in the sport and one that you seek at all times and at every opportunity - when even the smallest opportunity arises - YOU WILL SEE IT AND ATTACK IT! Have a clear idea of what you want and you’ll always have a clear sense of action when the game gets heated.

Stopping an opponents move doesn’t end the story - it STARTS the story: too often athletes will do good work stopping an opponents move and then subconsciously fall into mode of thinking whereby they think they’ve done enough and settle into neutral position. Don’t congratulate yourself for stopping a move - that’s exactly when some of the greatest attacking opportunities arise - that’s when things start to get interesting. Remember - the basis of your opponents defense is always his STANCE. At the moment you’ve stopped his move his stance will be temporarily broken, making offense MUCH easier. That’s why you should see the act of stopping an opponents move not merely as a successful defense, but also as one of the best possible times to launch into offense. When an opponent’s stance is compromised - and it almost always will be after a stopped attack - that’s when the chances of a successful attack are highest since there is so much less to have to fight through to complete your counterattack. So turn your mind in the direction of attack every time you stop an opponent’s attacking move - you’ll be pleasantly surprised how much easier attacks become

Fight the connection: In order to make a move a move in grappling, an opponent must begin with some form of connection - if you break that connection early on - the rest of the move will be nullified. There are many ways to break connection but in most cases the best place to start is at the end of the lever - the hands and feet. They are usually the primary connectors to the body and if they can make effective contact the move is generally lost. So when you feel danger encroaching - break that connection and then start getting into your counter offense!!

Moving fast - moving slow: Most of the time I prefer a smooth relaxed pace to Jiu jitsu over a lightning fast pace. This enables you to go longer, gives you time to think and solve problems as they arise and generally leads to fewer mistakes in execution. However, there are times it pays to put some gas on the throttle and GO! Any time you think the anticipated benefits of a successful short sprint are greater than the long slog of starting over again after going too slowly to capitalize on an opportunity - then you are licensed to step on the accelerator pedal and get going - just make sure it’s not for an extended period of time. Speed in jiu jitsu is both a blessing and a curse - be aware that it’s a curse much more often than it’s a blessing, so use it judiciously. Remember it’s not the speed that’s the problem, but rather maintaining the exertion required to get to that speed too long. Once you learn to step OFF the gas pedal at the appropriate time, you’ll be able to step ON more often and with greater confidence

Stopping movement facilitates submission: When you get into a submission hold the opponent will usually go into some rather extreme defensive movements. It’s not unusual to find yourself twisting and turning wildly as you try to follow his defensive movements. Learning to use the IMMOBILIZATION potential of submission holds first and the BREAKING/STRANGLING second helps a lot in the application of submission holds against tough opponents. Take the extra time to focus first on stopping movement and then when you’ve achieved that - THEN show your breaking/strangulation prowess. It’s quite difficult to impose breaking mechanics on a moving opponent - stifling movement first makes the task a lot easier!

Two is better than one: When it comes to taking an opponent down the most successful methods in Jiu jitsu are tackles to the legs, in particular single legs and double legs. Single legs are generally easier to enter into - it’s generally easier to grab one leg than two, but single legs are notoriously difficult to finish on well trained, athletic opponents who can maintain their balance and counter. The great advantage of getting to both legs is that it makes it so much harder for an opponent to maintain their balance long enough for an effective counter. You can get the best of both worlds by using the single leg to get an initial grip and then quickly transition to a double leg. This makes use the prime virtue of single legs - ease of entry; and the prime virtue of double legs ease of finishing, whilst avoiding their respective difficulties. Make a habit of getting to a leg and then quickly getting to the second leg and you’ll find a lot more success getting tough opponents down to the mat!

Well, that’s one way to spend Thanksgiving!! Hope you guys are all having a wonderful day with friends and family wherever you are! Thank you all so much for the interest you have in the work and development of my students and the never ending quest to improve our beloved sport! 🤗🇺🇸🇺🇸🤗 Happy Thanksgiving from Austin Texas!

Roger Gracie and Lex Fridman: The great Roger Gracie @rogergracie filmed a podcast here in Austin with Lex Fridman, @lexfridman one of the worlds foremost podcasters. I talked to both of them today and it sounds like a really great interview! Great questioner with a truly outstanding guest in an interview that will provide insight for many years. Lex asked Roger about both technical and psychological aspects of Rogers approach to competitive jiu jitsu - his preference for mounted pins over other control positions and then a fascinating discussion of his legendary second match with arch rival Buchecha and using that as a vehicle to express Rogers thoughts of confidence and focus. They also discuss Rogers disdain for tactics and strategy and the path to technical mastery that defined his career. I can’t wait to see this! Lex is editing now and tells me it will be out in a couple of weeks!! And yes - they also discuss bears vs lions!! I think that question will be asked in every Lex Fridman podcast from now on 😂😂

The best two grapplers I ever saw: We had the privilege of hosting the great Roger Gracie @rogergracie at the gym today. Roger was by far the greatest Jiu Jitsu athlete of his generation and the greatest all round Jiu jitsu player of all time. He has always been a source of tremendous inspiration both to the jiu jitsu world at large and me and my students. Roger and I met many years ago in NYC and I have have always coached according to the ideal that he set of ruthlessly hunting for submission victory above all else. It was amazing to see him training once again with my students as he did so many times back in NYC. His game still looks incredible!! Roger is in Austin doing a podcast with @lexfridman I will write more tomorrow about this podcast - I spoke to Lex today and it sounds awesome! Stay tuned for more on Rogers thoughts on Jiu jitsu!

Reading your opponent: So we often we approach a match with a predetermined idea of what we want to do - there’s nothing wrong with that - but don’t let that make you oblivious to what your opponent is doing. It behooves you to always read your opponent so you gain information of what he is trying to do so that you can first negate and then capitalize on his intentions. The second you put your hands on your opponent you can read his level of physical tension and what direction his body wants to move. USE THIS ABILITY. It’s like a a different form of vision and one that gives you real insight into your opponents game. It’s much easier to beat someone when you know what they want to do. The best scenario is one where you know what YOU want to do and also what your OPPONENT wants to do - when you know both you’ll be very difficult to defeat

Shutting down grips: Every attack an opponent can every do to you in grappling starts with a grip of some kind. If you can control his ability to grip you then you can nullify most of the danger he presents to you. You don’t want to take this line of thinking too far and become an overly defensive gripper. Make sure you negate the opponent’s grip and then immediately go into your attacks so that you maintain a good spirit of offense in your game at all times. Nonetheless it’s important that you be able to stop an opponent getting to their favorite grips, because once he can impose them things can go quickly from bad to worse. If you can stop his hands - you’ll stop everything that follows.

Nothing beats the back: in a game where talented opponents can finish you in a heartbeat with strangles out of front head and guillotine positions or sprawl so heavily on top of you that wish you’d never shot on them in the first place, there’s a lot to be said to first getting behind an opponent and taking him down from dominant chest to back positions where you don’t have to worry about those strangles and sprawls. At the top levels takedowns are never EASY per se, but they certainly be EASIER, and that’s all you ask for. Keep your eye open for the opportunity to get behind opponents at all times in standing position and you’ll find the subsequent takedowns are generally a lot less stressful.

Just finished filming the third part of STANDING2GROUND series covering upper body takedowns as used so successfully in ADCC 2022 by my students to win matches and medals. As always Placido Santos @placisantos was the outstanding assistant. It’s great seeing the way in which Bernardo Faria and Micheal Zenga at @bjj.fanatics are giving access for everyone to the best athletes in the sport. Now it’s back to Austin to get everyone ready for upcoming challenges!

Nicholas Meregali and Giancarlo Bodoni and myself waiting for the absolute weight division to start at ADCC - I don’t know why but it always looks like we are backstage at a rock concert getting ready to go out 😂😂 Lucky we all decided to study jiu jitsu because if we’d gone into music the results would have been truly awful! 😂😂

Ninety percent of your opponents takedown defense and counter offense comes from his head, hands, arms and hips - if you can get behind him, you’ve immediately disarmed the overwhelming majority of his defense and made your job of taking him down MUCH easier and safer. There are significant benefits to starting with position before takedown whenever it’s possible for you to do so. You can’t always do it, but when you can, it’s a truly great option. Opponents that seem impossible to takedown from the front can often be put down much more easily from the back and with a much better chance of scoring under Jiu Jitsu scoring criteria in the ensuing scrambles. Make a habit of working to get behind opponents in the standing position first and getting takedowns from chest to back positions. At the very least it’ll create defensive reactions that open up more conventional frontal takedowns, and quite often it’ll give you the positional advantage that allows for clean and decisive takedowns from the back that lead directly into the best scoring and submission positions in Jiu Jitsu

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video STANDING2GROUND: POSITIONAL DOMINANCE AND SCRIMMAGE WRESTLING. Jiu jitsu students are taught from their first day about positional dominance on the ground - yet oddly they are rarely if ever taught about positional dominance on the feet, in standing positions. Just as it’s a valuable thing to control position before submissions, so too it’s a valuable thing to control position before attempting takedowns. This video looks at how to get to superior position and how to use it to make takedowns easier and safer. Then we look at the all important skills of scrimmaging to score and prevent a score under jiu jitsu rules. This is what really differentiates the jiu jitsu standing game from wrestling and judo. We also add the skill of standing submission hold entries. Once you add the idea of submission scrambles into positional scrambles - the standing game starts to look very different indeed. You saw how my students used both to operate very effectively in the standing position in ADCC competition, taking standing entries into leg locks, scrimmaging to prevent scores and positional advantage to makes takedowns look effortless against athletes known for their takedown game. If you want to improve you jiu jitsu standing skills, perhaps check it out! Links in my bio and story

Anticipating failure: It’s good to be confident with your favorite moves and believe that you can get them to work anytime any place on any athlete - but we’ve got to be realistic too - sometimes your favorite move isn’t going to work, so we got to have effective back ups that enable us to go past an initial failure into success. Certain moves go hand in hand with each other. If you’ve got a favorite it’s important you back it up with appropriate follow ups when that inevitable failure arises. That way you’ll go immediately into a second move (and potentially third or fourth when you’re really getting good (any further than four is an indication that your mechanics are poor and it’s more likely you need to improve your execution than that your opponent has great defense)). So yes - it’s important you anticipate failure. This isn’t being negative, it’s being realistic. Just make sure you’ve got good follow ups that failure will open a door to success

Getting weak: I flew up to Boston today to film a new instructional video for @bjj.fanatics It’s the first time in two years I’ve been in a New England winter and I’ve totally gotten soft! 😂😂😂 After two years of Puerto Rico’s warm ocean breeze and Texas Dry desert heat I’m huddled up like a hibernating animal 😂😂😂I used to fearlessly step out into the cold for thirty years in NYC. I worked long nights outside nightclubs for a decade in sub zero temperatures. I trained Georges St Pierre in freezing Montreal winters for a decade and never missed a beat - now I’m crying because it’s less than 50 degrees 😂😂😂 My old NYC students would be ashamed of me! 😂😂😂 I better get back to my old self or this will be a long week!! ⛄️❄️⛄️⛷⛸☠️☠️☠️ It’s amazing how we accept wherever we are as normal and adapt to that and as soon as we’re taken from there we are like a fish out of water! 😂😂 Ha! I’m going to turn up the thermostat!

Speed kills: Last night in Dallas Luke Griffith won his match against rising star Haisam Rida in 24 seconds - this was the second fastest submission in WNO history - the fastest was Nicky Ryan who won in 23 seconds against the great wrestler Tony Ramos. In ADCC they give an award for fastest submission - it’s interesting to look at WNO and ADCC and look at fastest submission
WNO
Nicky Ryan - outside heel hook
Luke Griffith - inside heel hook
ADCC
2015 - Eddie Cummings - outside heel hook
2017 - Marcus Almeida - heel hook
2019 - Garry Tonon - inside heel hook
2022 - Gordon Ryan - outside heel hook
Do you notice a pattern here? When it comes to fast submission entries there is an obvious king of the hill. Heel hooks can clearly be entered into and completed in less time than most other forms of submission. This is because they do not need to conform to the standard method of positional control as a precursor to most upper body submissions. Upper body submissions that don’t require prior positional domination such as flying arm bar and triangles have the disadvantage of working against gravity in their initial application whereas heel hooks attack the lower half of the body and hence don’t require the difficult act of climbing the body to be applied (made even more difficult when there is no gi to grip). So if a fast and decisive early submission is what you seek - history provides a clear lesson as to what direction you might want to go

Victory in Dallas! Luke Griffith won a beautiful victory over ADCC sensation Haisam Rida in just 24 seconds with a devastating heel hook. It is testimony to Mr Griffiths incredible learning development that in just eight months of training with us and starting with no leg lock game at all - he is now heel hooking one of the top athletes in the game. Great work Luke Griffith! @luke_griffithjj That was a very fine heel hook! Congratulations also to Ethan Crelinsten on the biggest win of his career so far with a great stranglehold win over Brazilian sensation Fabricio Andrey and also to the rising phenom Cole Abate who at 17 years of age already looks like a world beater! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Getting ready for the show! Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj has been training hard for his match against rising star Haisam Rida tomorrow night in Dallas with @flograppling Mr Rida had an electrifying performance at the recent ADCC with a powerful submission victory over legend Cyborg Abreau that made him a star performer. Both athletes are progressing quickly, both are tall and athletic, both have a dynamic style aimed at submission - this should be a great match! The card has many other great matches. B team standout Damien Anderson takes on the teenage phenom Cole Abate who impressed everyone at ADCC this year as the youngest athlete. Another B team powerhouse Ethan Crelinsten takes on the brilliant Brazilian grappler Fabricio Andrey in what will surely be a great match with both men possessing great skills, speed and strength. Fan favorite Jacob Couch takes on Bruno Matias in the co main main event of the evening leading into the main event - a match between outstanding ADCC silver medalist Brianna St-Marie and Mayssa Bastos - both women have had an outstanding year of competition and both bring a lot of momentum into the match! Hope you all enjoy the show!

The mount as a grappling pin: The mounted position is the most desired position in classical Jiu jitsu. This is because classical Jiu jitsu is FIGHTING Jiu jitsu. The mount is the best pin for striking an opponent with fists and elbows - given that Jiu jitsu Beas originally conceived as a fighting art of self defense this made perfect sense. But what about modern sport Jiu jitsu that does not allow strikes of any kind? Should the mount still be held in highest regard among the pins? Of all the frontal/ chest to chest pins I still believe the answer is yes. This is because not only is the mount best for striking, it is also the best for smothering pressure that disrupts breathing. The mount aligns your torso with an opponents and as such creates great opportunities for smothering pressure - far more so than side or north south pins or knee on stomach. As such even in a pure grappling match, the mount should always be a goal once you pass an opponents guard. The kind of pressure the mount can generate creates reactions in your opponents that facilitate submission holds. Learn to use the mount for what it is - an intimidating, smothering pin that can break the defensive discipline of even the toughest opponents in ways that open them up more readily for the true goal of Jiu jitsu - submission

When it’s over: When sparring or a match is over it tempting to just let emotion fill your mind - joy if you performed well, sadness or frustration if you lost. That’s fine initially, but at some point you want to go into ANALYSIS. In order to improve you must eliminate the mistakes made in previous performances. Even when you win you make mistakes. Continual improvement is more about ELIMINATION OF ERROR than it is about addition of new moves or tactics. Learning new moves takes substantial time, eliminating mistakes can in most cases be done relatively quickly. Just as it’s easier to make a car go faster and perform better by making it lighter than it is to put in a new engine in order to make it more powerful, so too, removing errors is easier than adding new moves. Next time you’ve had a grueling training session or match, take the time afterwards to analyze your mistakes so that tomorrow you can begin the removal of errors that lower your current performance

Merging defense and offense: When an opponent attacks with a given move your first responsibility is to stop that move - put your shields up and blunt the attack - but the second you’ve done so - don’t congratulate yourself on your defensive success - get immediately to work on counter offense. One of the most profitable times to attack an opponent is in the immediate aftermath of a failed attack. Why? Because in most cases his posture and stance will be broken and posture and stance are the basis of defense. Take advantage of that window of opportunity and get to work. Strong defense is a wonderful thing, but even better is strong defense as a prelude to offense

Big Dan Manasoiu wins Emerald City grappling event in Atlantic City in fine form! @jiujitsugiant Daniel Manasoiu, the twenty one year old recent purple belt went on a submission spree under EBI rules to win in impressive fashion. Mr Manasoiu has been working very hard in his game here in Austin TX. His submission repertoire is expanding and his tactical sense improving. It’s great to see this young man’s results reflecting his hard work. Well done Daniel!!

The one thing a coach can never give you: A coach can help your technique and your tactics. As you improve in these areas, your confidence will organically grow. A coach can build a room that gives you the training partners and infrastructure to sustain growth over time. A coach can give you a philosophy or vision of jiu jitsu that colors your view of the game and gives you a sense of direction. But one thing no coach can ever do for you is to give you PASSION. That must come from you and you alone. If you lack it, no amount of coaching will help, the encouragement of friends will be of no avail and you will never endure the numerous hardships, disappointments and boredom of a long term training routine. What sparks passion? No one knows - but one thing we all know is when we have it and when we don’t. Everyone always asks what a coach can bring to you - but never forget the one thing you must bring to the coach - without it nothing will happen.

Walking in the front door: When you first come to engage with an opponent you will almost always have to make a frontal engagement because no trained opponent will give you an advantageous angle for free. You have to go forward and create an initial approach that is neutral - both of you have equal opportunity to attack and defend. The Whole idea of jiu jitsu however, is to gain some form of ADVANTAGE prior to attacking - so you want to think of approaching front door but entering the side door - you have to be able to consistently gain advantageous angle once you’ve made the initial frontal approach. You approach from the front because you HAVE to, but you attack from the side because you WANT to. Learning to cut to an advantageous angle and enter through the side door is a huge part of the game. Make a mental habit constantly working for an angle rather than try to bulldoze through the front. Understand that good opponents will always resist you attempts to gain angle on one side and square up to you to restore the frontal position - every time this happens, switch to the other side, so that you misdirect an opponent and become difficult to predict. Enter from the front - attack from the side whenever possible - this simple insight will add greatly to the effectiveness of your game.

Crowds: Interesting things start to happen when you go to perform in front of a crowd. Movements that you do easily and comfortably alone suddenly become problematic - indeed, You may not even attempt these movements. Why? What is it about the presence of the crowd? It’s the feeling and the fear of being JUDGED and found wanting by the audience. We all deeply care about other peoples perceptions of us and the thought of being judged poorly by a mass of people - even people we don’t know and have no interaction with - is hard to take. In this sense a professional athlete must become something more than just an athlete and become a PERFORMER in the same way a musician, an actor, a circus acrobat, an orator or anyone else who makes a living in front of a crowd must do. Interestingly in my experience a small crowd can be just as intimidating as a big crowd because it’s more personal - you see individual faces and people, hear conversation and words more clearly. Getting comfortable with the idea of being judged en masse by a group of strangers is essential to a competitive athlete and indeed, all of us, since it can happen repeatedly on a smaller scale in your everyday life at any time. Everyone has to find their own way to get around it - I’ve never seen any one size fits all approach that works for everyone - but get around it you must, whether it be by competing so often you just get used to it over time, or some psychological insight, for if you don’t get around it, you’ll never perform in your heaviest moments as well as you do in your lightest moments

When you’re winning - take your time: In Jiu jitsu it pays to get out of bad situations as quickly as possible. The longer you stay there, the worse things typically get. Good situations on the other hand, allow you to take your time. In most cases good position creates enervating pressure, so the longer you dwell there, the better things get. So as a general rule - when things are bad, move quickly to rectify them; when things are good - slow things down and let time and pressure work in your favor so that you can turn a good situation into a great one

Intensity: The first thing you’ll notice when you compare a competition match or a very hard sparring match where neither of you wants to lose versus a relaxed gym match where you’re focused more on technical growth rather than winning; is that the INTENSITY immediately rises several levels above normal. This will have several immediate effects. The first is that breathing will become shallow and restricted and quickly fall behind the demand for oxygen that the extra muscular effort demands. The second is that you will tend to keep muscular tension longer and at higher levels and experience greater lactic acid build up than usual. In some cases you may even experience adrenaline build up and release that can create an initial sensation of impaired muscle control when adrenaline levels are high and then a sudden strength loss when your adrenaline diminishes. Mentally, you will often experience a tunnel vision as you focus on an initial move or game plan and your heightened focus on that prevents you seeing any alternatives that arise as the match progresses. You will also find that as anxiety increases, so does your aversion to risk. You’ll restrict yourself only to your most trusted moves and shy away from trying anything else, thus shrinking your skill set well below what you normally exhibit in a more relaxed setting. Now if all this sounds bad - you’re right - it is - but it gets worse. As you start to experience these effects, you naturally get MORE anxious as you feel your physical and mental attributes diminish and this will further increase anxiety, creating a downward spiral of anxiety and effects that compound each other until you find yourself exhausted just a few minutes into the match - which is shocking because in regular training you may be capable of sparring for thirty minutes straight without a problem. This can be a shocking experience the first time you feel it come on. Be aware that it generally gets better with time. If you can survive the initial shock you’ll often be able to recover in the course of the match and exhibit a “second wind.” Make sure you get to feel the sensation from time to time so that the shock value diminishes

Falling in love with a technique: I’m sure you have a favorite pair of shoes, or favorite pair of jeans, definitely a favorite car that you preferred over all the other cars you ever drove. We have our favorites in every aspect of our lives. The more important that aspect is to us, the stronger that love is. Soldiers and hunters rely on a rifle to keep them alive and so they develop a deep connection with their favorite rifle. A musician relies on his instruments to make a living and so he develops a deep connection to his favorite violin, piano or guitar. In Jiu jitsu your technique is everything. The best athletes develop a very deep connection to their favorite techniques. Just like everything else in your live - your favorites will be the ones you always come back to and prefer to use when things get serious. There comes a point where you don’t just USE the technique - you IMMERSE yourself in it - and that’s when the path to mastery begins. Satoshi Ishii is a master of the classic Judo throw tai otoshi - the best I ever saw. He began study as a child, now in his mid thirties he still uses it every day and still learns new insights that enables him to use it in anyone, gi or no gi. He has gotten to a point where he can throw a man easily with one hand, and with so much control that he can determine which part of his opponents body hits the ground first. This is mastery. This is the path you must take to develop the depth required for excellence in Jiu jitsu and indeed, all aspects of life. Don’t just flirt with a technique - fall in love with it

Your two biggest positional goals - the back and the mount: When you first begin Jiu jitsu you get introduced to the basics of the positional game and taught the idea of position before submission. This is a great way to start your development. As times by you can get much sophisticated and start breaking down positions, grips and control into very finely distinguished categories. It’s important however to have some simplicity to give you a basic sense of direction no matter how complex things get. MAKE YOUR TWO POSITIONAL GOALS THE MOUNT AND THE REAR MOUNT. You can never go wrong with that. They are the two highest scoring positions in the sport and the two positions that beat create the physical and tactical pressure that result in submission. From your first days in jiu jitsu until your last - make the mount and rear mount your goal every time you train and compete and you’ll always know where you’re headed and give yourself the best chance of victory

Jiu jitsu with Mr Tom Hardy: The team had a blast training the last two days with the great English actor Tom Hardy, who is also a talented jiu jitsu player!! Mr Hardy is here with some of his British friends. Mr Hardy does truly great work helping the welfare of former soldiers coming back from war into civilian life through the @reorgcharity foundation. Jiu jitsu is often useful as a means of getting soldiers back together in a healthy environment that builds the old camaraderie they had in a civilian setting and can help smooth the transition back home. I’ve always been a fan of Mr Hardy’s cinematic work after Georges St Pierre, who was obsessed with The Batman movie in which the Caped Crusader takes on arch villain Bane (played by Mr Hardy), used to quote endlessly from the movie during fight camps! When I was demonstrating technique with him I kept expecting him to say “do you feel in charge?” - as he grabbed me by the neck! 😂😂 He is a very kind man and a really great representative of jiu jitsu

It’s a lot easier to take someone down when you’re behind them than when you’re in front of them: It’s never easy to take a skilled grappler down when you’re directly in front of them. Worse still, it can be downright risky when they have strong positional and submission counters to your takedown attempts. In contrast, takedowns from the standing rear body lock are easier and safer. You don’t have to get past your opponents head, hands and hips - the major defensive lines when operating from frontal positions. You don’t have to worry so much about guillotines and front headlock strangles - there is some threat from rolling leg lock entries and kimura but substantially less than the guillotine/front headlock danger from in front. Best of all - your feet are very close to your opponents feet - which opens up the possibility of ashi waza foot sweeps. These are among the safest and most energy efficient takedowns in the game and are a big part of my coaching program. There are many paths to the back in standing position - some are deliberate and planned moves, some are spontaneous reactions to a perceived opportunity that arose as you grappled - both approaches can put you in a position to make the task of takedowns much easier

First contact: Every time you start the process of engaging an opponent the ability of both of you to attack each other increases as you get CLOSER and you establish greater and greater GRIPS upon each other. So distance and grip determine the initial relative danger you pose to each other. As distance gets closer other factors such as angle and level become very important - but distance comes first. As such, your approach must begin with STANCE. Set a stance that doesn’t make you an easy target. With regards GRIP - one sound way to work is to START AT THE EXTREMITIES - the hands. Tie up at the hands to shut down your opponents ability to grip and work from there to your own grips. Thus you begin with nullifying your opponents ability to grip and attack, and then move on to setting up your offense by imposing your own grips on your terms. Learning to be disciplined about this throughout the entire course a match is very important. Many athletes START OUT doing this, but get forgetful as the match progress and get scores on as a result. Making it an ingrained habit takes time, but will make you a much more effective grappler - one who is difficult to score on and whose chances of victory increase as a match goes on rather than decrease.

Two of the best martial artists I ever met: We had the pleasure of hosting one of the greatest MMA fighters of all time, Demetrius Mighty Mouse Johnson @mighty and the most well rounded overall warrior I ever met, Tim Kennedy @timkennedymma They bring a totally different game to the mats but as all great martial artist do, they find the way to use their body type to best effect. Mr Johnson was always one of the most creative and intelligent fighters in MMA and his grappling is absolutely superb also - his movement on the mats is really something to behold! Working out with them was @juanjiujitsu one of our youngsters who came with us from our year in Puerto Rico - it was a great experience for him to practice with two of his idols! In an age of grappling specialists it’s so impressive to see just how good at grappling many of the top MMA athletes are at grappling and how well they stay abreast of the changing grappling game despite their need to practice many disciplines as MMA all rounders.

I had a fun time working some jiu jitsu with Maynard James Keenan @iamthebriefcase from the rock band Tool, who has been doing jiu jitsu for a very long time and has an excellent technical grasp of the sport. It was a lot of fun going over triangle entries and finishes. He impressed everyone with his ability! He also has a a great personal history in Jiu jitsu - studying with Rickson and his students in the early days in California - traveling long distances to train long before he gained fame in the music world and still finding time to train as a rock star on the road. He also gave us some fascinating insights into the world of rock music and super stardom - those guys have a lifestyle that very few can handle! Our lives are very simple and easy by comparison!! I was struck by the similarities on a much smaller scale of stage presence and performance between rock music and jiu jitsu as Mr Keenan told his tales. Learning to get comfortable and perform consistently on stage is a struggle for developing athletes but rock musicians have to deal with this on a MUCH bigger scale and under tremendous pressure. What a pleasure to meet such an interesting fellow under the umbrella of Jiu jitsu. After the training session he went on the do the Joe Rogan @joeroganexperience @joerogan podcast - I can’t wait to see that to get more insight from this fascinating fellow!

Heading back: Early morning start back to Austin after EBI 20 Open Weight in El Paso Tx. It was great seeing the return of the old EBI grappling format last night. Unfortunately Giancarlo Bodoni badly tore a rib in the opening minute of his first match. He went on to win in over time but could not continue into the next round as even breathing was very difficult. Any time breathing is painful with rib injuries it’s prudent to avoid further damage - especially in an open weight event where all your opponents are much larger than you. Luke Griffith had a fine win in his first match via mounted smother. In his second match he had a great tussle with Nicky Rod and attacked well with a heel hook, Nicky Rod came back with excellent positional control passing into mount. They went to over time and Nicky Rod won with a very well applied transition to arm lock from back control. Nicky Rod went on to win the event in fine fashion - showing that he is much more than a wrestler with fine array of submissions. Now it’s back to Austin for a full day of teaching! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Counting down in El Paso: Giancarlo Bodoni @giancarlobodoni and Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj going through their final drills in preparation for the big EBI open weight tournament tomorrow night at 10th Planet El Paso. Now it’s back to the hotel and get ready for the show!

The return of EBI! The event that gave birth to the squad - Eddie Bravo’s EBI is about to return this weekend in El Paso, Texas this weekend. It was EBI that launched the original squad into grappling notoriety back when it was Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan vs the world! They launched the modern leg lock revolution and changed the world of grappling. Now it’s back in its original form with a stellar cast of new generation athletes! Favorite will be 10th Planet EBI specialist Kyle Boehm who has never lost an EBI event as a black belt and is a master of the rule set. On the other side of the bracket is B Team standout Nicky Rod, fresh off an outstanding silver medal performance at ADCC 2022. He is renowned for his back attacks and ability to escape from anywhere - attributes that are extremely important in EBI tournaments. Team New Wave will enter Giancarlo Bodoni and Luke Griffith. They are relatively inexperienced in the rule set but have been training very hard and have the benefit of the experience and insights of Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan - the two most successful EBI competitors of all time. There are many other very talented athletes in the mix including ADCC trials winners and IBJJF champions - it’s going to be real show!!

Team New Wave wins three out of four judges categories at ADCC 2022: The staff at ADCC made their judgements for the four traditional “Best of” categories for the event - Best Athlete - Fastest submission - Best takedown - Best match. Gordon Ryan won Best athlete after arguably the greatest ADCC performance in history. He also won fastest submission with a devastating heel hook in the semi finals of his weight division. Nicholas Meregali won Best takedown with a truly beautiful uchi mata throw against phenom Tye Ruotolo in the open weight division. He very narrowly edged out New Wave team mate, Giancarlo Bodoni’ beautiful Sasae foot sweep against defending champion Matteaus Diniz en route to his gold medal win. It was interesting that the two most highly rated takedowns of the tournament were both more Judo oriented takedowns rather than the more common wrestling based ones. It is incredible to think that he never trained takedowns and always pulled guard throughout his career and then after around four months of training won the award for best takedown. Best match was won by B Team standout Izaak Michell who had an absolute barn burning back and forth war with the great Vagner Rocha in a match that could have gone either way and which no one who saw it will forget. Interestingly all three founding members of the squad, Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan have won fastest submission award and all three did it via leg lock - two outside heel hooks and one inside heel hook. This is the second time our team has won three out of four of the judges prizes (2019 was the previous time) - a tribute to the athletes ability to not only be effective, but also to embody the ideals of good jiu jitsu in an exciting fashion that helps the sport grow. There is a lesson there for all of us - your first duty as an athlete is to win, but your second duty is to train yourself to win a way that embodies an ideal that appeals to a new generation of athletes and ensures the positive growth of the sport.

Express yourself: When you hear me talk about jiu jitsu you might think I believe it’s all soulless mechanics, physics and rational decision making - a cold science. I do believe that these are the main factors that make jiu jitsu effective. Let’s be clear however, Jiu jitsu has the features of both science AND art. It is scientific insofar as mechanical and biomechanical laws are the core of its operations. However, all jiu jitsu involves the element of CHOICE. You choose among competing options as to what you will do on the mat. These choices will be a reflection of your body type and personality. They will inevitably be a form of SELF EXPRESSION. The most important thing is that your expression be AUTHENTIC. Let your game be a true reflection of who you are. Don’t try to emulate another person - you just end up looking like a bad copy. Don’t worry about what shape your authentic self expression will take - it will grow organically over time as naturally as your body grew from childhood to adulthood. Just as no one had to tell your body how to grow, neither will anyone have to tell you how your personal game will grow - it will do so all by itself over time.

Warm body - cold heart: When you get ready for action you want your body to get warm, but don’t let your mind get hot with emotion. As your body temperature rises, make sure the heart and mind stay cold and calculating. It’s natural to get mentally excited and passionate as the action gets closer, but just as you solve mathematical puzzles best in a state of mental calm, so too with jiu jitsu puzzles. The difference is that in mathematics your body doesn’t have to do anything so there is no requirement to get it ready for action - in Jiu jitsu there is - so you’ll need to get your temperature rising - just try to keep it from the neck down

Play the long game: We always tend to walk into the trap of thinking we are defined by our achievements of today - we aren’t - ultimately you’ll be judged by your achievements over the course of your career. Once you understand this you can begin to see that your central concern must always be improvement over time. Any failure today can be over turned by great success down the line. Your jiu jitsu may well be lousy now, but that implies nothing about how it will be in five years. Focus on building to the future and be confident that any deficiencies here and now can be reversed with training and adaptation in the future. No one was born good at Jiu jitsu, neither were the best at Jiu jitsu ALWAYS good at Jiu jitsu - they had their time as clumsy beginners just like you. Play the long game. Focus on gaining knowledge and developing skill and one day that will turn you into a very different person on the mat!

New students showing their stuff!! Two very talented students who began training with us here in Austin areLuke Griffith @luke_griffithjj and Reese LaFever @reeseis_bjj Both won gold in their respective weight divisions, Luke at Brown belt and Reese at Purple belt - both won every match by submission! Well done!! Lots more to come from these talented fellows!

Congratulations to one of my best students from the glory days of the blue basement in NYC - Doug Pelinkovic!! Doug was a true training room beast from days long before the squad and earned his stripes training alongside Georges St Pierre, Boris Benyanovich and others of that time. He always eschewed competition as he was an extremely busy businessman. The very first time he entered a competition was at fifty years old - he entered IBJJF Masters No Gi world championships and won the gold medal! Now he just went to Pan American championships and won another gold! He is a very fine example of a student who learned the whole game at a very high level to a point where he was extremely competitive even with the best athletes in the world in the gym and all while working an extremely busy professional life and raising a family. These are the students I admire the most. It’s one thing to learn jiu jitsu to championship level - it’s another to do it in your spare time while working full time and raising a family! Congratulations Doug! Teaching every Monday night for years in your dojo in the Bronx will always be one of my favorite Martial Arts memories! Well done!!

Base: Whenever you are in standing position or top position it is generally demanded of you to keep a solid base of support that enables you to keep standing or top position as long as you desire it. Intuitively it feels like the best way to keep a strong base of support is to WIDEN your base as much as possible. This would be true if you were alone and static - but in a match you aren’t - you are constantly moving in response to an opponent. As such width of base is only a part of the story. What you really want is a DYNAMIC BASE. It will be your ability to maintain base through MOVEMENT that makes you successful against a resisting opponent. It’s not so much the stationary width of of your base as your ability to step and post to a new base of support in response to second by second changes as the match unfolds. Very often this means taking a rather narrow initial stance so that you can pick up a foot easily and move it, rather than a heavy, exaggerated wide stance that makes it difficult to make a reactionary step in response to an opponents movement. Here, Daniel Manasoiu uses a good natural stance to easily pick up a foot and move to a new base of support in response to an opponent trying to off balance him at the 2022 ADCC World Championships

If you can isolate a limb, then you can control the limb, and if you can control that limb you can break that limb: Isolate - control - break. This is the pattern of submission grappling. You need to keep your opponents limbs apart from each other - remember that most of an opponents initial defense to a joint lock is to use his other limb to defend the one that is under attack - so isolation is important here. Get used to the idea of taking opponents limb away from the other limb and away from his center of mass and you’ll get the isolation needed to get to your victory

Emotion: This game is about decision making and calculating risk and reward. Emotion doesn’t help decision making and calculation. I find most people do their best work in a calm and emotionless state. It’s sometimes difficult to achieve this in the pressure of competition but you don’t have to be perfect - just better than the other fellow. The time for emotion is after the performance - then you can let out whatever you were holding back!

Opportunity: In a match against a tough opponent you may be presented with only one opportunity to make a decisive attack. Whether you do so successfully will come down mostly to two things - your ability to PULL THE TRIGGER when the moment arises and your ability to EXECUTE the move you have selected. The first is more psychological in nature and pertains to your confidence levels. The second is more physical in nature and pertains to your skill level. To shine under pressure you’ll need both to work in harmony

Trouble: In Jiu jitsu we always train ourselves to find the best routes to the best outcomes. The reality is however, that your opponents are doing the same thing and many of those opponents are very talented. As such, it’s always prudent to prepare yourself for trouble, including the worst kinds of trouble. Getting out of fully locked in joint locks is probably the scariest situation in Jiu jitsu because the price of failure in a competitive match can be a broken limb. Getting the confidence to escape from these scenarios has to begin in the gym. As always, start with lowered pressure so that you can build over time to escape from increasingly tight holds. Make sure your partner understands the difference between extension of a limb and HYPER extension, so that they can create a tension that gives realism but no damage if you don’t perform the escape moves quite correctly. Learning to keep a calm mind during a crises is half the battle of extricating yourself. Fear doesn’t make your escapes better - only skill does that

A short chat with Lex Fridman: My friend Lex Fridman and I recently did another podcast - it got completely out of hand and went a marathon four and a half hours! We talked mostly about ADCC 2022 and the stellar performances of Gordon Ryan, Giancarlo Bodoni, Nicholas Meregali and the Ruotolo twins. After that things got crazy as people offered their own questions which immediately went Straight to animal fights - grizzly bear vs Lion! 😂😂 It was a fun rambling chat and Alex always has a way of making things fun and interesting - hope you enjoy it!

The better you start, the more likely you’ll finish well: Jiu jitsu is like life itself, the better your starting circumstances, the better the chance that you’ll finish in a good place. It’s important that you raise the probability of success by giving yourself the best possible starting position in every aspect of the game. More than anything else, This means setting yourself in a good stance at the onset of action. It doesn’t matter whether your in a neutral position, a dominant position, an inferior position, attacking with a submission hold or defending a submission hold - starting with a strong stance raises the likelihood of success. Here, I coach the keys to stance in a dreadful position, defending a fully set juji gatame arm bar. More than ever, this is a time when deficiencies in beginning stance and positioning will cost you dearly. Every time you engage an opponent, every time there is a re-set in the action, every time there is a change in position or scenario - THE FIRST CHALLENGE YOU FACE IS TO SET YOUR STANCE APPROPRIATELY. Make sure you condition your mind to operate in these terms when you grapple and you’ll find your effectiveness in both offense and defense increases dramatically

It’s a lot lot easier to take people down from behind than from in front: Takedowns can be some of the most grueling work in grappling. Not only is the work physically demanding, it can be dangerous as you go straight into many of your opponents best submission counters such as guillotines and other strangles. Often it’s a lot easier to slip behind them first and THEN attempt your takedowns. Here is Gordon Ryan Ryan practicing his takedowns from standing rear body lock position that proved decisive in his ADCC 2022 Super Fight victory

Waiting: There is a time before your match where your preparation is over and now there is nothing but time between you and your opponent. It’s a lonely situation even in a crowded room because you know that soon you’ll be alone on the mat with your opponent. In that time every fear and doubt you have inside you will show itself. Just know this - rest assured that there is another room close by where your opponent sits. He is equally alone and every fear and doubt that he has is making itself heard inside his head just as yours do inside your head. Your nervousness is not unique to you. Your affliction is his affliction too. Once you realize this it’s always a little easier to go out and get to work

Now is when it begins: Takedowns in jiu jitsu look outwardly similar to any other grappling sport, but the manner in which they score is markedly different. Takedowns are scored by the amount of control exhibited AFTER the takedown. If there is no control - they don’t score at all. The criteria of control vary from one rule set to another but most involve the notion of three seconds of control that either keeps at least one of the opponents knees on the floor if he turns prone or hips or a large percentage of his back on the mat for three seconds. Now three seconds doesn’t sound like much, but in a scramble three seconds feels like an eternity. It’s usually rather easy for a trained opponent to prevent you satisfying these criteria by quickly getting back up to turtle position. The direct result of this is that the real scoring usually comes not from the takedown but from the takedown and transitions to rear mount after the takedown as the opponent turns to his knees to prevent the takedown score. Thus takedowns in jiu jitsu are very closely tied to ground skills, in particular getting to rear mount to score (and gain the best submission opportunity in the sport). Thus it is the synthesis of takedown and ground scramble (scrimmaging for points in the aftermath of a takedown attempt) that defines the standing takedown game in jiu jitsu.

The mind does its best work when the heart is cold - that’s when you can think and calculate with the least interference from your passions - and when the mind works quickly and you’ve done your physical work and preparation on the mat - the body will follow with equal speed.

Distance: Grappling is won and lost at point blank range, but it starts at distance. It involves a constant ebb and flow of closing distance to attack and creating distance to defend. In between is the tactical game of deciding where and when to close distance. This is usually determined by the strategy and tactics of the two athletes. Generally those athletes who favor control leading to submission will press the closing of distance since that is how they win. Generally those who wish to win by a minimal score will seek to limit the closing of distance until the perfect conditions to score are set, then attack to score and then go back to a distance where they can avoid retaliation. Understanding how distance can be your ally and enemy is a big part of your grappling development. Try to develop a sense of distance in your daily training. Learn to read when you’re at a safe distance and how to close distance on someone who wants to keep you at bay - the awareness you build will be of great importance to you one day

Dual threats: Creating a threat that your opponent respects is a good thing. Once he recognizes the threat he will be more reserved in his approach to you and more reticent in attacking you. Better yet, however, is to create TWO SIMULTANEOUS THREATS IN OPPOSING DIRECTIONS so that as an opponent tries to counter one he exposes himself to the threat of the other. This means that even if the opponent knows and expects the dual threat he will still have a hard time avoiding it since he can only counter one at a time and that counter leads to the second threat. A good example is leg locking and guard passing. The threat of leg locks forces an opponent to play a conservative guard game with shortened legs and feet conservatively positioned for safety - but this makes the task of passing guard easier. If he plays more creatively with his legs he will be harder to pass, but easier to leg lock. This dual threat makes the bottom players game very difficult. The game of Jiu jitsu is full of these dual threats in all the major positions and scenarios. Make sure you have an at least one per major position and your game will improve dramatically

The chase: When you begin to get threatening positions on good opponents they will often react by fleeing from the danger. This will create a chase sequence. When you go to chase a fleeing opponent you’ve got two approaches. The first is to match or exceed your opponents speed of escape with speed of your pursuit. Here your success or failure is based on the development of your own speed. The second approach is to focus not on INCREASING YOUR speed, but rather on DECREASING YOUR OPPONENTS speed. Taking certain grips and positioning your bodyweight appropriately can immediately slow down even the most explosive and fast moving opponents. In general the preferred approach is to focus on slowing the other fellow down with positioning and grip rather than trying to outrace opponents, however, Id be liar if I said you’re always going to be able to slow opponents down, so it’s important to develop your acceleration up and off the mat to chase down fleeing opponents. In hard fought matches it’s usually the combination of both that lets you reel in and recapture an opponent in flight.

The athlete goes out alone: When we think of athletes getting ready for competition in Jiu jitsu we tend to think mostly about the teamwork of preparation, working with your sparring partners, coaches, strength and conditioning trainers etc. This is a relatively small percentage of the average day however. Most of your time you’ll be alone in your house, your car etc. As the time draws near you’ll be surrounded by fans, haters, officials, opponents, but the more people around you the more you’ll feel the reality that when the match starts it’s you and only you that steps out in to the mat. If there is one attribute you’ll need to stay sane and succeed it is SELF RELIANCE. Cultivate this as an attribute every chance you get. Get comfortable being by yourself and comfortable with yourself, even in a crowded room. When you can be ALONE WITHOUT BEING LONELY you’ll have the inner strength needed for the big show. When you’re surround by thousands but alone inside yourself and comfortable, you’re ready to perform on stage. Get comfortable with solitude and you’ll create the success that will make people want to be around you.
Photo @tiagomolinos

When you get ready to step out for the biggest moments of your life - ask yourself one question. HOW DIFFERENT IS THIS REALLY FROM WHAT I DO EVERY DAY? If the answer is, “not very different at all” then step for ward with confidence and do what you do every day in the same manner and ignore the hype and distraction - you’re ready for action!
Photo @tiagomolinos

Chasing perfection: Giancarlo Bodoni in his first match at ADCC 2022 as time runs out he is decisively ahead on points and chasing the finish - another few seconds and it would have happened. His reaction afterwards speaks volumes - he wasn’t happy with what was a dominant performance against a very tough world champion opponent. Then he went out and finished all his remaining opponents including the defending ADCC champion with a mix of strangles and leg locks. It’s that elusive pursuit of perfection and creating a culture of high standards that creates great performers. Don’t settle for anything less. Even when you come up short you’ll do better than you ever would by settling for lowered standards. You will rise to the level of your goals. If you set the bar low, you’ll inevitably perform at a low level. If you set it high, you’ll run into a lot of frustration and disappointment at times, but when triumphs come your way, they’ll truly be something memorable

Greatness: How great you become in any given endeavor will always be assessed by the degree of difficulty of the barriers you had to overcome to get to the top. Just as the Lion became king of the jungle not by living among sheep, but by dominating a world of elephants, hyenas, Buffalo, leopards and crocodiles, so too the greatness of an athlete will be determined, not just by his own ability, but by the greatness of the athletes he faces. Thus in his quest for greatness, Gordon Ryan owes a debt to the greatness of his toughest opponent Andre Galvao. Mr Galvao stood at the highest levels of the grappling world for two decades and atop ADCC for a full decade, setting records for super fight longevity that were truly astounding. He had a deep and complete skill set married to superb tactical sense. Like a true martial artist he evolved greatly over the course of his career, moving easily from no gi to gi, across weight divisions, culminating in a game based around standing position that enabled him to defeat many legends of the game with relative ease. Mr Galvao fought his match with Gordon like a Lion, showing great tenacity and skill. The relationship between opponents is a strange one. You end up knowing each other very well as each studies the other and interacts in the build up. In the end, the greater your opponent, the greater you can become through victory, and yes, even in defeat. In the quest for greatness you end up owing more to your opponents than perhaps anyone else, since they are the true measure of where you stand. Andre Galvao stood against the best of the best for over a decade. In this greatest of all grappling events, it was the height of his legacy that made it such a special confrontation and such a memorable event.

Nicholas Meregali ADCC 2022: One of the outstanding performances at this ADCC World Championships was undoubtedly Nicholas Meregali who had one of the best debut performances in memory taking silver and Bronze in his first ADCC. What made this so remarkable is that just six months prior he had never trained without a gi even once in his life! His first ever no gi training was an impromptu session with Gordon Ryan when they were both filming videos in Boston! Mr Meregali decided to move to Austin Texas to begin training. Soon after doing so he said to me one day, “I want to be the first person to win IBJJF Absolute and ADCC Absolute in the same year.” It seemed a crazy idea for someone who didn’t know a single takedown and who never had a single no gi match in an age of no gi specialists. I must say however, that I was deeply impressed by Mr Meregali’s self belief. As you’d expect, start was rough and difficult but he never faltered in his training despite initial frustration and disappointment. Then he had to lose two months of no gi training when the IBJJF world championships - despite suffering a severe rib injury three weeks prior to the event he won. Then he had to get back into his ADCC preparation. He took on matches and improved with each one, all while maintaining his training schedule. At ADCC he surprised everyone with his ability to negate strong leg lock specialists and stand comfortably with takedown specialists. He fought far above the level of someone with less than six months of no gi experience and came very very close to reaching his audacious goal of double gold gi and no gi in his rookie year. Mr Meregali is a truly fine example of dream big, but maintain a workload proportional to the size of your dreams so that they become reality. When your dreams are big the hard fight to realize them will make you greater athlete than another with smaller more realistic dreams - even if you come short of them you’ll achieve something remarkable and prepare yourself better for your next goal!

Coming out from the shadows - Giancarlo Bodoni ADCC 2022: The greatest breakthrough performance in ADCC 2022 was undoubtedly Giancarlo Bodoni. I first met him around two years ago while filming instructional videos in Massachusetts where he worked at Bernardo Faria’s school as an instructor. He was a solid positional player in the gi and was looking to switch into no gi. The transition proved difficult as he was repeatedly leg locked in local competitions. When our team broke up in Puerto Rico he saw it as an opportunity to come and train full time in Austin. He uprooted his life and made the move. This commitment deeply impressed everyone, but even more impressive was his work ethic upon arrival. Every day he was in the gym working on every aspect of the game. As weeks became months his training intensity continued to rise. He started doing very well in local competitions. His submission finishes, a weak point of his prior game, started to massively improve. His leg lock game, his nemesis in the past, started to become a strong point. When he stepped on the mat at ADCC it would be a very different Giancarlo. In his four matches he finished three out of four of his opponents including the champion from the previous ADCC and was just seconds away from finishing the fourth when time expired. He did not have a single point scored on him. When he faced the athlete most people considered the foremost leg locker in the division, Giancarlo easily leg locked him. In exactly one year of work, Giancarlo completely reinvented himself. In the final he took on the formidable Lucas “Hulk” Barbosa, a man who had defeated Giancarlo many times in the past. Beating someone who has repeatedly beaten you before is not easy - Giancarlo turned it all around and dominated the match and then submitted him. There is a powerful lesson in there for all of us. You are never a finished story. You are a never a final product. Improvement and progress is always possible. Obstacles that once seemed insurmountable can be overcome. People will always underestimate what you are now, but never let them make you underestimate what you can BECOME. Work hard and you won’t be in the shadows forever

Gordon Ryan ADCC 2022: The greatest event in grappling history is over. New stars emerged, established stars shone bright again, but one man stood above all like a colossus - Gordon Ryan. I have seen many incredible feats of grappling, but I never saw a performance like this. For many, Mr Ryan is a polarizing figure in the sport, for many others an inspiration to look up to, but after this weekend there was no disagreement among haters and fans about his merit - He is the best ever. It was a long and difficult journey to ADCC 2022. Just one year ago we were having a difficult conversation about whether he could even continue in in the sport due to a debilitating stomach ailment. We barely had training partners and many sessions had to be abandoned soon after starting when extreme nausea from his stomach flared up. Over time he clawed his way back to a level where could train acceptably well and began to plot his return. It began with exhibition matches to get used to performing on stage again. Then he formulated an ambitious plan to run three back to back events, a return match against current champion Pedro Merinho, a rematch against past nemesis, Felipe Pena and then ADCC itself. On the surface it was a crazy plan because the three matches had totally different rule sets and the training would require a continuous sixteen weeks of training for three rule sets against the best of the best. At one point Mr Ryan was doing thirty minute sparring rounds daily in preparation for no time limit match and then a couple of weeks later multiple ten minute ADCC wrestling rounds - it was brutal. He went through it all and emerged as the undisputed best of all time. It was a virtuoso performance of unmatched technique, preparation and confidence. No one else can claim credit for his achievement - this was his and his alone. No one else today brings together technical depth, tactical insight and the confidence to use them onstage as he does. I had many students, but I had only one Gordon Ryan.

Thank you: Team New Wave just completed one of the most successful team performances in ADCC history. This was truly remarkable given that one year ago a team split resulted in around three quarters of our competition athletes leaving. It was a dark time. We had no gym of our own, Our main athlete Gordon Ryan was so sick from a long term stomach illness he was contemplating leaving the sport, Garry Tonon was mostly focused on MMA, we were strangers in a new city - it seemed the grappling program I’d built over the years was dead in the water. Yet eleven months later we surpassed even the great success we had in 2019 ADCC. This success had many factors and I would like to thank the people who helped make it happen. First, my students. I took on new students to help those who had remained after the split. They gave everything they had in a very tough year of training up to four sessions a day every day. There are too many to mention, but in particular Oliver Taza, Luke Griffith, Dan Manasoiu, Nicholas Meregali and Giancarlo Bodoni trained with inspiring dedication and grit to get to championship level in record time. My remaining senior students Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Georges St Pierre took on an inspirational role as mentors and coaches while at the same time continuing their own growth and progress - an incredible achievement on their part. From the bottom of my heart - thank you. Second, my new local students here in Austin who flocked to my classes in small local schools to make tremendous progress and become worthy training partners to the competitors in record time whilst still working their daily professional and family obligations - thank you. Third, The staff and management of @roka who provided a stable training gym for a year of intense preparation and asked for nothing in return and showed such kindness of spirit to us that made us fight that much harder to improve and represent them well at the world championships - thank you. Fourth, to Bernardo Faria and Michael Zenga of @bjj.fanatics who help my students craft their teaching skill and become financially sound. Thank you all so much for the kindness, work and sacrifice you all showed.

Nice show dork, now get your lazy ass back to work: Back in Austin - ready to start a day of teaching. Where ma dogs at? #norestforthewicked

Victory in Las Vegas!! ADCC 2022 was the greatest show in grappling history. The best of the best came and out in a show that will never be forgotten. Gordon Ryan showed why they call him the King and stands atop the grappling world. He became the first person ever to win three world titles in three different weight categories and also the first person ever to compete and win in both weight category and superfight. He beat the greatest ADCC grappler of all time, the great Andre Galvao in a passing of the torch in greatness. Giancarlo Bodoni shocked the world to win gold in the hyper competitive 88kg category in his ADCC debut - a truly incredible accomplishment. Nicholas Meregali won silver and Bronze medals in his ADCC debut after only around six months of no gi training. A truly incredible accomplishment in a world where everyone specializes in one of the other. It’s been a crazy day - I have to run now - I will write more soon to fill you in one details. I want to thank the ADCC organization and in particular @mojassim80 who worked tirelessly for a two years and massive personal expense to make this show what it was. I also want to thank all my students who elevated the performance of our competitors to a new level. I hope you all enjoyed the show!!!

Legends: Its great to be around the excitement of ADCC this weekend! I am thrilled to see that two of the most important people in jiu jitsu career are going to be rewarded with induction into the ADCC Hall of Fame - my teacher Renzo Gracie and my great friend and mentor Roger Gracie. Both were great champions and both are great coaches who were pivotal figures in the growth of our sport and also in my own development. I am eternally grateful for their guidance. It’s also great to my friend from that same era, Kyra Gracie, one of the most polished athletes I ever saw get her induction to the hall of fame alongside her family members! It was great seeing all three today here in Las Vegas!
@renzograciebjj
@rogergracie
@kyragracie

Counting down in Las Vegas: Putting the final touches on the team preparation here in Vegas today in conjunction with a man who knows what it’s like to compete at the highest levels @georgesstpierre took us to UFC Apex training center. Now it’s time for final stage of weight cut and pre competition formalities and then the big show this weekend. Wishing all the competitors the very best. Only the gods of fate know who will prevail, but given the unprecedented talent level and scale of this years event whoever does stand on top of the podium when the dust settles can truly be said to be the best!

If you can preserve your BALANCE, then you can see and react well to every threat and at a moment’s notice launch your own attacks. If you can preserve your COMPOSURE then you can make good decisions even under stress. If you can preserve your BREATHING you can outlast an opponent who matches you in skill and strength. Keep your balance, your composure and your breathing under control whilst denying them to your opponent and you’ll find victory far more often than not.

Breaking connection: The entire game of grappling is based on grip and connection - without those it would all be impossible. It stands to reason then, that in a competitive game where both of you want to establish grip and connection in order to win, learning to BREAK grip and connection is a very important skill. You don’t want to turn into a negative player who only tries to negate an opponents game with no concern for positive play leading towards victory - that’s definitely not the spirit you want to approach the game. Nonetheless we have to be realistic and understand that there will definitely be times you need to break potentially dangerous grips opponents have gotten on you in order to shut down their encroaching attacks. In wrestling and judo the grip breaks are almost always centered on the HANDS, but in Jiu jitsu you’ll need to break grips of both the hands AND feet, since many of the most important grip/connection come from guard positions. When you feel an opponent getting a grip that gives them more control over you than you’re comfortable with - stop what you’re doing for a moment and break the grip before going back to your positive attacking game

Jiu jitsu takedowns: When you look at takedowns in jiu jitsu you see several things. First, the general execution is generally at a lower level than grappling arts that focus primarily on takedowns such as Judo and Wrestling. This is probably due to the simple fact that historically takedowns have been under emphasized in training due to the fact that they score relatively low in a sport who primary emphasis is pins that enable striking on the ground and submission holds. In addition, Jiu jitsu athletes have the option of sitting to guard if they feel their opponent has superiority in takedowns, this always de incentivizes takedown training, since the better you get, the more like your opponent will simply sit to guard and render all your takedown training null and void. I am confident that a change of training culture will in time improve dramatically the execution of takedowns in jiu jitsu as athletes begin to realize it is a very effective to score and ensure top position. Secondly, very often a takedown will be performed that would definitely score under wrestling or judo rules, but which scores zero points in Jiu jitsu. This is the more important difference as this has nothing to do with culture and is the result of the rules of the sport. The scoring criteria of jiu jitsu are always based on POSITIONAL CONTROL rather than the takedown itself. As such, it is the AFTERMATH of the takedown that counts, rather than the actual takedown. You have to be able to satisfy control criteria for three seconds after the takedown. This is difficult to do against a skilled opponent. As such, the art of takedowns in jiu jitsu has a focus on what happens immediately after a takedown. Most grappling styles award points for the takedown itself, and the more amplitude in the takedown, the greater the score. Jiu jitsu does not reward amplitude, only control after the takedown. This creates a need for a significantly different approach for takedowns, where typically the takedown itself will look like it is borrowed from wrestling or judo, but the scoring aftermath looks like a jiu jitsu positional scramble. This is the insight you must carry into your standing training.

Be ready with both mind and body: When you come out to engage with an opponent there are a thousand possibilities for both of you. You have two modes of defense. The first is mental - this is AWARENESS. If you are mentally aware of dangers BEFORE their onset, defense is always easier. The second is physical - this is your stance. A good stance covers the most likely attack options an opponent has whilst facilitating your own attacks. Weaknesses in stance always make your opponents job easier and your job more difficult. When you go out there - be mentally aware of dangers and physically set in a strong stance that enables you to confront and overcome those dangers and you’ll always a tough opponent for anyone.

The best of the best: ADCC 2022 is coming up next week. The main event features the great Andre Galvao vs Gordon Ryan in a super fight that could well be described as the bout to determine who is the greatest ADCC athlete of all time. Mr Galvao has amassed a record that far surpasses any other ADCC athlete with regards superfight success. He is one of a handful of athletes who have achieved double gold in ADCC. Gordon Ryan entered ADCC in 2017 with the most successful debut in history and then hit double gold in only his second ADCC event as well as becoming one of a tiny number of athletes who have won gold in different weight divisions. They are both at the top of the game, they have both taken hard fought but dominant forty minute wins over the other great figure of this era, Felipe Pena. Each has a very different style and approach to Jiu jitsu. Mr Galvao is the greatest no gi TACTICIAN of all time, Gordon Ryan is the greatest no gi TECHNICIAN of all time. The history of jiu jitsu shows very clearly that tacticians often defeat technicians and technicians often defeat tacticians - it goes both ways - they can both beat each other, but in very different ways - that’s what makes this such a compelling match up. Training has been harsh for both men. Mr Ryan had to peak for three different events in this camp, first a super fight with Pedro Marino, then Felipe Pena and now an ADCC where he will do both his weight division AND the super fight - the first man in history to attempt this. No mortal knows what will happen, but one thing we do know is that whoever wins achieves grappling immortality.

Standing position and takedowns: When jiu jitsu athletes begin studying standing skills they typically say “I need to improve my takedowns.” This is certainly true, but as it stands, rather naive. You will need to learn a lot more than takedowns. In fact, takedowns will be one of the last things you’ll be learning. In order to be effective at all with your takedowns, you need a set of supporting skills that make those takedowns possible. If you lack those skills, you can train takedowns all you want and it’s very unlikely they’ll succeed against a skilled opponent. Everything begins with stance and motion. Then it progresses to contact and grip, and culminates in the ability to off balance an opponent, move him where you want him to move and break his stance. Only when you can reliably perform this on an opponent will you be able to enter into takedowns with a good chance of success. The stance of jiu jitsu is rather different from wrestling and judo. The matches are much longer, so the extreme crouch of wrestling is usually replaced by a more upright stance as deep crouches are fatiguing over a possible 20-40 match. The extreme upright stance of judo is a little too upright in a sport where leg tackles are the main form of takedown, so jiu jitsu typically finds a stance between those two extremes. This early battle for stance is one of the true keys to the standing game. Your goal is always to maintain your stance whilst breaking his. If you can do this first, the takedowns will be a much easier second.

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video STANDING2GROUND TAKEDOWNS AND STANDING SKILLS FOR JIU JITSU. I go over the essential standing skills that make takedowns possible - stance, motion, contact and gripping and the all important breaking of your opponents balance and stance. Then we go over the best takedowns from neutral standing position. Takedowns and standing position can be very different in jiu jitsu than other grappling arts due to the difference in rule sets and priorities. The major theme presented in this series is that in the long term of jiu jitsu is to make significant progress in one of its traditional weaknesses - the standing position - it must develop its own standing game. The point is not to MIMIC wrestling and judo, but rather to MODIFY, ADAPT and ADD to them until jiu jitsu has it own character suited to its own rule set. I believe the most significant progress in Jiu jitsu in the coming years will be the standing game and even more important - the interface between standing and ground that is the true emphasis in jiu jitsu rather than pure takedowns per se. If you’re interested - check it out! Link in my Instagram story

Climbing: The worst scenarios for takedowns in jiu jitsu usually involve getting your head and shoulders getting caught under a skilled opponents body weight. This is always an exhausting and debilitating experience that usually ends with you getting caught in submissions or scored on. Get used to the notion of climbing UP when you make contact with your takedowns rather than falling down and forward. As long as your head is over your hips you’ll be in a position to work up your opponents body and hopefully towards the back - that’s always the optimal situation with regards takedowns for Jiu jitsu

Position AND submission: In most cases we distinguish between positional moves and submission moves. Indeed, the old cliche does more than separate them - it puts a sequence between them - position comes BEFORE submission. There are many moves however, that are both submission AND positional moves. Many moves such as juji gatame armbars, kata gatame strangles, variations of triangle strangles, many versions of ashi ashi garami etc that can be used both pin or sweep and opponent and to finish them. These moves are of extraordinary value, since they close the usual gap between position and submission and allow you to work for both at the same time. Make sure you work and train both aspects of the move so that you can derive maximum value from them. Start with the classic arm bar juji gatame. Instead of just trying to extend the arm, challenge yourself to see how long you can pin someone down without extending their arm. Start to see it for what it is - both a pin and a submission. This will make you work the move to its full potential. You’ll need this as you grapple better and better opponents who aren’t easy to submit - you’ll have an extra element to these moves that’ll keep you ahead of the opposition!

It start with your hands: Jiu jitsu is all about EVER INCREASINGLY CLOSE CONTACT INTO EVER INCREASINGLY MORE ADVANTAGEOUS POSITIONS. But that close contact has to start somewhere - and in the majority of cases that will be with the HANDS. get used to coming at the start of each engagement with hands ready for action. Work to get your hands into grips and positions from which all the subsequent movements you require can follow naturally. Condition your hands for hard gripping strength and endurance - I always recommend rope climbing above all other methods - but remember always that efficiency of grip always counts for more than strength of grip.

ADCC 2022: Counting down the training days for the biggest event in grappling. Teams from around the world are making their final preparations for the big show. Looking at the athlete roster for this year I must say I have never seen anything close to the level of talent in any previous ADCC event. In the old days of ADCC the first round were usually mismatches that enabled the favorite to advance with minimal stress. In this event even the lowest seed athletes are outright killers who could easily upset even established champions. I am certain this year will see some of these unknown athletes emerge as new legends. I am thrilled at the growth of this sport - this event is going to show that growth in two ways - the audience and the athletes. Looking forward to seeing you there!

Action and reaction: When you start jiu jitsu it seems there are so many moves to learn that when it’s time for sparring you get locked into a mindset of MOVE PERFORMANCE, that is, a desire to perform a move that you’ve selected as well as you can, come what may. There is no thought as to what your opponent is doing - only what you want to do. This is totally understandable when you’re starting out, but at some point you’ll want to get away from that and start paying attention to your opponents REACTIONS to your moves and use THAT as the basis of your technique selection rather than just arbitrarily selecting a move and trying to force an application of it against resistance. Just as a good conversationalist doesn’t just talk his own thoughts, but rather LISTENS to the other person and talks in response to what he hears, so too, a good jiu jitsu player listens to the movements of his opponent second by second in response to his moves and responds. It takes two in jiu jitsu - make sure everything you do takes the other fellow into account

Double your success with takedowns: Many students of jiu jitsu see takedowns as a very separate area of study. Indeed, more than a few don’t study it at all because they don’t think it is necessary to success in our sport. This is very unfortunate. Even if you pulled guard at the start of every match your jiu jitsu game would STILL benefit immeasurably by learning takedowns. Takedowns have a great second function in Jiu jitsu as a means of reversing/sweeping opponents from guard position. They also chain together extremely well with classical jiu jitsu sweeps - when the sweep fails - follow with a takedown to finish and get the score. Jiu jitsu doesn’t require that you devote all your energy and training time to standing takedowns, the vast majority of points and submissions occur on the ground, but you should at least aspire to be COMPETENT in this area. It is sad to see athletes who are brilliant is most aspects of jiu jitsu but who cannot perform even rudimentary standing skills other than sitting to guard. Jiu jitsu is a sport whose founding game plan begins with taking conflict to the ground to assert greater control than is possible in standing position. Again, you don’t have to be a world beater in standing skills/takedowns, but you owe it to yourself to at least be competent. As noted earlier, it’ll make you better both on your feet and as a guard player with an entirely new toolbox

The incredible power of the hips: We humans are physically very feeble compared with most of the other life forms in this planet, but one thing we do have going for us is the power of the hips. In standing position your hips can be used to block and lift even the heaviest and strongest opponents of you can get your center of gravity underneath theirs. With relatively little energy expenditure you can make even strong and heavy opponents topple and sometimes even fly. The two main choices will always be to get your hips in FRONT of opponents hips or BEHIND. Both offer many great throwing/takedown options. It is crucial you learn to harness the power of your hips. Even though the great majority of takedowns in no gi Jiu jitsu are variations leg tackles, the hips provide an excellent alternative - as well as a powerful counter to those leg tackles on many occasions. Start your training by learning to bend your legs to get your hips under your opponents, then stepping in either in front or behind, being sure not to rise in level in level as you do or it may be you flying over your opponents hips!

Jiu jitsu is an art based on closing distance to either get behind opponents or, if you’re in front of them, getting past their legs. The whole game is based on closing distance - make sure your actions in sparring reflect this essential fact. But when you close distance - don’t be naive and close distance into his legs - that’s where your opponent is most dangerous - close distance towards his back or past his legs and you’ll be winning. Cultivate a mental habit of constantly pressuring forward to close distance in this manner and you’ll be very successful in jiu jitsu, but if you shy back and away, you’ll never be a threat to opponents

Easy like a Sunday morning: Not every workout has to be a war. I demand of my students that they aspire to train every day - but I certainly don’t demand that they train HARD every day. Learn to pace your workouts over the course of a week. The more days a week you train and the more times a day, the more you need to switch pace among workouts. If you’re training multiple times a day seven days a week it becomes absolutely essential that you have different speeds and intensities for different workouts or you will burn out quite quickly and increase your risk of injuries. If you train recreationally a few times a week pacing becomes less important, until you start getting older - then it becomes an important element of your training as older athletes typically don’t recover as quickly between workouts as younger athletes. Develop a sense of listening to your body, but balance this with a solid discipline that doesn’t allow you to lapse into laziness and make unjustified excuses to take it easy when you should be working harder. Finding that balance takes time but it’s crucial to your longevity in the sport.

In Jiu jitsu and in life - you won’t be measured by how many techniques you know in theory , but rather but how many you are willing to use under stress. If you have a working knowledge of a hundred moves in the comfort of gym sparring, you can probably count on around ten of them being moves you’re willing to employ under great stress in competition or against a very tough opponent in very competitive sparring. Just as you may know one hundred people, but when push comes to shove, only ten of them are real friends who’ll help you when you’re in need, so too with your jiu jitsu - those moves that form the bedrock of your game, moves that you’re willing to use in your toughest and most competitive matches - THOSE are the moves that will define your game. Research them deeply, practice them unceasingly and trust in them completely

Use your feet and hands to break their stance - then use your legs and arms to control them - then your torso position to pressure them over time - and then your whole body against a small percentage of their body at a vulnerable point to submit them - that is the nature of Jiu jitsu

The floor is your friend…but a very fickle one: Top position in Jiu jitsu is built around the idea of BASE. This concerns your ability to build a stable base of support that enables you to stay on top and build pressure over time that breaks opponents will and ability to resist. Using your hands and feet as posts of support is the key to building a good wide base that keeps you stable in top. In this respect the floor is your friend. Post your hands and feet out wide on the floor and you’ll be stable on top of even the wildest opponents. Be aware however, that oftentimes you post a foot, you become vulnerable to leg locks and oftentimes you post a hand you become vulnerable to arm locks. To complicate things further, it’s not every time, but only certain situations where this is true. The onus is on you to know when it’s safe to post on the floor and when it’s not - only then will the floor be a friend and not an enemy. Even if you aren’t sure whether it’s safe or not, just the awareness that posting can lead to dangers is enough to make you wary and pull away from danger as it starts to materialize rather than just complacently leave it there and get locked by a skilled opponent. Treat the floor for what it is - a friend when you use it well but one that can betray you when you get complacent

Distance: Control of distance is a crucial concept in all combat sports and jiu jitsu is no exception. There will be times where you can make effective grips on an opponent, but they cannot make effective grips on you. These are the moments when you want to make distance work in your favor. Maintain a distance where you can make effective grips but your opponent can’t and you’ll have a handy initial advantage that will create momentum in your favor at the onset of an engagement. While that certainly doesn’t guarantee a win, if you can do this consistently you’ll stack the odd well in your favor, and in this game, that’s the best we can ever do.

If you can get around an arm - you’re in control: Every time you start to engage you’re in front of your opponents arms - if you can slip around or over them - there is nothing between you and your opponents back - and that’s always the best place to be! See your opponents arms for they are - the major barrier between you and your opponents back. If you can cultivate the art of beating the arms - it won’t be king until you’re beating opponents!

Small persistent movements often garner bigger rewards than big single movements: When we want to perform a move we usually think that the bigger and more dramatic our movements the more likely we will get into the positions we seek. Sometimes that is true, but usually what you’ll find is that a smaller moment performed five times gets you further than a big Herculean movement performed once - and it has the additional benefit of usually being less tiring. Here I want to get an angle on a training partner as we go into toreando passing. Rather than taking one giant step to get an angle that evokes an equally big defensive reaction from an opponent, I take a series of small shuffles that add up to a big movement without putting an opponent on high alert or tiring myself. Try working with repetitive smaller movements in place of big single movements - you might be surprised how effective they can be

Tape: If there is one ritual that all grapplers perform and understand it is wrapping up small scale injuries with athletic tape. Athletic tape plays a similar role in the life of grapplers as duct tape does for blue collar workers - it’s a quick fix for pretty much every problem! When it’s competition time and everyone’s body is sore every day and every session seems to create a new issue, jammed fingers, skin abrasions, twisted ankles and wrists - the pain is bothersome but not enough to stop you - that’s when the tape comes out 😜😜 If there is one thing I encourage you all to carry with you at all times it’s athletic tape. It has done more to keep grapplers on the mats than all the physical therapists, acupuncturists, mobility trainers and other rehabilitation experts combined 😜😜😂😂 Make sure your study the basics of taping and wrapping your small joints up so you can stay active. Like anything there is a skill to it. Learn the different ways to wrap fingers,
Toes, wrists and ankles, cover a skin abrasion. It’s not difficult to learn and is a skill you’ll be using often and as long as you’re doing jiu jitsu

The weaknesses of jiu jitsu - working the standing position: There is no question that Jiu jitsu as an art has its weaknesses. When I began teaching jiu jitsu I identified five prominent weaknesses that I wanted to address as I taught. The first was leg locks. The second was takedowns and grappling in the standing position. The third was third was the widespread tendency in jiu jitsu culture to make a gentleman’s agreement to play the roles of guard and guard passer and almost completely neglect the possibility of heisting or standing up from bottom and using the change in elevation to score takedowns and reversals. Fourth was the widespread belief that training in a gi somehow made you better at no gi grappling. This odd belief held back the development of no gi technique for many years. Fifth was the failure of jiu jitsu coaching to keep pace with the development of jiu jitsu technique. The techniques of jiu jitsu evoked with impressive rapidity, the the methods coaches used to teach the technique did not evolve at all. My coaching career has essentially been an attempt to overcome these five major weaknesses that I observed in jiu jitsu. I believe it is fair to say now that leg locks are no longer a weakness in jiu jitsu, but rather they have now become a strength relative to the other grappling arts. I also believe that very few people still believe the fable that you need to train in a gi in order to maximize your technical development in no gi jiu jitsu and as a result the evolution of no gi technique in the last decade has skyrocketed. The standing position and takedowns is still under developed in jiu jitsu. It’s getting far better than when I began the sport, but it still has a way to go if jiu jitsu is to mature fully as a grappling art and attain the perfection that I truly believe it capable of. It is my earnest belief that Jiu jitsu must develop its own standing game - a game appropriate for its unique rule set - rather than just pirate a few moves from wrestling and judo and be happy with that. This will require a deep and sincere study, with much inspiration taken from wrestling and judo, but even more modification and adaptation for Jiu jitsu

Building instincts: I’m sure you’ve all had the experience of sparring with an opponent who even though they may not have highly developed technique or tactics, just seems to have good INSTINCTS. They turn in the right directions during a fast scramble, the pull out of danger at the right moment. Often these good instincts are seen in athletes who started the sport very young. A natural question to ask is - if I start older with no good instincts and I always seem to turn the wrong way, move at the wrong time - how can I improve my grappling instincts? My answer is - START WITH ONE SIMPLE DESIDERATA AND HAMMER IT INTO YOUR CONSCIOUSNESS UNTIL IT BECOMES A HABITUAL ACTION. Once you’ve achieved that, move on to another. I always recommend to start with developing an instinct to RELENTLESSLY SEEK THE BACK FROM EVERYWHERE. You simply can’t go wrong with this as a habit of action or instinct. Next time you’re sparring, see how many many times you can visually identify a path to the back as you work. Try hard to seek a physical path to the back. Keep working over time until it becomes a settled instinct or habit. You’ll be shocked how positively it affects your game overall

The first minute of a match can feel very intimidating. Your opponent often feels immensely strong and fast and your first attempts at your moves often can’t even get started - forget about completed. Take heart. If you stay active and impose a work rate on your opponent that exceeds your own work rate time will work in your favor. An athlete whose stance seemed impregnable in the first minute will very often feel quite a lot weaker, slower and more open to attack in seventh, eighth or ninth minute. Fatigue can totally change the character of your opponent. Don’t lose heart when the first minute feels tough - everybody is tough in the first minute. Focus on taking the match to a point where that initial toughness fades to a level where an opponent who initially felt like he could stop all your attacks, now can’t stop any of them. Pressure and time can be your worker enemies when used well against you, and your best friends when you are in charge of them - use them whenever you can

Daylight: When you enter into the various holds and pins of jiu jitsu the quality of your execution will de determined largely by the quality of your connection to your opponent. IF YOU CAN SEE DAYLIGHT BETWEEN THE RELEVANT PARTS OF YOUR BODY TO HIS, FAILURE WILL FIND ITS WAY TO YOU OFTEN. Seek always to contour your body into the contours of your opponents so that just as water takes on whatever form it’s container takes, so to you adapt to the form of your opponents body - leaving no space for escape. To do this you will need a degree of relaxation and softness to your body, not too much or you’ll be ineffective, but enough to let you mold into your opponent - and if you can do this, you’ll have satisfied one of the most important prerequisites for success in the application of Jiu jitsu moves

Get to your grips and get to work! Everything starts with grip - if you don’t have some form of grip and connection you can do very little. When you go to grip - ENTER WITH A PLAN - don’t just go forward and see what happens. Know the grip you want and know what you want to do with it and you’ll get off to a solid start in most engagements.

Follow through: When you go to attack with a joint lock it is important to understand the idea of follow through. To THREATEN a joint you need to EXTEND it. To BREAK a joint, you need to HYPEREXTEND it. This means that you must position yourself in such a way that you can extend the relevant parts of your body THROUGH the opponents joint. Just as a boxer doesn’t punch AT the jaw, but rather THROUGH the jaw, so to with your joint locks. There must always be some extra extension available for you, so that if you had to, you could have taken the joint beyond it’s range of motion into damage. Of course it goes without saying that in training you NEVER MAKE USE OF THIS FOLLOW THROUGH DISTANCE as it will injure training partners, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t be cognizant of it and train yourself to create it should it ever be necessary to use one day.

Strangles: There is no question that the most high percentage submission attack in Jiu jitsu is variations of rear strangles. You could make a great career in the sport with no other submission but that. However, it is great importance that you compliment your rear strangles with at least one really good strangle from the front. It doesn’t matter too much which you you choose - Guillotine variations, Darce, anaconda, seated kata gatame or another - they all work well. The dual threat from both directions greatly amplifies the effectiveness of the techniques since as an opponent defends from one he inevitably exposes himself to the other. Make sure you have strong strangles from both front and back, at least one of each that you have total confidence in - you’ll soon become a real force on the mat!

Multiple lines of attack: When you have but one attack in a given scenario you’ll be successful as long as you are matched against people who don’t know your game. Once you start showing everyone what that attack is however, they’ll learn quickly and develop defenses that stop that one line of attack. That’s why we all have a need to develop multiple lines of attack from all our favorite positions and moves, so that opponents can never know what’s next. Best of all are dilemma/trilemma pairings where one horn of the dilemma creates a reaction that facilitates the other horn of the dilemma and vice versa. One of the very best moves in this regard is the REAR TRIANGLE ushiro sankaku. It creates several dilemmas at once. The first is between the dual threat of strangle and joint locks. The more an opponent resists one, the easier the other becomes. The second is between the various joint locks available, probably more than any other hold. You have juji gatame armlock, kimura, Americana and a nasty wrist lock thrown in for good measure. With all those options it will be very difficult for an opponent to stop them all, even they know it’s among your favorite moves.

When you can’t train: Life has a way of throwing obstacles in our path. There will be many times when injury and circumstance will interrupt your ability to train. In most cases what this means is that you are temporarily unable to physically train your BODY - but this should not stop you from training your MIND. There are many things you can do that don’t involve the body. You can study great champions and learn from their example and potentially add some aspects of their game into yours. You can watch matches either on video or at your gym and follow the action mentally, placing yourself in the action on the side of one of the combatants and asking yourself second by second what you’d be doing differently out there and why. You can work some aspect of your physicality that, if it were to improve, your gym performance overall would also improve. So for example, if you had an injury to the leg, you could work rope climbs to develop grip strength that will benefit you when you resume grappling. When Gordon Ryan suffered a terrible knee injury six months before 2019 ADCC most medical experts thought it was extremely unlikely he would be able to compete at all. For three months he came in every day to watch classes and we would quiz each other as we watched everyone train. When he finally got back on the mats his body was rusty but his jiu jitsu mind was sharper than ever. As soon as his body started moving properly his jiu jitsu looked better than before the injury due to the sharpness of his mental game. The mind governs and directs action. If the mind increases its powers during a lay off, the body will reveal Thais improvements as soon as it is able

You are the average of your best offensive moves and your worst defensive moves: Your ability on the mat overall has two crucial parameters. The ability of your best offensive moves to break through and score/finish; and your worst defensive moves that enable and opponent to score/finish you. You aren’t measure purely by your best offense and you aren’t measured by your worst defense but rather the average of the two. You therefore have a responsibility to bring both as high as possible to increase your effectiveness overall. If you have good offense but gaping holes in your defense your average will be lower than it ought to be; similarly when your defense is rock solid but your offense is weak. Bring your average up by working on both areas and never neglecting one for the other.

They can’t all be diamonds: When I was beginning Jiu jitsu one of my most important mentors and training partners was future UFC and IBJJF world champion Matt Serra. Like any beginning student I was always chasing maximum progress in minimum time. There were a few days I would leave the gym ecstatic with the progress I felt I was making and the knowledge I was gaining; but there were many more days I’d leave thinking I’d gotten no better, possibly slightly worse, and that I’d never catch up to the advanced students. Whenever I would have days like this I would vent to Matt and he’d look at me and say, “Hey man, they can’t all be diamonds!” It would always raise a smile on my face because I knew even then it was true. Progress in Jiu jitsu isn’t linear. It tends to happen in short spurts where some critical insight is gained that boosts your performance. In between these short periods of significant progress there are typically long periods of very little, even no discernible progress and occasionally regression (particularly when you’re trying a lot of new moves and concepts). DON’T WORRY - this is the normal state of affairs. Just stay in the game and be sure that the progress will come. Be assured that progress in Jiu jitsu looks a lot like a graph of the stock market over time - lots of chaos in the short term with many big dips and rises but a noticeable overall upward momentum when longer time periods are used to assess it. Remember always that the only thing that definitely WILL stop your progress is stopping training.

Leandro Lo was unquestionably one of the greatest Jiu jitsu athletes of his generation and indeed in the history of the sport. Eight times he stood on top of the Jiu jitsu world, most recently at the 2022 IBJJF World Championships. As an athlete he excelled in all the major aspects of the game, as a man he was friendly and animated, one of the great social characters of the game and an unforgettable character. He was able to keep a rare balance in his life between athletic excellence at the highest levels but at the same time able to indulge his other passions in life. It’s easy on the path to greatness in sports to get so obsessive that you ignore every other facet of life. Leandro was able to remain at the top across multiple weight divisions for over a decade but still live a full and fun life outside of jiu jitsu that made him one of the great characters of the game. His death is a reminder of the delicate nature of life and how all our plans and dreams have to kept within the bounds of our mortality, for we never know the day or hour of our end and there is no denying the iron decrees of fate. Leandro made jiu jitsu better and he enriched the lives of all who knew him - there is no better life than that. Camus said it best “those whom the gods love most die young.” You can kill a man but you can’t kill the memories of him - the jiu jitsu world will always remember him as one of its very best and most loved in its pantheon.

Victory In Dallas!! Gordon Ryan and Nicholas Meregali both had extremely impressive wins here tonight in the second biggest grappling event of the year. Mr Meregali showed the fruits of his hard work training without the gi. In just five months he has made great progress and he showed that tonight with a win showcasing his developing standing skills and pressure top game. He hit two beautiful uchi mata takedowns and passed to mount and rear mount multiple times. Gordon Ryan had a tense tactical match with his great rival Felipe Pena and was able to use a combination of guard pulls into reversals and takedowns to secure top position and play a disciplined pace that drains even the best. This match was essentially a meeting of the two best submission artists in the world under a rule set where one of them had to submit. The pressure over time that Mr Ryan can build us very daunting to face and on several occasions Mr Pena seemed to want to stop but then resumed. Just past the forty minute mark Mr Pena asked to stop with a verbal submission and victory went to Mr Ryan. It was an indication of just how far Mr Ryan has progressed that he was able to determine the pace, direction and outcome of the match against such a great opponent who had defeated him at the onset of his career. It was a brave and admirable gesture for Mr Pena to compete tonight - he lost a dear friend in Leandro Lo today and still came to do his best. Now it’s back to Austin to get everyone ready for ADCC 2022! Thank you to Garry Tonon and Luke Griffith for their help preparing and cornering the athletes tonight. Thank you all for your interest and support for our athletes. Wishing you all the best from Dallas!

Weigh in complete: Gordon Ryan and Felipe Peña both weighed in for the main event tomorrow night. Mr Peña came in at 228 pounds and Mr Ryan at 227. Now all the athletes will engage in a press conference. The undercard alone for this event is better than most main events with Brazilian phenoms Mica Galvao, and both winners of Brazilian trials Fabricio Andrey getting ready for big matches. B team sensation Jay Rodriguez will take on rising star Jacob Couch from Daisy Fresh. Bia Misquita, the great ADCC champion will go against Elizabeth Clay. This is a super event - no question!

Big Weekend coming up! The second biggest grappling event of the year is on this weekend with @flograppling WNO Grappling super fight featuring the main event Gordon Ryan vs Felipe Peña. The co main event is also a fascinating match up between Rafael Lavato Jr, one of the greatest grapplers of his generation and a master of jiu jitsu in gi and no gi and also in MMA. He will take on Brazilian superstar Nicholas Meregali in what should a truly great match up. Mr Meregali has only had two no gi matches in his career and had never even trained without a gi until around five months ago, but he has been training hard alongside Mr Ryan and making great progress. He has brilliant overall movement and an attacking style that he transfers over from his stellar gi game and now must try to apply it against an ADCC legend! I’m really looking forward to this match - I’ve seen both train up close and they are both extraordinary athletes with very different styles - watching the clash of those styles will be fascinating!

When to be fast and when to be slow: Jiu jitsu is a game of variable pace. If you try to sprint the whole time you’ll soon be exhausted. If you move like a sloth the whole time you’ll be late for every engagement and have to constantly fight out of bad positions. So where is the happy medium? WHEN YOU ARE IN CONTROL OF YIUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT SLOW THE ACTION DOWN; WHEN YOU DO NOT CONTROL YOUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT SPEED THE ACTION UP. This simple rule will give you a good initial direction with regards pace control next time you’re sparring a tough opponent and worried about keeping a pace that enables you to last the distance

The more off center you get - the better it gets: In most cases in jiu jitsu nothing good happens when you’re directly in front of opponents. The idea is almost always to get angle that enables you to get the advantage of flank. Going in through the front door is hard and risky work - it’s much better to slip in the side door whenever possible. Make a conscious effort in every engagement to work to an angle prior to launching the main attack and you’ll suddenly find that moves that never worked for you suddenly start working and opponents you could never score on, suddenly you’re putting them under pressure. In combat sports, angle is everything and the more the better. Make it a habit you’ll soon make a habit of winning

The fundamental choice in joint locks - twisting or linear: Joint locks are the second major category of submission holds (strangleholds are the first). They can be divided into linear locks and twisting locks. A good example of a linear lock would be juji gatame arm bar or a knee bar. The joint is straightened out and the breaking pressure is in a straight line. Twisting locks involve turning the joint to create a rotational breaking pressure. Both are devastating when taken to their limit, but in my experience the effects of rotational locks tend to come on quicker and have greater fight ending capability when applied in practical situations. Make sure you have at least one of each type per limb taken to a high level of development. Often as an opponent straightens a limb defensively in response to a twisting lock, you can switch to a linear lock; and, as he bends his arm to escape a linear lock, you can switch to a twisting lock. Don’t see them as rivals, but rather as complimenting partners. On their own, they’re good - working as a pair they’re great.

Submissions never begin in a completed state: When you think of a perfect submission hold you think of the final state of the move, where everything is set in place and locked out. This is not how they begin however. Submissions typically start with an entrance that is quite far from the completed form. You have to work from that initial start to the final position. That process of going from initial entrance to final locked out submission will have to be done against maximal resistance. In order to be successful you’ll need to be able to work step by step, being sure to make each step reinforced so that resistance doesn’t destroy your progress. If the resistance proves too strong, you’ll need alternative finishes that can be realistically made from the starting submission. Here I have locked in the starting position for a front triangle. There is still a lot of work to be done from here to get the original submission. My choices will be to either work step by step to complete the front triangle; if I take this option I’ll need to be able to lock each step so as to maintain my progress. So for example I could use my left land to grip my right shin to prevent slippage as I turn an angle to shift into the completed triangle. Failing this I could shift off to a new choice of submission, juji gatame arm bar variations, omo plata, ude gatame straight arm bar, kimura and te gatame arm lock are obvious candidates here. Make sure you map your options from the entry to finish of your favorite submissions ahead of time, there won’t always be time in a competitive match to figure it out on the fly, so have your favorites sorted out in training so they’re ready when you need them!

If you can control an opponents movement - you control the game: Moving targets are hard to hit. When you can stick an opponent in place and immobilize him, you can hit him with a submission hold at will. What makes the ground game so interesting is that the floor limits the means and methods by which we can move into a few predictable patterns. Once you learn those patterns you can learn to shut them down - and if you can shut down movement while still able to move yourself - you can finish anyone. When you grapple focus less on trying to perform moves and more on learning how people move on the ground and how you can interfere with that. Then all the moves you were previously focused upon become considerably easier

If you are unstable - anyone on top of you will also be unstable: When you pin someone from top position your stability is heavily influenced by the stability of the person you are on top of. If he is stable, then you’ll be stable on top of him. Once you understand this, you’ll see that one of you goals when being pinned is to make yourself unstable. This is the central insight in many forms of escape from mount. If you can make your body unstable through stance and motion - kipping, bridging, shrimping - your opponent on top will also become unstable and then you can work to complete the escape. WHEN HIS STABILITY IS DEPENDENT ON YOURS - MAKE YOURSELF UNSTABLE. Then the actual escapes will be much easier to complete

Use your hands to take away their ability to post their hands and form a base of support - then let your legs provide the horsepower that sweeps them over. Good sweeping action from bottom position usually requires all four of your limbs working in unison. You’ll need your hands to prevent him posting to the floor. Then you’ll need your feet lifting him so that his stomach begins to face up to the ceiling. If you can get that interaction between your hands and feet going well, you’ll give your training partners some air time!

Hands: Your hands and feet are your primary connectors to your opponents body. The hands are by themselves weak, but they enable you to connect to an opponent so that you can use the stronger parts of your body to provide the horsepower required to control strong people. In short, no hands, no connection. No connection, no ability to control an opponent. Once you understand this you will see the value of consistently fighting against your opponents hands as you grapple. If you can control his hands you control his primary connectors. If he can’t connect strongly to you, he can’t control you. So get used to monitoring and controlling your opponents hands, especially when you’re in positional trouble. It’s often quite easy and simple to do, and can save you a lot of grief during tough matches.

Anyone can train when they want to. Whether you reach your potential or not will be determined not by whether you train when you feel like training, but by how you behave when you DON’T feel like training. The best train regardless of how they might feel that day. If you wish to get to your goals you must do the same.

It ain’t over till it’s over: A common tendency among developing athletes when working from guard positions is to initiate a nice sweep that topples the opponent, but then to let the opponent recover by neglecting to come up quickly into top position and secure the completion. Remember, you don’t score by knocking the opponent down, you score by going from bottom position to top position. That means you must develop the habit of getting up after the initial knockdown and grappling for top position. Don’t sit there congratulating yourself just because you knocked the other fellow to his butt - that’s not enough to score - go through to completion by rapidly getting up and over your opponent so that there is a clear reversal of top and bottom position. Only then do you actually score. Make a mental habit of pulling yourself up and forward after every knockdown and you’ll soon be scoring far more often than previously

The power of the hips and legs: The human body is generally unimpressive as a combative organism. Compared with the animal kingdom we are weak, slow, encased in soft, easily perforated skin, devoid of weapons such as talons, claws, fangs, susceptible to injury and infection. One part of our physiology that does garner some respectable potential power however, is the hips/legs. When it comes to building your jiu jitsu game, MAKE YOUR LEGS AND HIPS THE BASIS OF YOUR POWER. Let your hands and arms being a CONNECTION to an opponent, but create POWER through the use of your legs and hips. If you Try to make your power come from your arms you’ll never beat anyone bigger and stronger than yourself and you’ll never be able to engage for long periods of time. Almost all our daily tasks other than locomotion are done with hands and arms. Jiu jitsu demands of you that you do the opposite and make almost all your jiu jitsu tasks be done predominantly with legs and hips. Making this insight the center of your game as early as possible is the key to progress in Jiu jitsu

Plotting your next move: One of the most useful abilities to develop in Jiu jitsu is that of temporarily STOPPING THE ACTION and taking a short break. This gives you the ability to PLOT THE NEXT MOVE. It can be difficult to make constructive progress if you’re just always in high gear hustling after a opponent. You can burn a lot of energy and have nothing to show for it. Often you do better by using a pattern where you apply a short intense burst of energy to attain a position that allows you to take a short breather whilst exercising sufficient control to retain that position, then figuring out your next stop, working hard to attain that new resting point and continuing this pattern until the job is done. If your hearts racing and lungs burning, keep working to get a holding position and then take a break. While you and your opponent take a short reprieve your body rests but your mind is still working - figuring out the next pit stop - and then going back to physical work. Work like this and you can grapple a long time and make consistent forward progress

Rites of passage: Almost all my adult life I lived in NYC so I never bought a car. I always used the subway, trains and cabs to get around. I didn’t even have a driver’s license, forget about a car. Now I’ve moved to Texas so I finally had to learn to drive and buy a car - of course when I finally decide to buy a car the American car market goes into total chaos and prices of cars and gasoline skyrocket 😂😂😂 All these years my friends would always tell me horror stories of the daily and weekly expenses of their vehicles. In NYC it was smashed windows, paint scratched off by people parking clumsily next to them, broken indicator lights, burst tires and damaged rims from potholes and of course flat tires. I always thought to myself as I heard their stories “thank god I don’t have these problems!” Well, now I finally do! 😂😂 I got to work teaching today and saw a giant screw sticking out of my rear tire! 😂😂😂 I guess I’m finally living the real American experience! 😂😂😂 Off to the tire shop tomorrow to get it plugged or maybe even replaced 🤦‍♂️😂🤦‍♂️Now I know what you’ll have been going through all these years! 😂😂 I enjoy driving but it’s definitely a perk with problems!

The story of Rory MacDonald and his walkout music: One of the most distinctive elements of professional fighting is the fighter walkout. Often they are moments of high drama and suspense. One of their central features is music. Fighters select a song that embodies their spirit and attitude as they go out to do battle. Rory MacDonald grew up listening to Slayer and Scorpion, by the time I started working with him as he trained next to Georges St Pierre his preferred listening material was crazy death metal that could scare a grizzly bear away. It was always something of a mystery to me then, that when he would go out to fight his music would be some really low powered garbage that just sounded awful. Finally he told me the story why. A long time ago he lost his phone. That phone number was the one kept by the UFC staff responsible for fighter walkout music selection. Some random guy found the phone and started using it. The UFC texted him, thinking it was Rory, and asked what walkout music he wanted. The random guy gave a song recommendation. We will never know if this random guy either had a genuine sense of humor or whether he just had awful taste in music. Either way, it ensured Rory went out on multiple occasions to hilariously bad songs 😂😂 It culminated one night were Rory went out in Philadelphia where his opponent came out to The Rocky Theme, which of course got the Philadelphia crowd absolutely amped up! Then Rory came out to MC Hammer Can’t Touch This 😂😂😂 The look of dumbfounded horror on Rory’s face was priceless as he went out to a song he never wanted and the crowd reaction was total LOL Wut? This was the straw that broke the camels back and Rory finally got his groove back by making sure his music got selected properly 😂😂 If you were the guy who found the phone - how far would you have gone with the music selection? For sure I would have requested It’s Raining Men 😂😂😂 That would have been enough to ruin any fighters career 😂😂😂 On my drive home home tonight for sure I’m going to drop some MC Hammer in honor of that unknown comedian - break out the baggy pants and let’s go! 😂😂

Elbows: Next time you’re struggling for offensive ideas against a tough opponent, consider this - IF YOU EVER GET OUTSIDE AN OPPONENTS ELBOW, YOU WILL ALWAYS GAIN AT THE VERY LEAST AN ADVANTAGEOUS ANGLE AND QUITE POSSIBLY ACCESS TO HIS BACK AS WELL. Learning to get past your opponents elbows is a huge part of the game. You should several effective methods to quickly slip past an opponents elbow and get to an outside angle and threaten the back. This will create a situation where opponents will either risk having their back taken if they don’t respond adequately, or if they do respond, their response will inevitably create fine attacking opportunities on the opposite side as they are preoccupied with recovering angle, they won’t have the time and focus to defend the new direction of attack. Drags, elbow posts, ducks, slidebys - they all are based on the notion of beating your opponents elbow and as a result, create angle and back exposure that pays handsome dividends in Jiu jitsu. Make sure you threaten getting past your opponents elbows as often as possible - it’s a low risk, high reward pathway to more effective offense in Jiu jitsu

Top and bottom: When most people begin the sport of Jiu jitsu they almost always do better in top position than they do in bottom position. A decently athletic and competitive person can usually be reasonably effective against other white belts from top position within a fairly short time frame. Most people have a decent sense of holding another person down from on top. Bottom position however, is a very different story. Very few, if any, people come into the sport with a natural propensity for bottom game. Even very athletic people usually flop around hopelessly in bottom position when they first attempt it. It’s as though nothing in our previous experience prepares us for Jiu jitsu bottom game. Everything has to be learned from a state of total ignorance. Overcoming this common imbalance between our natural propensity for top position over bottom must be a core part of your early days in jiu jitsu. When starting out EMPHASIZE THE BOTTOM GAME MORE THAN TOP GAME. This will create great initial frustration as you are essentially handicapping yourself by forcing yourself into weakness, but the long term benefits will make it worth it. Ultimately you want to be equally strong in top and bottom position, but given the uneven start we all begin with we need to nurture bottom game development more at the beginning so that as time passes you naturally even out in development.

When you control the head and shoulders - you control everything: When it’s time to control an opponents movement - and that should be the goal of all us - nothing beats chest to chest or chest to back contact when your past you’re opponents knees and in control of the head and shoulders. If you can get to a position like that on an opponent your own size and skill level, you’ll win that position in the great majority of cases. Get used to parking your head right next to your opponents with at least one arm under his arm and you’ll have him in a bind that he will find very difficult to get out of and very difficult to counter whatever you choose to do. Next time you want to put some heat on a tough opponent either get behind him or over one of his knees and get head to head with an arm under his and you’ll definitely have him under pressure!!

Finding your favorite moves: This game is built around the idea of knowing ENOUGH about MANY moves so that you can anticipate and defend them and knowing a LOT about a FEW moves so that you can beat anyone with them. Selecting those few moves is a deep personal journey that will last as long as you stay in the sport. Everyone has their own path. I’ve seen great champions take widely divergent routes to the top. These best advice I can give you is this. Individuality and self expression is great but don’t ignore the fact that certain moves outperform most others. Historically high percentage moves that have worked very well for generations across all skill levels and weight divisions should generally be preferred when assessing which moves will become your major weapons. Within the ranks of those high percentage moves there is sufficient variety to let you express your individuality. You can have a few unorthodox features in your game, that’s fine, but there is a reason why a subset of moves get most of the best results in jiu jitsu - let those moves be your main focus and express your individuality within those to make a great compromise between individual expression and high percentage technique

Victory in Austin! Team New Wave won five out of five matches tonight here in Austin at the finale of the Whose Next grappling reality show hosted by @flograppling Big Dan Manasoiu began the action with a submission win over a very tough Tristan Overvig from the Daisy Fresh team. Then Mike Rakeshan, one of the most popular characters from the show, defeated Sewer Rat via Kesa Gatame asphyxiation. Giancarlo Bodoni won a unanimous decision against the extremely talented B Team standout Jay Rodriguez in the most exciting bout of the evening with both athletes showing brilliant attack and defense. Nicholas Meregali then defeated world champion Breylor Grout via submission with a beautifully executed Kata Gatame strangle after a splendid display of positional dominance that showed his development in no gi jiu jitsu. Then main event Gordon Ryan stepped up to take on the current heavyweight WNO champion and the man who has dominated no gi heavyweight competition the last twelve months, Pedro Merinho. Mr Ryan was determined to show the power of his pinning game which he did in fine style - taking an athlete of the level of Pedro Merinho who is very difficult to control and sticking him to the mat is very difficult indeed, but Mr Ryan did it for fifteen uninterrupted minutes whilst maintaining a draining asphyxiation that wears down even the toughest opponents. With five minutes left he decided to end the match with his characteristic back strangle. Five out of five wins - four out of five submissions - these guys are talented! I hope you all enjoyed the show!! Thank you as always to @roka for giving us the training facility that makes it possible to prepare for these events

Getting ready: Tomorrow night in Austin Texas @flograppling will host the finale to their WHOSE NEXT grappling reality show which featured many outstanding rising talents and colorful characters. Headlining the event is a fascinating rematch between the very talented Pedro Merinho and Gordon Ryan. Last time they met at ADCC 2019 Mr Ryan quickly won via heel hook, but since then Mr Merinho has made a thorough study of the leg lock game and has beaten great leg lockers since then. Pedro has a very dangerous guillotine and excellent takedowns. In the last twelve months he has been winning everything he entered and beaten legends like Cyborg, Craig Jones and Vagner Rocha - this will be a very tough match! Nicholas Meregali will have his second ever no gi match against the very talented Strangle specialist Breylor Grout. Mr Meregali fearlessly stepped in as a replacement for Luke Griffith who had a training injury just days before the event. Giancarlo Bodoni will take on the juggernaut of the West Coast ADCC trials Jay Rodriguez in what should be a spectacular bout of two great developing grapplers. Dan Manasoiu will take on the man who fought and won a legendary three hour match during the reality show - clearly this Mr Overvig is a mentally tough opponent who can overcome great adversity to get the win. Mr Manasoiu will need all of his rapidly expanding technique to prevail against such a physically and mentally strong opponent. Mike Rakeshan will rematch his nemesis Sewer Rat (that is not a typo) after their epic match during the show. Both men have very unorthodox games and are not afraid to take big risks on the mat! The finale also features the two finalists from the show - B Team standout Izaak Mitchell vs 10th Planet champion Kyle Chambers. This should be a great evening of grappling! Get ready for a night of grappling action!!

Physical pressure: Submission is the aim of our sport. There are two paths to submission. The first is through mechanical and tactical expertise in execution of the the move. This method is usually the one scene when the submission is performed early in the match when both both athletes are fresh. The second path is through unrelenting pressure that undermines the opponents ability to defend a submission that under normal circumstances they definitely would be capable of defending but in a state of exhaustion they cannot. This is the kind of method usually seen late in a match. Both paths are vital for you to master. As the skill level of your opponents rises however, you will inevitably find that it is the second path that you employ more often and with better results. Physical pressure will gradually degrade an opponents skill level due to the simple fact that skills require physical energy to execute, and when energy levels fall below a certain threshold, even well trained athletes can no longer perform them well enough to be effective. Learning to create and maintain physical pressure over time to a point where you can degrade an opponents skill level to a level where they are no longer effective in executing techniques is one of your biggest long term goals in jiu jitsu. At the higher levels it’s not how good your technique is per se that counts; but rather how good that technique is after ten minutes of grueling grappling that will usually determine winner and loser.

Closing distance: Most jiu jitsu students have a tendency to think the action starts when you get a grip on your opponent and doesn’t get serious until you have close connection. It is very important that you understand that the action begins BEFORE you make contact in the action of CLOSING DISTANCE that makes contact possible. Even as you approach your opponent you must change your demeanor to one of preparation for action. You must enter your stance, move with appropriate footwork, and seek to initiate contact in ways that confer advantage to you rather than the opponent. The action begins as you approach each other, not after you’ve gripped each other. Stance , motion and positioning for advantageous contact and connection are the key themes - and the battle starts earlier than many believe, whether it be in standing position or on the ground - like all things in life, so too in jiu jitsu - start your preparation earlier and you’ll have less work to do later!

Learning together: Jiu jitsu is PERFORMED as an individual but it is PRACTICED as a group. This has deep consequences for all of us. One of the more obvious effects of group learning is that subjectively you never really feel like you’re getting much better as time passes. That is because everyone else in the room is progressing at roughly the same pace as yourself and learning the same techniques and tactics. The result is that that you can spend months and even years feeling like you’ve worked long and hard but are no better than before. You must have faith that progress is being made even if it’s not very apparent among your peers. Occasionally you will be given a clear sign of your progress. It usually comes in the form of a training partner you don’t often spar with. One who previously used to dominate you and who perhaps has been training less - not so little that his skills have simply degenerated, but enough that he has been static in his progress. You spar and for the first time you do very well against him. Signs like this signal your hard won progress and let you know that the hard work has paid off. If you feel at times like it’s like swimming upstream with hard labor but no progress, be assured that the very nature of group training in a dojo makes it seem this way, but that if the training program is well designed and you are putting the work in consistently, you ARE making progress. It won’t be obvious in most cases, just as you can be driving fast on the highway but feel you’re not just because everyone else is driving fast alongside you - but everyone so often you’ll see signs of that progress - be proud of it - you’ve earned it

Never lose track of the basic fact that one well applied submission will win a match but a dozen submissions applied with anything less than full technical and tactical proficiency won’t score even a single point - forget about win a match. Let the lesson be clear - quality beats quantity in the submissions game.

Calm between the storms: The general pattern of Jiu jitsu sparring is of relatively long periods of little activity followed by bursts of intense hyperactivity followed again by a longer period of relative inactivity. This cycle continues on until victory is scored. These periods of apparent inactivity are in fact, very active, but in subtle ways. The athletes are jockeying for some small, often imperceptible advantage that will make a sudden dramatic move more likely to succeed. Once the advantage is gained there is a strong attack. This necessitates an equally strong counter from the opponent which creates the sudden increase in activity level that will continue either until victory or failure for either athlete to score and they make a mutual agreement that it’s not worth pursuing what they sought and they go into another quiet phase of subtle set ups. Learning play with this shift of gears is a big part of your development. Beginners tend to just sprint the whole match and get tired very quickly. If you can’t get a quick win this approach condemns you to defeat. Going to passive for too long creates an activity level so low that you won’t tire your opponents and you can’t build the pressure that wins matches decisively. Somewhere in the middle is the right path. Learn to juggle the need for periods of low energy expenditure where the primary emphasis is on tactics and set ups, with short bursts of intense activity where the primary emphasis is on scoring and finishing. Play the two together seamlessly and you’ll be able to grapple a long time and out sufficient pressure on an opponent to fatigue them to a degree that a decisive breakthrough is much more likely to occur.

Gravity: There is no doubt that the use of gravity has big effects on the outcome of matches. Most people think gravity helps the top athlete - after all, if I’m on top gravity naturally creates a sense of weight and pressure that can immobilize and exhaust an opponent. It is however, crucial that you understand that gravity can work in the bottom athletes favor as well. Instead of weight pressure and weight, the bottom athlete focuses on off balancing the opponent. Once balance has been broken, gravity will create an immediate stumbling and falling effect that makes subsequent attacks easy. Gravity itself doesn’t change - it helps both the top and the bottom athlete equally - just in different ways. Make sure you know and understand them both so that gravity is not your friend when you’re on top but your enemy when you’re on bottom, but rather, your trusted friend regardless of where you are

I am very pleased to announce the release today of my latest instructional video NEW WAVE CLOSED GUARD: BUILDING A COMPLETE CLOSED GUARD SYSTEM. In it I show all the most important and high percentage attacks without the Gi in the modern game. The emphasis is on showing how the unusual amount of distance control, hip control and off balances from closed guard allow a much more systematized approach than the more chaotic open guard scenarios. This allows a step by step procedure attacking an opponent on their knees or standing with a very aggressive array of upper body into lower body submissions mixed with positional attacks. In addition I cover how shorter, stockier athletes can use tactics to make closed guard work effectively for them. Closed guard will always be a foundation of jiu jitsu and with good reason - no other bottom position offers the same degree of overall initial control over an opponents movement and balance. If you want to make it part of your no gi game, take a look! Link in my Instagram bio

Happy 4th of July! I always loved the American holiday of 4th of July. I’ve seen it celebrated in many American cities - especially my long time home in New York City where they always put on a great show on the river. This was my first time in Austin Texas and they out in quite a show! Austin looks great by night and with fireworks blazing even better! Where ever you are I hope you had a great day!

Closed Guard: When most people think of guard position in Jiu jitsu, the first image that comes to mind is closed guard. That’s probably because it is usually the first form of guard that most people are taught. It is probably the oldest,
most traditional form of guard. With the plethora of new types of guard coming out over recent years many ask whether closed guard is still relevant, especially with the rapidly developing no gi game. The answer, I believe, is an unequivocal YES. Closed guard will always be relevant no matter what other advances are made in jiu jitsu bottom because of the very same unchanging principles and concepts that made it the first major choice of guard generations ago. Closed guard is unique in so far as it positions the most important part of your body your HIPS, above your opponents hips - even though you are in bottom position OVERALL, your hips are in top position. This has immediate consequences. It means that, unlike any other guard, if you sweep an opponent you will finish mounted, rather than merely top position in front of an opponents guard. If at any time you get past your opponents elbow, you will be rear mounted. In addition, unlike any other form of guard, closed guard creates a tactical asymmetry in so far as your opponent cannot realistically attack you as long as your guard is closed, but you can attack him at will. Another important difference with regards closed guard is that unlike any open guard, it enables you to control DISTANCE between you and your opponent. The lock of your feet enables you to hold him within your guard and thus the distance between you and him is determined by you. In open guard your opponent controls distance and therefore chooses the time and place of engagement. These fundamental facts about closed guard make it a position that every jiu jitsu athlete has to take seriously in their development. Oftentimes I hear people say that their body type is too short or stocky to use closed guard. I have has numerous students whose body type seemed unpromising for closed guard but who nonetheless used it very effectively. Good tactics can almost always find a way around apparent physical limitations.

Victory in Las Vegas! New Wave Jiu jitsu sent a team of talented juniors to the @ufcfightpass event UFC Fight Pass Invitational where they competed in four vs four team events under the leadership of Anthony Pettis. @olivertaza @jiujitsugiant @giancarlobodoni @cpapadelos performed very well under the lights Big Dan got two submissions in the first round, Giancarlo Bodoni had a dominant showing against the very talented 10th planet athlete PJ Barch and Oliver Taza secured victory in the final round with a fine submission over the very talented ADCC trials winner Jay Rodriguez from B Team and then showed a strong positional game against the great Penn State wrestler Bo Nickal with a reversal and several guard passes to win a close decision victory for his team. Great stuff from the youngsters in Vegas!!

When the workouts done: Back home in Austin and in the gym getting athletes ready for upcoming grappling shows. I love the feeling of returning from a show and going straight from the airport back to the gym - that feeling of hitting the ground running is a good one. Gordon Ryan is getting ready for a very tough match against the very talented Pedro Merinho @pedromarinhojj who has had a stellar last twelve months in grappling. They will meet at WNO here in Austin Texas on @flograppling Now the workouts over but an empty dojo is a fine place to figure out the plan for tomorrow when the dojo is full once again…

Rory MacDonald makes weight for tomorrow night: Everything ran smoothly for @romac_gorilla in preparation for his bout tomorrow night against the very formidable kick boxing MMA fighter Sadibou Sy in the @pflmma Now it’s rehydration and recharging time! Great to have @timkennedymma and @itsanplusdrew on hand - their vast experience in prefight preparation is always a massive plus (and an incredible source of crazy stories from the early days of MMA 😜😜). Great to be in Atlanta, it’s a very impressive looking city - I’ve heard so much about it over the years - I had many students in New York who lived between the two cities and spoke highly of it - they were right! Now it’s back to our room to get ready for the show!

Breaking posture: Sometimes when you attempt a submission hold on an opponent they feel so strong that you get the feeling you have no chance of success. If they are working from a strong posture you may well be correct. HUMAN STRENGTH IS LARGELY DETERMINED BY POSTURE. Think about something basic like a squat. If your posture is good, you’ll be able to put up some impressive weight, if it’s bad no amount of innate strength will help and your poundages will be unimpressive. Jiu jitsu is the same. If your opponent is in good posture, he’ll feel impressively strong when you go to attack. If you can break his posture and put his body into unnatural or forced contortions , he’ll feel weak and vulnerable to your attacks. Here I demonstrate taking an opponents head out of position when attacking a standard juji gatame arm bar out of closed guard. By misaligning the sound at the neck you make the usual stacking and postural defenses significantly more difficult. Next time you’re attacking submissions - attack his POSTURE at the same time and you’ll find success more often than before

Watching jiu jitsu: Every day you train there will be some amount of time where you will be watching other people spar. If you’re injured and can’t train you can spend the whole session observing other people spar. If you can’t even get to the gym you can watch video of great athletes in competition. There are clearly many opportunities for you to watch jiu jitsu on a regular basis. The question becomes - what will be the manner in which you watch. Most people watch jiu jitsu with a recreational mindset - the main thing they watch is the RESULT of a sparring or competition match. They watch to see who wins. While this does have entertainment value, it does not improve your jiu jitsu. Instead, watch with a questioning mindset. Instead of focusing on the result - FOCUS ON THE FACTORS THAT DETERMINE THE RESULT. Many of these factors are very subtle and not easy to observe when you start, but be persistent, victory in jiu jitsu becomes mostly from a relatively small set of moves. There are patterns of success in this game - THE MORE YOU WATCH THE MORE YOU’LL SEE THOSE PATTERNS - and the more you SEE the patterns of success, the more you’ll be able to REPLICATE the patterns of success for yourself.

Resistance: Everything you do in this sport - you will be doing against resistance. Your opponents know what you want to do and they generally know the counters to whatever you are attempting - SO EVERYTHING YOU DO IN THIS SPORT MUST BE DONE IN THE EXPECTATION OF BEING STOPPED ON THE FIRST MOVE. As such you must program yourself to THINK AHEAD TO THE NEXT MOVE and very possibly the third and fourth move. Don’t leave it to the moment and try to figure out a continuation in the heat of battle - HAVE THE NEXT MOVES PLANNED OUT IN ADVANCE based on previous experience. This is how you win in a game where everyone knows all the major moves and counters. Victory will go to the athlete who executes the best and who works around resistance best.

Make the mount and rear mount your pinning goals: The central focus of jiu jitsu is to get into upper body dominant pins that create an asymmetry between your ability to attack the opponent - which is very high - and his ability to attack you - which is very low. Foremost among the pins are mount and rear mount. They are the highest scoring positions in Jiu jitsu - scoring double what any takedown or guard sweep scores, more than guard passes or any other pin. No other positions put so much physical and tactical pressure on your opponents. You can directly attack their ability to breath in these positions. It’s often tempting when you start out jiu jitsu to be happy just with passing into side control and staying safe there, after all, side control is a very stable position and most beginners find it easier to get to and maintain than mount or rear mount. This will hold back your long term progress. Go the extra distance and get mounted or rear mounted. Don’t worry if your initial attempts result in you losing position a few times. In time you will learn to ride mount positions against even very spirited resistance and you’ll have a a pin that creates devastating pressure, inhibits breathing which creates defensive over reaction that will greatly boost your submissions game

Directing your weight: I’m sure you’ve all had the experience of sparring with a well trained opponent who doesn’t appear very heavy, but who FELT extremely heavy when he was on top of you. In Jiu jitsu your ACTUAL weight and your PERCEIVED weight are two different things. What makes you appear heavier than you are is your ability to direct a large percentage of your weight through a small percentage of your body’s surface area on to a vulnerable point of your opponents body such as the jaw or shoulder. You will find that getting up into a tripod will allow you to direct your weight down with great precision on to a specific target that can make you feel far heavier to an opponent than your actual weight. Here Gordon Ryan uses a tripod to direct his weight down through his shoulder and make his cross face feel like it belongs to a man twice his weight. Pressure like this can have a devastating effect from top position

The central theme of Jiu jitsu bottom position - fight them with your legs: In most grappling arts bottom position is seen as inherently inferior. Jiu jitsu is one of the few that sees bottom position as neutral. The central message of jiu jitsu with regards top position is simple but profound. The great advantage of bottom position is that your legs can be used to grapple your opponent. When in top you have to use your legs as a base of support. When on bottom facing your opponent either on your butt or back your legs bear no weight so that you can use them them to engage the opponent rather than the floor. Because your legs are considerably stronger and with far greater endurance than your upper body, this means that someone fighting from bottom with their legs has a great chance against someone fighting from top mostly with their arms. Understand of course, that the top athlete has their advantages too. They have the power of gravity on their side. Learn to work with this central theme of Jiu jitsu in mind at all times. When playing bottom position focus primarily on ATTACKING THEM WITH YOUR LEGS. Make your legs the center of your bottom game and you’ll see that bottom position in grappling offers as many opportunities as top

The results you get will not be determined by how many moves you know but rather by how many you have the confidence to use in those heavy moments where your own mind is screaming at you to avoid the risk of moving. Ten moves in which you have confidence to use any time and anywhere will be of more value than a thousand in which you have a passing knowledge but in which you lack the confidence to use when it counts

Damn Austin - you scary! Austin Texas may not be one of America’s biggest cities, but in less than a year it has become a jiu jitsu powerhouse as evidenced by the roster call for the upcoming ADCC World Championships with a staggering number of competitors coming out of this city. New Wave has Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon, Nicholas Meregali, Giancarlo Bodoni, Luke Griffith, Daniel Manasoiu and Oliver Taza all confirmed. B Team has Craig Jones, Nicky Ryan, Nick Rodriguez, Jay Rodriguez, Ethan Crelinsten, Izaak Mitchell all confirmed. Six blades has ADCC legend Xande Ribiero and heavyweight juggernaut Victor Hugo confirmed. Fight Factory has William Tackett confirmed. This means a staggeringly high percentage of the total competitors will come from this small city in Texas that previously never figured in jiu jitsu discussions at all. Well done Austin! I have always believed that a small group of motivated people who build a culture of continual improvement over time can create results out of all proportion to their numbers - this town is proof of it!

The dual role of pins: a huge part of jiu jitsu’s approach to combat is PINNING. Pins are defined as positions where you have gotten past your opponents legs and are pinning him with chest or knee, or you have taken his back and locked yourself in place using your legs as hooks into his hips. The first role of pins is NEGATION. These positions strongly negate your opponents ability to attack you. As such they create a highly desirable asymmetry between your ability to attack them (very high) and their ability to attack you (very low). The second is PRESSURE. Pins allow for great TACTICAL pressure because if you attempt a submission and fail, you still have the position and so can simply try again and again until you succeed. They also allow great MECHANICAL pressure because you can severely interrupt their breathing and apply severe and direct pressure to the head and the opponent cannot use his legs to relieve this pressure. These two features of pinning allow you to enter into the most important aspect of pinning in jiu jitsu with regards submissions - the notion of switching from PINNING THE TORSO to ISOLATING A LIMB. Only when you make this transition do pins become related to submission. This must always be your goal, if not your pins are merely a method of holding people rather than a devastating method of enforcing submission.

When it comes to developing your offensive moves in Jiu jitsu more is not better. Whichever you select, you will have to develop them over years through trial and error and experimentation. They, perhaps more than anything else will define who you are as a Jiu jitsu athlete. Remember always that you will be judged not by how many you know, but by how good you are at those you have chosen. Understand that true expertise in a few is far better than mediocrity in many.

Budgets and jiu jitsu: If your life is anything like mine, it’s probably the case that any time you make a budget for a given project, whether it be a hobby, a vacation, a dinner with friends, or whatever, and make a budget for time and expense for that project; you inevitably find that your budget is insufficient and that you have to invest more money and time than you originally believed as many unforeseen factors complicate and interfere with what initially seemed a simple task. Jiu jitsu is the same. Everything you do in jiu jitsu is done against resistance. Often this resistance is much stronger and more cunning than you initially believed it would be. When you enter a move in jiu jitsu you make an initial budget for how much energy and strength you will need to invest to make it work against the expected resistance. My advice to you is this - ASSUME THE RESISTANCE LEVEL WILL BE GREATER YOU WOULD NORMALLY ANTICIPATE AND BUDGET ACCORDINGLY - put more energy into the connection required for the application of the move than seems to be required. If you are attacking your opponents knee - don’t form your connection at your opponents knee - his resistance will almost always result in his knee slipping out of your hold. Over budget by forming the connection at the HIP so that as your opponents leg inevitably slips out to some degree as he resists, you started so high on the leg that even if you lose 15% of its length in the struggle, you’ll still be above the knee and able to perform your lock. Just as engineers OVER BUILD a bridge to hold far greater weights than any average day will expose them to in the expectation that some unforeseen event may occur where the extra strength saves the day - so to with your jiu jitsu moves. Over build them to accommodate the unexpectedly high resistance that so often comes when grappling tough opponents

Give yourself a hand: Nature gave you two hands to use in jiu jitsu, but training can give you a third - your head. Your hands can push and pull and opponent and create a base of support AND SO CAN YOUR HEAD - use it well and it’s like having a third hand to gain advantage over tough opponents. Any time you use your head as a substitute for a hand to push, pull or create base - you free up a hand to use to advantage against your opponent. Imagine fighting an opponent with three arms - it would be a nightmare - well, if you use your head creatively you can make yourself a nightmare to your opponents. Develop your neck strength and your head will become a powerful weapon of control and increase by a third your ability to push and pull opponents (the head doesn’t really pull so much as block movement but the practical effect is similar). Next time you feel like your running out of hands to control an opponent - use your head - you’ll be amazed at how effective it is!

Congratulations to Satoshi Ishii @satoshiishii0141 He just won his MMA fight via elbow TKO in Europe after training with us in Austin Texas. He was both Olympic and All Japan Judo champion and training with him has been a tremendous learning experience. I am always very happy to see the unification of Judo and jiu jitsu as they complement each other so well. Congratulations to Ishii San! He represents extremely well the tremendous work ethic of Japanese athletes and gives everything in daily training - it is great to see his hard work rewarded with victory 🇯🇵🇯🇵

I was coaching a session at @10paustin 10th Planet Austin recently and this motivated young fellow asked me what he should focus on in his early stages of development in jiu jitsu

Different speeds: One of the clearest differentiators between novice and expert in Jiu jitsu is the ability of experts to VARY THE SPEED AND INTENSITY of the game at will to match their purpose. Most beginners have only one speed - maximum. They quickly find this is exhausting and if you don’t know what you’re doing, just gets you into bad position slightly faster than if you slowed down a little. One of the first signs of progress is the ability to slow their pace down to a speed that enables them to make considered choices and solve problems. Over time they will learn to play at many different speeds and to vary their speed many times over the course of the match. Here, Nicholas Meregali shows his mastery of speed variations with a relaxed pace just moments before he stepped out to win a tough match at the recent IBJJF World Championships. He went effortlessly from this relaxed pace to a full intensity competition match at the highest level without interruption. This kind of mastery of variation of pace and intensity is at the core of Jiu jitsu mastery. Just as modern cars benefit from having many more gears than old fashioned cars to create smoother and more efficient power, so too you will benefit from having many jiu jitsu gears to suit the many situations you will find yourself in.

Tie ‘em up with ya legs and attack ‘em with ya hands: Sometimes a simple insight counts for a lot in combat. The great American General Patton once described his strategy as “hold them by the nose and punch them in the face.” It was a numerous throwaway line to describe a massive military operation, but the lesson is there - give people a simple path to follow and in the chaos of a match it will guide them like a lighthouse to the destination they seek. One of the best in Jiu jitsu is to use your legs to tie up your opponent and then use hands to help finish the job. Closed guard, ashi garami, mount and rear mount all involve connecting with your legs to an opponent. Then you’ll use your hands and arms to further isolate your targets and finish. Perhaps best all the leg connections to immobilize an opponent are variations of the triangle. These really put an opponent under pressure because of the immediate submission threat. Train yourself to follow this simple idea as early as you can in your jiu jitsu journey. Avoid the natural beginners mistake of trying to tie up and immobilize opponents with your ARMS - you won’t make much progress that way. Do it with your LEGS and in particular with the TRIANGLE and your progress will be much swifter

Who’s controlling who? When you look at this picture it seems on the surface that the top athlete is in control. After all, he has passed my guard and is in a side pin. But I am under both his arms. It will therefore be easy to move underneath his body weight and escape before the pin registers. This is an important point. What’s more important - the position or the grip? In many cases the grip is extremely important, in some cases arguably more important than the position. The position is only as useful as the control it offers and if your grip is inadequate to exert control over an opponents movement it’s not very useful at all. Next time you’re about to get pinned focus on getting your arms into a grip that negates the value of the pin and you’ll see that the pin isn’t nearly so fear inducing as it would otherwise be. In particular focus on getting both your arms under your opponents as under hooks and you’ll discover that as long as your movement is not constrained (and it won’t be if you have double under hooks under a side pin) then you’re not really pinned at all. Remember that it’s the pin and and a controlling grip TOGETHER that is a problem, not just the basic position by itself without a proper grip to solidify it.

Heading up to Boston to film another jiu jitsu instructional video - back at Austin airport. It’s starting to get warm here in Texas! Hot days of summer ahead. I always loved the New England summers so I’m looking forward to to seeing the gang up in Boston. Then it’s back to Texas to get ready for some big upcoming shows! Hope you all had a good summers day!

Doing my best Dr Evil impersonation at the last ADCC - looking forward to the mega show at 2022 ADCC @adcc_official later this year!

Specific skill sets: I am notoriously bad at anything outside of jiu jitsu. Focus on one thing tends to make us deficient in others. It looks like some of my students are the same way 😂😂 Here is Rory MacDonald trying to cook dinner after training. He is a great MMA fighter - chef? Hmmmm…not so much 😂😂😂 The real mistake was letting a Canadian into the kitchen - that was my mistake 😂😂😂

Make them carry your weight: Gravity is a truly powerful force - make sure you use it as much as possible in your jiu jitsu. When on top and past your opponents legs, use your weight and center it over your opponents head and shoulders and within a very short period of time the hard physical work of holding that weight up will break him and make him take risks he would normally never take in order to relieve the pressure. Be ready to capitalize on those risks and unforced errors. Experiment with ways and methods of maximizing the felt pressure of your weight. You will find that getting off your knees and into tripod posture often greatly increases your felt weight and allows you to direct your weight with great precision through your head and cross face shoulder. You don’t have to BE heavy in order to FEEL heavy (though of course it helps 😜) Learn to use your weight to advantage and you’ll find that even the toughest matches become easier as time passes.

The basis of jiu jitsu - Take away an opponents freedom of movement: An opponent who is free to move as they please is a dangerous opponent. One of the cornerstones of jiu jitsu is the idea that you must be able to control an opponents movement in order to control the outcome of a fight or match. Control of movement comes in degrees. It starts with something as mild as a wrist grip and builds up to control of the hips and core, becomes still more powerful when you go to the ground and can use the combination of floor, gravity and your body forming blocks and wedges to make movement very difficult for an opponent. It culminates in situations where you have your legs controlling your opponents upper body preferably on top of him so that he finds any kind of movement extremely difficult. Learning to progressively gain greater and greater control over your opponents movement is close to the very soul of jiu jitsu and is the element of the art that allows you not only to win - BUT TO CHOOSE HOW YOU WIN AND WITH WHATEVER DEGREE OF VIOLENCE, RANGING FROM VERY MILD TO EXTREME, YOU CHOOSE. Don’t accept situations where an opponent stands unfettered in front of you - make contact early and progress rapidly to greater and greater contact until you have complete control. This is the spirit of jiu jitsu

Fate has a way of f**king with us 😂😂: Nicholas Meregali won his first world absolute title this weekend in California, but the victory did not come easily - in training just thirteen days before the competition Mr Meregali badly tore his rib cartilage - a notoriously painful and debilitating injury. There isn’t much one can do about a rib injury and so he had to go in with his movement severely compromised and do his best. When the brackets were announced We were stunned to see that his first opponent in the open weight tournament is literally the largest active black belt competitor in the world! A man somewhere between three and four hundred pounds!!! I’m thinking to myself as I read the brackets ARE YOU F**KING KIDDING ME? Nicholas comes in with a busted ribcage and his very first opponent is the biggest and heaviest man in the sport??!!! How the hell did the gods of fate arrange that?! And why do they hate us this much?! 😂😂😂 What were the chances of this happening? 😂😂😂 As always there is nothing to do but shrug your shoulders, laugh and keep going 😂😂😂 Fortunately that’s exactly what Mr Meregali did and he went on to win with his trademark loop strangle late in the match! It’s something I often tell my students - when you go to compete - always cover the worst case scenario because the gods of fate have a way of making it happen every time! 😂😂😂 I’m sure you’ve all had similar experiences in both jiu jitsu and everyday life - there’s not much you can do except work on our skills so much that even when that worst case scenario gets thrown at you you have such an over abundance of the relevant skills that you can still overcome the challenge - and that exactly what Mr Meregali did!

Congratulations to my good friend Bernardo Faria for being inducted into the IBJJF Hall of Fame this weekend during the World Championships in California. Bernardo was one of the finest jiu jitsu athletes of his generation and has since gone on to become a cofounder of @bjj.fanatics the jiu jitsu instructional video that I work for. Mr Faria has done what very few have succeeded in doing - in the splintered and tribal world of jiu jitsu he gained near universal respect and trust and unified every corner of jiu jitsu into his company to revolutionize learning in the internet Information Age. Developing athletes now can get the cutting edge technique from the best athletes from every camp and school. I believe that the next few generations of athletes will far surpass the level of current athletes due to this incredible information advantage over previous generations. As an athlete Mr Faria represented himself and his school with great distinction, but now he represents all of jiu jitsu in bringing together all the best players and coaches to benefit the sport as a whole. Here I am with Mr Faria and his co founder, Michael Zenga after watching @bjj.fanatics athlete @nicholasmeregali win the gold medal in the Open Weight Division - a great moment for all of us. Congratulations Bernardo - it’s been a huge honor 😜😜 to work with you. Thank you for helping my students so much and so many other great athletes and coaches with your work!

Victory in LA!! Nicholas Meregali was able to fulfill his dream of winning the IBJJF Open Weight division today in Long Beach, California. It was a remarkable weekend for the Brazilian jiu jitsu star. He won every match until the finals by submission with his scintillating display. He did all this while suffering from a severe rib injury that occurred thirteen days before the tournament and which got progressively worse with every match as the weekend unfolded. Mr Meregali showed real courage and mental fortitude to take the final in a gritty and hard fought match and take gold. It was a real lesson in the degree to watch inner resolve will always play a powerful role in the outcome of championship matches - mechanics and tactics are responsible for most victories- but the most memorable ones are often those that have more human elements at their core - Mr Meregali showed that this weekend. It was a fantastic event overall with so many great athletes present and many outstanding matches - I hope you all enjoyed the show!

California: When I was in my early twenties I lived briefly with my brother in Huntington Beach California. I loved it then and now at the end of the day at the World Championships we are hanging out back in HB and I still love it now 🤗🤗 The famous Pier still looks great - I spent so much time there many years ago and Saturday night here looks much the same as it did thirty five years ago. I always loved the Pacific Coast Highway. California has a real car culture - American muscle cars and European exotics abound here. This place is awesome 😜😜

2022 IBJJF World Championships: I am having a blast here at the Gi World Championships at Long Beach California! The arena is packed with jiu jitsu stars and has a great enthusiastic audience! There have been some amazing matches already - some shocking upsets and surprises - and some dominant displays. It’s great to be back in California after so long away. Lots more action to come later today and tomorrow! Hope you are all enjoying the show!

Attrition: Technical skills are the main basis of victory, but never underestimate the value of TACTICAL considerations in determining victor and loser. It’s not just about skill level. In a surprising number of instances the more skilled athlete may lose to the less skilled. If your tactics are superior you can reliably make the other guy work harder than you so that while you are TIRED he is EXHAUSTED. Build your skills, they will be your main weapons, but never forget that a weapon is only as effective as the user who employs it - only when skills are employed in line with sound tactics will they be decisive in determining the outcome of a match.

Seeing it is half the battle: A move is a physical skill, but physical skills don’t tell the whole story of who gets to use the move successfully in a live situation. You can have all the skills in the world, but if you can’t see the opportunity for their application they are of little value. Fortunately, the task of identifying opportunities is pretty easy in most cases. For example it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out the opportunity to use a mount escape move is when you’re mounted. Things get more interesting however, when you start looking at the notion of single move being used in many different areas. Then you have to start FORCING opportunities and seeing possibilities where most people don’t see them at all. There’s an old saying that to a man with a hammer in his hand, everything looks like a nail. So too in jiu jitsu, when you have a very strong move, your mind will see opportunities for its use in damn near any situation. The best overall application of this kind of thinking is TAKING YOUR OPPONENTS BACK. This is truly a valuable and winning skill in jiu jitsu and can done from anywhere if you’re creative enough. When your mind is focused totally on your opponents back you’ll be shocked how often you end up there from chaotic situations seemingly without even trying. Don’t just program your BODY with skills, program your MIND with opportunity and then you’ll become far more effective than with skills alone

Different kinds of pressure: People talk all the time about PRESSURE in jiu jitsu - they do so for a good reason - because pressure is one of the most important factors in deciding winner and loser in a jiu jitsu match. If you can out your opponent under more pressure than he can apply on you and for longer periods of time, you are very likely to win the match. Understand however, that the most commonly understood notion of pressure - which is the pressure of weight - is not the only form of pressure. You can create TACTICAL pressure by getting ahead on points so that your opponent is forced to increase his work rate or lose. You can create SIDE TO SIDE pressure, where instead of using linear weight application, you threaten one side of the body to force a defensive reaction left and then jump to the right with another attack until the constant defensive side to side movements exhaust your opponent. You can create BOTTOM pressure by constantly threatening to stand or heist up from underneath, forcing the opponent to work hard from top just to hold you down. You can create PSYCHOLOGICAL pressure by making an opponent emotional, or fueling unrealistic performance expectations set by him being the favorite or underdog in ways that distract him from tactically sound decision making. Pressure is indeed among the most important elements of victory and defeat - but make sure you go beyond the common perceptions of pressure and try to incorporate more aspects of pressure to make your use of it more effective

Can you remember the first submission you ever successfully applied in sparring? One of the first great memories in your jiu jitsu life is the first time you successfully applied a submission hold on a sparring partner. Submissions are among the more difficult moves of the sport. A lot of prerequisites have to be satisfied before they happen. Usually we succeed with positional moves like passing guard or getting mounted before we successfully apply a submission - positional movements generally don’t require as many complex movements and controls and so come more naturally to most students. My first successful submission was an utterly atrocious headlock lift and squeeze that overwhelmed my equally inexperienced white belt opponent only because I was bigger and stronger. My first real submission was an arm bar (juji gatame) from guard. When my partner tapped I couldn’t believe it had worked! A real submission applied from underneath! Success breeds success and I went hunting for guard position and arm bar attacks from there every chance I got. Then when I finally landed a successful kimura from guard, I started chasing kimura incessantly. What was your first big submission breakthrough? Did it go on to become your favorite move? (At least for a while). Why do you think it was that move in particular that worked early for you? Was it because your coach heavily emphasized it? Or perhaps because it was well suited to your body type? Or was it just random? Sometimes it’s useful to ask these questions to know yourself better and make assessments as to what you should work on in the future!

Once you take someone off the mat - you own them: The second an opponent takes you up and you lose contact with the mat and them - you are no no longer in control of events - they are. Make a habit of digging yourself in underneath an opponents center of gravity and you’ll find that it confers great advantage and gives you an open door to your attacks. The only thing that gives us control over our movement and position is contact with the floor and the opponent - once you lose those, you lose the game of control until you regain them. Make lifting and elevation a big part of your game and you’ll create an expressway to many of your favorite attacks that opponents will have a very hard time dealing with.

Dual threats: When your Dad first showed you how to throw a punch he told you jab was good, rear cross was good, but the combination of them both - the old 1-2, was best of all. Your Dad was absolutely correct. The very same advice applies just as well to jiu jitsu. Creating one threat is good, but creating a dual threat is always better. Here I use the leg position of a triangle combined with the arm position of kimura to create a dual threat. The more an opponent defends one the more vulnerable he becomes to the other. As you gave better and better opponents, the finishes won’t come easy, and the more you will have to create dual threats to get the breakthrough you seek. Learn to match and pair your moves - they won’t be twice as effective as a single move - they’ll be FOUR times as effective due to their action/reaction dynamic that is so difficult for an opponent to counter. You already know your favorite moves - now it’s time to form them into your favorite PAIRS in order to get to the next level.

The outcome of a match is almost entirely settled before either athlete steps on the mat. It is determined by the long hours of effort, frustration, disappointment, sweat and occasional small daily victories set among many defeats seen by only a few in the quiet of a gym whose walls tell no tales. While fate sometimes throws in some surprises and upsets, in the vast majority of cases, the stage is just a public manifestation of what has already been decided long before in countless unseen matches against nameless opponents. Therefore the course of your career is determined much more by what happens out of sight than what is seen in your most dramatic moments onstage. If you seek the highest levels - learn to love training more than anything else, because more than anything else, that will be the determinant of how high you fly

Beginnings - stance, distance, grip: Every grappling exchange has a beginning. How well you do overall is often affected by how that beginning goes. It’s important you get a decent start. How decent that start is is determined by your STANCE, your ability to control DISTANCE and your ability to get a good working GRIP. Every time you engage with an opponent you should have an internal memorandum running through your head - stance, distance, grip. Failures in any one of these three prerequisites will inevitably cause problems as the action continues. There are a thousand things to take care of in a long jiu jitsu exchange - but make sure you take care of first things first - stance, distance and grip

Defensive soundness: Just as a good boxer always protects himself at all times through either distance, head movement, motion, level change, high guard etc, so too a jiu jitsu athlete must always protect himself from the many dangers he faces from a skilled opponent the moment he engages. The basis of defensive soundness in jiu jitsu is always ELBOW/KNEE CONNECTION. The further apart your elbow and knee are from each other, the more vulnerable you are. Learn to play the game with a mindfulness for elbow/knee connection at all times and you’ll find that you become a difficult target for even a good opponent to attack.

Good jiu jitsu players create PROBLEMS for their opponents; GREAT jiu jitsu players create DILEMMAS: Every problem has a solution. Dilemmas are different. They don’t have a solution, only two bad outcomes that force you to choose the least damaging one. Observe this photo of Gordon Ryan passing half guard - it’s an excellent example of a simple but powerful expression of creating dilemmas from which there is no good outcome for your opponent. He has freed the knee of his his left leg. This enables him to drive his knee across his opponents far hip towards a mounted position (it won’t yet be a true mount because his foot is still trapped, but it’s getting close). His opponent recognizes the danger and reaches to stop the knee with his hand. This is what Mr Ryan is looking for. By reaching for the knee the opponent has created a big opening for a far side underhook that will enable Mr Ryan to go into several very strong passing positions; If he DOESN’T reach for the knee, Mr Ryan will simply drive the knee across the hip towards the mounted position and take even stronger passing positions - either way it’s bad for the opponent. This is the kind of game you want to play whenever possible in jiu jitsu. You can’t always do it - but you’ll be pleasantly surprised how often you can if you teach yourself to look for it. Why settle for creating a problem that talented opponents will find a solution for when instead you can create a dilemma for which there is no solution?

My first all American traffic jam experience! I finally got my driver’s license here in Texas at age 55 after not having driven a car for around 30-35 years while living in NYC. Learning to drive every day into work has been a fascinating experience - almost got run off the freeway yesterday by someone changing lanes who must have either been totally blind or extremely drunk/high - at least I know that I’m only the second worst driver in Texas now! 😂😂 Today I had my first real traffic jam with traffic completely stopped for an hour on the freeway 😂😂😂 I finally got to experience what all of you have had to deal with your whole lives! Damn! I’m sure it’s much worse in LA or around NYC but even this Austin jam was pretty bad 😂😂 And yes, my windshield definitely needs a cleaning - I should have just got out of my vehicle and cleaned it during the hour we sat there 😂😂 Hopefully there aren’t too many more morning like this! 😂😂 I definitely admire the patience you all have to deal with this every morning in the big cities around the world. I’m sitting here waiting for the invention of flying cars to alleviate the problem 😂😂 Thank god for automatic transmissions! Going through this with the old stick shifts i learned to drive way back in New Zealand would have sucked! 😂😂 Wish me luck for the commute home at the end of the day! 😂😂

The mind must perceive opportunity before the body can act upon it - thus training your perception is every bit as important as training your physical movements. All the physical skill in the world is worthless without a mind that sees opportunity and directs the body towards it

The long way home: Back at Changi Airport in Singapore getting ready for the thirty hour journey home. Sorry to say Garry’s match did not go well last night. His opponent Tye Ruotolo secured a perfect Darce strangle early in the match and won via submission in outstanding fashion. Congratulations to both Ruotolo twins on outstanding debut performances in OneChampionship last night - they both showed very clearly they have arrived at the very highest levels of the sport. Congratulations also to @onechampionship for putting in another outstanding show. It was an honor to be among so many of the very grapplers and Muay Thai fighters last night. OneChampionship has been doing an incredible job of getting the best of the various martial arts disciplines under their banner and giving them an exciting framework to showcase their skills. As they say, your worth is not measured by whether you fall or not, but by how you respond to a fall. There have been some very very interesting matches signed back in the States - the good news is that I’ve got thirty uninterrupted hours to figure out how to get athletes ready for them 😜😂. Looking forward to getting back to Texas and back on the mats to help everyone get ready!

Martial arts in Asia: It’s always fascinating getting ready for a show in Asia. There is a deep cultural association with the study of martial arts that goes far back into history. Here we are in a shopping mall on the way to the gym and there are statues of Shaolin monks practicing their skills! Up the street there is a small monastery running Kung fu classes. The crowds at events have a good grasp of what the athletes are trying to do at events and a deep appreciation for the athletes. Our study of jiu jitsu in America is largely as a competitive sport where the emphasis is entirely on mechanical efficiency, tactics and athletic preparation. These are here in Asia too of course, but there is also a fascinating association with cultural and religious tradition that gives it a different flavor than the way we practice in the West - however hard it is to pin down and define, it’s unmistakable when you’re here and always a delight. It’s been great feeling the summer humidity and afternoon rain storms of Asia and the Pacific - it’s a feeling I always associate with my travels here and the first thing you feel when you step off the plane. Now it’s time to get ready for the big show at @onechampionship tomorrow night - there is a mix of truly high level jiu jitsu, kick boxing and Muay Thai - it’s going to be a great show!

I am very pleased to announce the release of my latest instructional video in the NEW WAVE series - SIDE ATTACKS: BUILDING A DEVASTATING SIDE CONTROL SYSTEM. The side pin and it’s variations is the most stable pin. It offers a wider variety of submissions than any other. As such it is often the preferred option in grappling sports where striking is not allowed or rule sets that don’t award positional points, or hurst regular sparring at the gym where no one is keeping score and submission is everything. I show how my students apply tremendous pressure from side that sets up positional advances and submission holds. When you can play a game that alternates between positional pressure and the constant threat of submission, you will have a side game to be feared. Of all the dominant positions in jiu jitsu, you will probably spend more time in side control than all the others put together - make sure it’s a strength and not a weakness in your game! If you’re interested follow the link in my Instagram bio

INITIALLY TRAIN AT A PACE WHERE YOU CAN THINK BEFORE YOU ACT. ONE DAY YOU WILL REACH A THRESHOLD WHERE AS THE PACE QUICKENS YOU FIND YOURSELF ABLE TO ACT EFFECTIVELY BEFORE YOU EVEN THINK - AND THEN THE VICTORIES COME FAR MORE OFTEN THAN THE DEFEATS

Watching the mighty Thais in training: I landed at midnight in Singapore last night - today it was workout time with Garry Tonon who will be matched against the brilliant submission specialist Tye Ruotolo this Friday night in a ten minute grappling bout as part of the @onechampionship mixed MMA/Grappling event! Mr Ruotolo and his twin brother Kade have been in incredible form this last year - both racking up impressive victories over the best in the sport with their lightning fast entries into submissions, exhausting pace and excellent integration of ground and standing technique - this will be without question one of Mr Tonon’s toughest matches. When in Singapore I love to train at @evolvemma in Far East Square. It’s always an incredible experience to walk in and see some of the very best Muay Thai athletes doing their daily workouts. The level of Muay Thai here is incredible. They have a level of finesse and efficiency in every aspect of their movement that is truly a sight to behold and a true inspiration to all of the other combat sports. Today I had the privilege of watching the great Nong-O go through his workout. His workout sets a standard of excellence that every martial artist should strive for regardless of their discipline. When it comes to watching sports outside my own I really don’t care WHAT i watch - SO LONG AS ITS THE BEST IN THE WORLD DOING IT - because the best always have a way of doing things that illuminate and inspire you in whatever you do yourself. It’s fascinating to watch the way the elite Thais move between extreme focus and precision one moment and yet shift into relaxed joviality the next, then right back to work. Thank you to @evolvemma gym for the being such a great place to get ready for the toughest challenges

Good things happen when you work outside your opponents elbows: Frontal attacks can work well when you’re bigger or faster than your opponent or have excellent set ups to catch him by surprise, but blasting straight through the front door is tough on someone bigger and stronger or who knows what the set ups to your main attacks are. Everything gets easier when you get an angle outside your opponents elbows and work from the flanks. You suddenly find that you are fighting only half of your opponent instead of all of him; that he has to adjust his position to alleviate his angular disadvantage, leaving him momentarily vulnerable as he shifts. You can greatly increase your effectiveness just by consistently seeking to get outside your opponents elbows prior to attacking. It COSTS very little in energy and resources to do; but it can SAVE you huge amounts of energy and resources when launching and completing your attacks - make it a habit!!

Distinguished visitors: We had the honor of training today with the great Satoshi Ishii, Olympic Gold Medalist and All Japan Judo champion. It was very impressive watching a truly elite Judoka work with the modern jiu jitsu style. His Judo pedigree showed today. He has a tremendous inside trip (ouchi gari) and body drop (tai otoshi) and osoto gari. Like every elite Japanese judo player I’ve seen he has excellent positional ground grappling (ne waza) that even a good jiu jitsu player would be proud of. I always loved watching his judo battles against the two great Japanese Olympic champions Kosei Inoue and Kejii Suzuki back in the day - watching his jiu jitsu battles today were just as good!

Doubling your chances: For every ten times you try to sweep someone your own size and skill level from guard position, you can expect around seven to eight of them to fail due to a skilled opponents anticipation and resistance. Knowing this it is very important that you build the habit of rising up from bottom position and following a failed sweep with an attempted takedown. This gives you a second chance to reverse your opponent and take top position. Most beginners have a tendency to sit back down after a failed sweep - do the opposite - rise up into a follow up takedown and you’ll find that you double your chances of a score without adding a lot of effort. Interestingly these follow up takedowns tend to be easier than normal takedowns for the simple reason that the opponents stance and balance is usually broken by the initial sweep attempt, making takedown defense more difficult than usual. Next time you’re sweeping from guard, start that building that habit of coming UP rather than just sitting back down.

The central tactical message of combat sports: The aim of combat sports is to make the inherently difficult task of defeating a tough and strong adversary significantly easier through training various techniques and tactics that increase the probability of you winning. The means by which this aim is fulfilled is universal across all combat sports - PUT YOURSELF IN LOCATIONS WHERE YOU CAN ATTACK YOUR OPPONENT MORE READILY THAN HE CAN ATTACK YOU. Different combat sports have different ways of doing this. Some do it through distance, some via angle, some via level, some through striking, some through grappling - but the same basic idea persists and forms the core of intelligence applied to personal unarmed combat. In jiu jitsu it is done primarily through POSITION. two positions above all - the mount and the rear mount. In grappling jiu jitsu where striking is not permitted, I believe that the rear mount is the single best positional pin of them all. Seek it at all times - the athlete who actively LOOKS for the back will always FIND the back - it’s that simple. THE EYES WILL ALWAYS SEE WHAT YOU TELL THEM TO LOOK FOR FOR - tell them to look for the back and you’ll see the everywhere you grapple - and then you’ll win a lot of matches!

Threat level: The highest goal of jiu jitsu is submission. The reality however, is that most of your opponents know all the major submission holds and how to defend them. As a result, the majority of submission attempts you ever attempt will fail. Don’t worry - that’s ok - remember - you only need ONE to succeed and the match is yours. Understand something however - your submissions will only have a decisive effect on the match if your opponent fears the consequences of no tapping to them. If your submissions are MECHANICALLY WEAK, they will be ignored and even countered by a good opponent. If they are strong, opponents will quickly submit, or over react to the threat and create easy follow up attacks for you. It’s important them, that your submissions carry with them the threat of damage if the opponent doesn’t tap. Just as there is a massive difference between someone throwing light slaps at you versus something throwing heavy blows with the intention of knocking you out cold, so too there is a massive difference between grappling someone whose submission attempts feel like they would do little damage even if you let them perform it versus a submission specialist who feels like he could tear your limbs apart or strangle you unconscious in seconds. In the latter case, you will want to tap quickly or react so dramatically that you’ll open up vulnerabilities just trying to get away from the initial threat. Make sure your submissions have that mechanical strength underlying them so that in a real situation you know they are capable of doing real damage if the situation should demand it. Of course in daily training apply all submissions with care and control so that you don’t hurt training partners, but practice your mechanics so you on that day you need the power of real submission, you have that ability. Remember that AN EMPTY THREAT IS NO THREAT AT ALL.

Tension: Probably the single biggest issue for most beginning students in sparring is exhaustion. It’s natural to get very tense and stay at near maximum exertion level throughout the match. This will quickly exhaust anyone - even people who are in very good physical condition. Maximum isometric tension is physically exhausting. The key to endurance in sparring is learning to regulate its use. There will be times when you really need near maximum isometric strength, but these times are short and far between. For most of the match you need movement - which is best done in a state of relative relaxation. Only when you go to apply a move against resistance do you need a quick burst of isometric strength. Learn to stay relaxed most of the time and then to turn on tension when needed and most important - when to turn it off - and you will immediately find that you can grapple for longer periods of time without total exhaustion. Here, Luke Griffith is on the point of completing a stranglehold - this is the time for near maximal commitment to isometric tension - but understand that this is the exception rather than the rule. For most of your match time, stay fairly relaxed to save strength for the times you need it, and if you don’t get a speedy breakthrough - turn it off and go back to relaxation - you’ll need it again later

Heavyweights: People are often surprised to hear that I train many heavyweights the same way I train lightweights. Too often people underestimate the degree to which bigger people can play a smooth and technically adept game that involves inversions and flexible guard play as well as many lightweights. When I come to assess to coach someone I don’t judge them by their WEIGHT and SIZE, but rather by their MOVEMENT POTENTIAL. Some big people can move extremely well and in these cases, I teach them the same program as the lightweights. Here is Big Dan Manasoiu, at six foot seven (200 cm) and over 250 pounds (115 kg) he certainly is big, yet you can see he inverts into leg locks as well as any lightweight on his way to winning gold at European ADCC trials. Don’t let people tell you how you should grapple based on size. I’ve seen Small people play a powerful top pressure game well against bigger opponents, I’ve seen big men roll around the floor with the speed and agility of a mongoose. Movement quality, not size is the best predictor of how you should play.

Victory in Sau Paulo! Nicholas Meregali returned to Brazil to compete in the Brazilian National Championships and won in characteristic brilliant style! He showed his impressive attacking game that makes him the most exciting gi athlete on the planet, winning with his dynamic strangles. In the finals he took on the great Brazilian athlete Fellipe Andrew, one of the very best in the business, and attacked with a dizzying array of sweeps from his powerful open guard, then shocked everyone with a very well executed uchi mata throw in standing position and straight into a beautiful strangle to win! It was a real pleasure observing some of his training preparation here in Texas and then seeing him apply it so well in one the toughest gi tournaments of them all. Well done, Nicholas! And a lesson to all athletes that winning is great but best of all is to win in a way that conveys the central theme of all good jiu jitsu - constant and exciting attacks directed towards control that leads to submission. Winning makes an athlete respected - but winning like this makes you a legend!

Victory in Poland! Outstanding squad juniors Dan Manasoiu @jiujitsugiant and Luke Griffith @luke_griffithjj punched their tickets to the worlds biggest grappling show at ADCC World Championships 2022. Both of the blue and purple belt youngsters put on outstanding performance, winning three of their four matches via submission against much more experienced black belt opponents, winning the outstanding team trophy in addition to their very impressive individual performances. The amount of progress these two have made since beginning their training in Texas has been remarkable and culminated in their superb performance today. Now it’s time for them to prepare for the biggest show of their lives later this year! Well done Luke and Dan!

Victory in Dallas!! Rory MacDonald @romac_gorilla won a brilliant victory in his MMA fight tonight against the very tough and experienced Brett Cooper. He was able to mix his formidable striking and grappling skills into a flawless package to flow from punching combinations into takedown into beautiful pin transitions into devastating grapple boxing (the skill of mixing striking and grappling) culminating in a picture perfect strangle finish mid way through the first round. Watching Firas run Rory through the warm up brought back many memories of past campaigns, but on stage Rory showed he has not been dwelling in the past as he showed recent improvements in his grappling skills. As always there are many people to thank. Thank you to @firas_zahabi for being such an amazing friend, coach and student and guiding Rory’s development for so long. Thank you @timkennedymma and friends for high level sparring rounds. Thank you @roka for giving us such a great training facility for the fight camp over last six weeks. Thank you @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @garrytonon for helping Rory get ready with grappling insights. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Getting the band back together: Hanging out with old partners in crime Rory MacDonald and Firas Zahabi at the PFL weigh in in Dallas Texas. Mr MacDonald successfully made 170 pounds for his bout tomorrow night against the very tough Brett Cooper. It’s been awesome talking about old times and getting ready for new ones. Now it’s time to recharge and strategize with the best in the business!

Don’t stand in front of danger: If someone motioned towards you in a way that conveyed that they intended you throw hard punches at your head - would you stand in place directly in front of them? Of course not, you’d immediately shift off to one side and keep doing so every time they recentered in order to gain some safety. Same thing when you face the danger of a talented opponents legs as you are confronted by his guard. His guard can be as dangerous as punches, and similarly you want to angle off to a side to lessen the danger rather than stand directly in front where the will face the full array of his attacks. Make it a habit - don’t stand directly in front - GET A GRIP AND STEP TO AN ANGLE. Do it early and do it every time and you’ll be a lot safer when confronted by a dangerous guard

Position isn’t enough: You could make a good career in jiu jitsu just by getting into good positions. However, if you want to live up to the IDEAL of jiu jitsu, you’ll need to go further and FINISH opponents. That means in addition to position, you’ll need LIMB ISOLATION AND CONTROL from the pin that allows you to transition into the submission hold. You need a bridge between the POSITION and the SUBMISSION. The former is control over the TORSO, the latter is an attack on a LIMB. Without a bridge between the two you will rarely be able to go from one to the other. When you get good position on opponents make it your daily habit to go further and ISOLATE A LIMB so that you can translate positions into submissions. If you aren’t sure where to start, begin with under hooks - they are a relatively simple and easily understood method of isolating a limb from a variety of dominant positions. Remember, good jiu jitsu gets you into dominant positions, but great Jiu jitsu sees pins as a means to an end and strives to go further by isolating limbs from the pin and then attacking with submissions

Reaching: In all combat sports we have a basic need for defensive soundness at all times. Whenever you REACH for an opponent, whether with arms or legs, you lose defensive soundness. Over extension is vulnerability in this game. KEEP YOUR KNEES TO YOUR CHEST AND YOUR ELBOWS TO YOUR SIDES AND ELBOWS AND KNEES CLOSE TOGETHER AND YOU’LL BE DEFENSIVELY SOUND. When you need to make contact, don’t do it so much by REACHING as by MOVEMENT. Use either your motion or your opponents motion to CLOSE DISTANCE - that way you can make contact without compromising your defensive structure. So when you need to make contact - use MOTION to close distance rather than REACHING in ways that create vulnerability

Work rate: There are many simultaneous battles going on at any given moment in a jiu jitsu match. One of the most important of all is the battle to control RELATIVE WORK RATE. Both athletes are performing work. The question is - who is performing more mechanical work? Of the two athletes have similar levels of physical conditioning, as time passes, the athlete who is working harder physically will fatigue faster. YOUR JOB IS TO CREATE CONDITIONS WHERE YIUR OPPONENT IS FORCED TO WORK HARDER THAN YOU ARE. If you can do this consistently you will win most of your matches based on this single consideration. The easiest opponent to take down, pass guard, pin and finish are TIRED opponents. They don’t START tired and they don’t get tired easily if they are good. They get tired because you make them work harder than you for extended periods of time. There are many ways to do this but the single best one is to make them CARRY YOUR BODYWEIGHT IN COMPROMISED POSITIONS - in particular to carry your weight on their upper body. The longer you can make them do this, the easier will be the task of finishing them.

The best all round method of passing guard - pass from half guard: There are many effective ways to pass an opponents guard, but to me, the single best all round method will always be to pass from half guard. Why? Because the vast majority of guard passes end with head control as their final step. This creates a critical weakness within them - the need to transition from control of the hips/torso to the head. Making that transition - the cranial shift - always presents a window of opportunity for a talented opponent to escape back to guard as you attempt to make that final transition. The beauty of half guard passing is that unlike other passing methods, you can control the head BEFORE you pass. This removes the vulnerable cranial shift from the process and makes for total control from beginning to end with no real weak points. Of course you need to know other methods, but make sure you put a heavy emphasis on developing your half guard passing game - no other method is so tactically sound

The real power of pinning: In jiu jitsu passing guard into a pin is defined by the act of getting completely past your opponents legs and holding at least one hip and shoulder to the floor for a minimum of three seconds. Most people use pins to score. As a result their is little to no relationship between their pins and their submissions. This is disappointing. The real power of pinning comes from the ability to create EXTREME PRESSURE THAT CREATES OPENINGS THAT LEAD TO SUBMISSIONS. You must seek to create pinning pressure that opponents FEAR. When you can make opponents wilt and fatigue over time under your pins then you will have created the incredibly valuable link between pinning and submission and lived up to the central jiu jitsu theme of position being linked to submission. Good pins attack your opponent on several important fronts simultaneously. Posture, alignment and breathing are the three targets you want to focus on. Degrade those three and you’ll degrade resistance overall and make submissions easy.

Two for the price of one: GOOD jiu jitsu players create PROBLEMS for their opponents; but GREAT jiu jitsu players create DILEMMAS for their opponents. Whenever you create situations where you can play two threats simultaneously against an opponent such that the more the opponent tries to avoid one, the more he exposes himself to the other, you have created a winning situation for yourself. One of the very best examples of this comes from the TRIANGLE and this is definitely a great starting point for you to build the concept into your thinking about jiu jitsu. I’m almost every variation of the triangle you have both a threat of STRANGLE and JOINT LOCK. As you attack the strangle and your opponent defends, you can immediately switch to arm bar ( juji gatame), kimura, straight arm bar (ude gatame) and wrist locks, even an American lock in some cases. The relationship goes both ways; as you attack these joint locks you can overcome resistance by switching back to the strangle. Here, Gordon Ryan switches the emphasis of his triangle attack from strangle to juji gatame arm bar to overcome the initial line of resistance and create a game ending dilemma. This type of thinking must become part of your jiu jitsu consciousness - and the triangle is an excellent place for you to start

Gentlemen: There is an odd gentleman’s agreement in jiu jitsu that there is a top player who passes guard and a bottom player who works from guard to sweep or submit his opponent. Typically the bottom player stays on bottom until he either sweeps or submits the other fellow. THERE IS NOTHING IN THE RULE BOOK THAT SAYS IF YOU START ON BOTTOM UIU HAVE TO STAY ON BOTTOM. You add a whole new dimension to your bottom game when you constantly threaten to rise up from bottom and threaten takedowns and hip heists to top position. Ironically this will force your opponent to close distance and pass with more pressure - which makes it easier to apply a conventional submissions and sweep guard game. Next time you’re playing from guard - make sure you threaten to come up into takedowns and snaps to front head lock - you’ll be amazed at how it benefits your bottom game

Regulate speed of engagement by increasing or decreasing body contact: Good jiu jitsu players have a distinguishing characteristic - they can easily control the PACE set between them and their opponents. This is a truly important skill. If you can control the overall pace and tempo, controlling the outcome will be a lot easier. There is a simple rule in effect here - the greater the surface area of your body in contact with your opponent - the slower the pace will be. You want to speed things up? Decrease body contact. You want to slow things down? Increase body contact. Learn to contour your body into an opponents and you can increase the effect dramatically until you get to a point where you can slow movement down to a degree where escape becomes very difficult and submission becomes very easy. LEARN TO REGULATE MOVEMENT THROUGH BODY CONTACT AS EASILY AS YOU REGULATE THE PASSAGE OF WATER THROUGH A FAUCET and you will have taken a giant step in your jiu jitsu progress

Control them with your LEGS, generate breaking horsepower through your HIPS, transmit that power to the target through your ARMS - this is the pattern of winning jiu jitsu.

Failure: We all have an internal voice that tell us whether or not a given move that we attempt during sparring or competition has succeeded or failed. When you compete against opponents your own size and skill level, the great majority of your attempted moves will fail. So that voice in your head will be saying “you failed” very often. When we experience failure it’s natural to feel frustration and disappointment. This usually has the effect of lowering our morale over time until you stop attempting moves because they simply aren’t succeeding. You must not slide into this way of thinking. Understand this - A SUCCESSION OF FAILED MOVES PAVES THE WAY FOR A SUCCESSFUL MOVE - why? Because every act of resistance is a drain on your opponents energy levels. As long as you are not expending more energy than your opponent over time, a series of failures will create a tired and fatigued opponent who will eventually be unable to defend the next move. One failed move doesn’t do anything, a but a long succession of failed moves can degrade an opponents energy levels to a point where success is inevitable. As long as you keep this view in your mind, the many inevitable failures you will experience in the course of a hard match won’t get you dispirited - on the contrary - they will inspire you to keep pushing. Skilled opponents can stop almost any move when they’re fresh, but even the most skilled opponent can’t stop a move in a state of total exhaustion. Victory never came from a single failure, but many victories came from multiple failures over time that kept an opponent working to exhaustion until he couldn’t stop the next move

One good weapon: Having one good weapon doesn’t sound like much in a sport where there are thousands of moves and techniques to learn. Remember however, that ONE GOOD WEAPON ALWAYS BEGETS MORE WEAPONS. Why? Because when your opponent fears one strong weapon that you possess, he will tend to react to that threat in predictable ways that make the application of other weapons much easier. Best of all is when you have a strong technique that goes in one direction and another follow up that goes in the opposite direction - then you can play the two against each other and breakthrough even very tough defenses. The way of good jiu jitsu always follows this path of developing a few favored weapons that are like the trunk of a strong tree, and from that tree sprout many branches, just as many subsequent moves sprout off the development of those strong moves of yours. The Japanese noted this pattern long ago and created a work “tokui-waza” for this kind of favorite or strong technique. Make sure your development makes use of this essential feature of the sport

Perceptions: How your opponent perceives you has a HUGE impact upon their behavior towards you in a match. If they do not perceive you as dangerous towards them, they will engage with total confidence and use their full arsenal of weapons without any concern for you. If, on the other hand, they believe you are a substantial threat to them, they will engage with trepidation and hold back from using many of their moves for fear of bad consequences if they don’t work. It is MUCH easier to engage an opponent who is more worried about what you can do to them, than what they will do to you. The single best way to create this perception of danger in your opponents is to build a strong submissions game. Nothing induces fear and respect in grappling as well as the ability to finish an opponent. Develop your submissions as a strong point and opponents will immediately take you seriously and show a marked reluctance to over commit to their favorite moves and shy away from even using many other moves that they would normally employ.

A little break in the action…Hard sparring is damn exhausting at times. The usual response is to think you need to get in better physical shape via an exercise program. That’s certainly sound thinking and it’s every jiu jitsu player’s responsibility to be in the best shape you can; however, the world is full of people who are in great physical shape but who still get exhausted quickly during sparring. The key is to understand that once a satisfactory baseline of physical fitness has been achieved, ENDURANCE IS MUCH MORE A QUESTION OF PACE CONTROL THAN SUPREME PHYSICAL FITNESS. You must learn to moderate your pace and keep it within a threshold that you can maintain for the expected length of the match. A big part of this is LEARNING TO TAKE ACTIVE BREAKS during the course of the action. Obviously you can’t just stop moving. You have to be able to lower your activity level to one where you can physically recover, but still be doing enough work to appear actively engaged in the match. The best time to do this is in set positions that limit an opponents ability to increase the pace through movement - this usually means closed guard or half guard or top pins, but in extreme cases it might even include bottom pins. You don’t have to be moving like a madman the whole match - learn to take some recuperation time in the midst of the action and you’ll suddenly find you can go a lot longer than you previously believed

If it ain’t tight - it ain’t right: When you start learning submissions it can be quite difficult to maintain a tight connection to your opponent as you try to perform the move. Space seems to inevitably develop between you and your drilling partner as you move further into the move. This is even more pronounced when you attempt it in sparring and the whole move often falls apart. This leads you to squeeze harder with your muscles to compensate and now you find yourself quickly getting tired performing large numbers of repetitions. Worse still, that tight musculature prohibits smooth movement and now you can’t even perform the move. The key to finding the tightness required for good submission holds that opponents can’t simply pull out of is MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS rather than MUSCULAR tightness. You want to be fairly loose as you move into the position , but SNAP INTO ISOMETRIC TIGHTNESS WHEN YOU GET THERE. Movement requires looseness and fluidity, locks require immobilizing tension - learning to reconcile these contradictory demands is the key to success with your submissions

Kimura - the joker in the pack: All the various submission holds have their own distinct character. Kimura often has a similarity to the knight on a chessboard. It can be used in ways that are very different from the other chess pieces. It has its own character that breaks the usual patterns and rules. Kimura can be used even from disadvantageous positions, from strange angles and entry points, from standing as well as ground, in combination with other holds, as both a submission hold and a means of control, it can be performed with your arms (the standard method) but also with your legs for additional power. It is often derided as a strong man’s move, but in fact if you can get an opponents hand behind his back, or incorporate your legs into the move, it takes no more strength than any other. Along with the guillotine/front head lock and ashi garami it is the most commonly available submission hold. A common problem for most students when they first begin using it is that they will get the grip and then attempt the move and if it does not work immediately - abandon it. This is understandable as many kimura attempts can be strongly countered by a skilled opponent if you hang on too long. However, part of kimura mastery is learning when to hold on and when to let go. To learn this you have to hang on for a while. You’ll make some mistakes initially and put yourself in arm bars and other counters when grappling good opponents - that’s part of the learning process - but in time you’ll learn how to move and counter those counters and come out with a win via kimura. It all begins with time spent with the lock in place

The single best instinct you can build in jiu jitsu: Sometimes the action in jiu jitsu can unfold very quickly and it’s not always clear in the time available where we should be going in the midst of the action. That’s when instincts tend to kick in. Some are good, some are bad , but there is one that’s ALWAYS great - THE INSTINCT TO FIND THE BACK IN POSSIBLE SITUATION. The back is the single most dominant position in grappling, the highest scoring and the best for setting up submissions. BUILD AN INSTINCT TO FIND THE BACK FROM EVERYWHERE and you’ll always be headed in the right direction regardless of where you are or where you’re going.

What the f**k are those guys wearing??!!! First training session for @nicholasmeregali in preparation for gi World Championships this morning. It’s a very impressive sight to watch one of the very best gi athletes of his generation in his element! Nicholas Meregali has the kind of gi game that everyone admires - fast tactical gripping into smooth positional advances finishing with devastating submissions. He has one of the most exciting gi games I’ve ever seen, full of technical nuance, some beautiful original moves and that unmistakable Brazilian flair for movement and opportunity that characterizes so many of the top athletes from that nation. Now our fingers are all mangled and our ears on fire 😂😂😂 Time for the no gi training session! 😜😜 I didn’t have a gi after the move from Puerto Rico, so I had to borrow one from from Nicholas. He gave me a black gi so i look like some dork showing up for his first Ninjitsu class hoping for a free shuriken 😂😂😂 The transition from one game to another is a fascinating one - but at the end of the day it’s all jiu jitsu - just a different expression and a different set of problems to solve! Can’t wait to see how these sessions play out!

One of the most remarkable men I ever met: This crazy job of mine has brought me into contact with many truly fascinating people. One who really stands out will always be Tim Kennedy @timkennedymma It is very difficult in this life of ours to master even one skill - Tim Kennedy is a master of many. I watch him routinely spar against elite current MMA fighters and easily hold his own even in retirement. Then he’ll do a jiu jitsu class and give hell to top grapplers. Then he will head out to a gun range and easily put five rounds into a ten inch circle at a thousand meters day or night, in any weather conditions, then he will teach handguns, knife defense. After all this he will quietly slip down to the Texas border and battle cartel human traffickers all night in night vision goggles. And the truly incredible things is that next day when I come to the gym, he’ll be there before me doing some crazy workout that would flat line me in three minutes and then do another MMA sparring session with no problems! I’ve never met a person like this! He can teach you about driving cars for maximum performance against armed attack, how to survive longer in freezing water, how to speak foreign languages to get by in a dozen countries - and after all this this he’s one of the nicest and most helpful people you’ll ever meet - a man who always makes time to help his friends (when Georges St Pierre came to train he came up from a fire fight at the border to see his old friend, trained, and went back to the border for more!) He is a character like no other I’ve met. Today he came in to help Rory MacDonald @romac_gorilla get ready for his upcoming bout. I’m looking forward to seeing my old partner in crime @firas_zahabi as we all get together to help Rory in Dallas Texas early May in PFL Thanks also to Sean Apperson for sparring help this morning - what a crew!!

Isolation: Jiu jitsu is the art and science of control that leads to submission - and submission requires the ISOLATION of a vulnerable target (joints and blood supply to the brain) that can be attacked through the use of the leverage of your own limbs. Arguably the best of these acts of isolating targets are those where the LEGS are used to isolate targets in the upper body. This keeps your game in line with a fundamental feature of the human body - the fact that the legs are inherently stronger than the limbs of the upper body. A smaller and weaker persons legs will be stronger than a bigger and stronger persons arms and neck. Staying true to this principle is a good way for smaller, weaker people to defeat bigger, stronger people. One of the best examples of this principle are TRIANGLES and ARM BARS (juji gatame), as they use your legs to control the opponents head and shoulders. Taller, longer athletes generally develop an affinity more for triangles; shorter, stockier athletes typically develop an affinity more for arm bars. Take your pick - but remember the principles - your legs vs your opponents upper body - isolate the targets and you’ll be a dangerous opponent for even bigger and stronger adversaries

Speed: Speed is a wonderful attribute to have in any combat sport. If you can consistently get to where you want to be faster than your opponent can get to where he wants to be, you’ll have a definite advantage. However, as desirable as physical speed may be, it’s value is dwarfed by another form of speed - SPEED OF DECISION MAKING. If you are physically slower than your opponent, the only way you can win a race with them is to START FIRST, and that is exactly what superior speed of decision making enables you to do. If you make a decision to move in a given way prior to your opponent and act on it before he even has decided on his own course of action, then you can realistically get to where you want to be before he does - despite being slower in a physical sense. Remember always that in a fight the race does not go to the swiftest, but to the one that starts first. Make decisions faster than opponents and you’ll always be first off the line

Eyes: We spend all day training our bodies but the single most important element you must train is your EYES. Your eyes SEE opportunity long before your body ACTS on it. Moreover, if your eyes DON’T see opportunity, your body won’t act at all. ACTIVE OBSERVATION - where you both see AND assess, is the most important thing you can develop - because until the eyes see possibility the body won’t create actuality. Build knowledge inside your mind and the eyes will learn to discern when watching. Staring vacantly won’t help you at all. Active observation stems from knowing what to look for. You can only train your body for some long every day until it is exhausted, but the mind can be pushed much longer with no ill effects. Once knowledge is imbedded, the eyes become begin everything you do

Stop the attack…and then what? Traditional jiu jitsu is an inherently conservative game. Defense before all. There is wisdom in this, particularly when you remember that traditional jiu jitsu bus concerned primarily with self defense against bigger and stronger opponents. However, in modern jiu jitsu you must go beyond the old SATISFICING mindset which directs us simply to defend an opponents move; and instead opt for a MAXIMIZING mindset which asks us to not just defend a move, but also to IMMEDIATELY COUNTER as soon as the defense has topped the initial attack. Most opponents will be extended and out of position immediately after a failed attack so these counters have a very high success rate. Next time you’re under attack, go the extra distance and the second you’ve blunted the opponents attack - ask yourself what your best offensive option is. Your game will take on a whole new dynamic as a result.

Controlled intensity: One of the toughest tasks for a coach is to get students to regulate their intensity levels to the task at hand. We all have a natural tendency to work harder than we need for every task in jiu jitsu and get tired quickly as a result. The opposite mistake is to play so loose that you never get tired but your technique is so weakly applied that you simply aren’t effective. Somewhere in between there is controlled intensity. Here, you focus on controlling the TIME and LOCATION of intensity. Some tasks require a considerable power output from you - apply that power long enough to complete the task AND NO LONGER. With regards location, don’t tense up your WHOLE BODY if you only need to put tension into your legs to get a task completed. It’s very true that jiu jitsu technique does require considerable strength output at times - don’t let anyone kid you, it’s a physical game - but REGULATE that output so you don’t exhaust yourself. Controlled intensity is the hallmark of good jiu jitsu athletes

Reflections: When Gordon Ryan was matched against Ralek Gracie several years ago it was a rather surreal experience. The match was in the legendary Torrence Gracie academy where Brazilian jiu jitsu gained its first foothold in the United States. When I began jiu jitsu in the mid 1990’s I remember being in awe of grainy VHS images of challenge matches in that academy and being so impressed by the way they used jiu jitsu to dispel many of the prevailing beliefs about fighting from that era and usher in a new way of looking at martial arts that we still benefit from now. We were there in effect for a challenge match in a different era so it was a strange feeling. Rorion Gracie was a gracious host and he showed around a beautiful jiu jitsu museum he has built inside the academy featuring the history of the Gracie family. I love the history of the old Japanese and Brazilian masters who gave birth to this art. Many of them were fascinating characters. The sport has changed so much in some ways but it’s core principles and methods remain largely unchanged. I always wonder what the old masters would think if they saw the modern changes in jiu jitsu - would they be impressed or horrified? I guessing they’d be both. No matter what their feelings about us - I will always be grateful for them

Stance first - action second: Everything in jiu jitsu starts with stance. Before you even establish contact with an opponent you should have your stance set appropriately. For every change in scenario, you’ll have to change to a new stance. STANCE BEFORE EVERYTHING - before contact, before motion, before any given move - there is a stance that makes you efficient and the further you deviate from that ideal stance the less effective and efficient you will be. A huge part of winning in this game is just having the discipline to get into and maintain your stance better than your opponent does. Next time you’re watching a champion at work - don’t just watch his MOVES - watch his diligent attention to maintaining a stance and switching from one stance to another as the scenarios unfold - for it is only THIS which makes those moves possible

Attacking the whole body: The single most important factor in how effective your attacks will be is their mechanical efficiency. If your attacks are mechanically weak they simply won’t have sufficient power to have any effect on an opponent. Close behind mechanical considerations however is the notion of DIVERSITY OF ATTACKS. If you attack only one part of the body you become predictable and your opponent will have an easy time anticipating you and putting up strong defenses in the specific area you are focusing your attacks. ONLY WHEN YOU ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY CAN YOU SCATTER YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSES. Once his attention is pulled into one zone it’s easy to attack another. You don’t a vast array of attacks - just enough to have one or two good attacks to lower body, upper body and head/neck. It’s not so much the NUMBER of attacks you have, as your ability to target the whole body and shift rapidly from one target area to another that will determine your effectiveness. Attacks on the left will always set up attacks on the right, attacks to the upper body will disguise subsequent attacks to the lower body - this the nature of good jiu jitsu and martial arts in general

Navigating from neutral to advantage: The story of every jiu jitsu match is the same - your quest to advance over time from neutral positions (starting) to advantageous positions (finishing). Usually this cycle has to be repeated several times before a decisive victory is achieved as your opponent will typically escape quite often when you get a good position on him. Like any other act of navigation in your life, you have options. Just as you have a favorite way to drive home, the shortest way home, the most scenic way home, a new and interesting way home, the long way home etc so too in jiu jitsu, you have many ways from your standard starting positions into your finishing positions. The most important thing in this sport is to have A CLEAR SENSE OF DIRECTION from all the major starting positions. No sense of direction will immediately result in no movement and no movement means your opponent will swarm all over you. If you don’t have a clear sense of direction from a given starting point, you need to figure that out first before you can expect any techniques to succeed. Remember - techniques without direction are random - direction without technique won’t even get started. KNOW WHERE YOU WANT TO GO AND KNOW WHAT YOU HAVE TO DO TO GET THERE and you will be very successful in this game

Failure? Or opportunity? Let’s face the facts - the overwhelming majority of moves you attempt in sparring or competition will fail. This is true regardless of your skill level. As you get better, so do your opponents. As you learn new moves, they learn new counters. If you try a hundred moves on a given days training you can expect ninety of them to fail. Given this fact, it’s up to you to shift your perspective on failure. EVEN A FAILED MOVE WILL ELICIT A DEFENSIVE REACTION FROM YOUR OPPONENT (indeed that defensive reaction is usually the reason why it failed). YOUR JOB IS TO USE THAT DEFENSIVE REACTION TO SET UP THE SUBSEQUENT MOVE(S) THAT SUCCEED. Get rid of the Fail-Stop mentality that most people carry into jiu jitsu and adopt the Fail - Opportunity mind set instead. If you stop every time you perceive failure then you really will fail. If you immediately switch to a follow up move appropriate to the defensive reaction you elicited from the initial failure, then (initial) failures will become one the main sources of your success. Every time you experience failure, have a follow up mapped out and suddenly you’ll find that getting stopped one way by an opponent is just an invitation to a different route to success.

Finding your favorite move: Jiu jitsu is dominated by athletes who have great depth of knowledge by a relatively small set of favorite moves. The moves of jiu jitsu are far too numerous for anyone to learn them all in depth. In addition our cognitive limits means we can only juggle a small number of moves effectively under stress. So which moves should become your favorite “go-to” moves? Let’s understand from the start that when we say “favorite” we mean “most effective.” There are many moves that are fun favorites but we’d never use them in a high pressure situation. Finding your favorites is a very personal journey. When you first start out it’s natural that you will be heavily influenced by your teachers and mentors and inherit their favorite moves since you look up to them so much. As you develop you will start to include famous champions as you observe what made them successful and see that you could incorporate some of their game into yours. The last stage however, will be when your own experience and experimentation becomes the most important source of your individual game. This is when your jiu jitsu becomes an expression of who you are as an athlete and a person. You may be surprised by how few moves you really need to excel in to reach a very high level - it’s usually fewer than most people believe. Understand also that your favorites will almost certainly change over time and what you know think of as your main weapons may be but a memory five years from now. Whatever you end up choosing - research them with everything you have - you are in a sport where depth of knowledge almost always beats breadth of knowledge.

Joint locks - take your time,
Feel the relationship between joint, lever and fulcrum: When you get an opponent in a good joint lock is natural to want to close the deal as quickly as possible - you’re in a potentially match winning move after all - so why not seal it as quick as you can? If you just pull on the limb as quickly as you can you will have success up to a certain level. Beginners will panic tap to avoid injury. As you go up against better opponents they won’t panic and will skillfully defend themselves. As they move in defense the initial direction you are pulling the joint will almost always crease to be effective and you must shift to new directions to accommodate their defensive movements. This will require you to slow things down and use the lever of their limb against the fulcrum of your body to FEEL which direction you should be applying pressure. This is not the time for one simple pull on the limb, but rather, a time to see where they are going and feel what direction of pull will take their joint in a direction that it cannot bend. Next time you’re applying a joint lock, focus less on speed of application and more on the feel of the joint against the fulcrum

Observation: There is only so much hard physical training you can do in a day before you break yourself. If you want to increase your training time without adding to your physical load - TRAIN YOUR MIND THROUGH OBSERVATION. You can train your mind for many hours a day with no danger of over training or injury. It is the perfect addition to your physical training and a fine replacement for physical training if you are injured or sick. Train yourself to watch matches and learn. Most people watch only for entertainment. They watch to see who wins. This is unimportant. What is important is not WHO wins but HOW they won and lost. Train yourself to look for THIS and you can double or triple your training time in a day by adding a non physical element. As the old saying goes - the hardest work is hard thinking. Thinking can’t be a substitute for hard physical work - but it is a very fine addition to it. Don’t just watch - WATCH FOR A PURPOSE - learn to see why some win and some lose and take those mental lessons to your next physical training session - you’ll be surprised how much they can add to your progress.

Jiu jitsu on a crowded mat: When I began jiu jitsu the numbers of people per class were rather small. Jiu jitsu was seen a fringe art within the fringe activity of martial arts. The mats we worked out on were always small to keep costs low. As the sport expanded, the mats expanded - but so did the numbers of people on the mats. Most of my career teaching in NYC in my teachers school we averaged seventy to eighty people per class and when big events were coming up that often rose to over a hundred. As such, space was always at a premium. It’s very important that you develop a sense of how to train in confined areas with other people right next to you so as to avoid unnecessary injury. When we began we had no sense of this at all and just crashed into each other and kept sparring. This led to injuries and anger. When you perform moves in a crowded mat you must have not only of where you START the move, but also where the move will END. So if you’re about to sweep or takedown a training partner, you must mentally check where people are in relation to where your move will finish. Just as a good shooter never takes a shot at a target without first checking what is behind and beyond the target, so to a good jiu jitsu student always checks what’s around before engaging a move that will send his partner with force in a given direction. CULTIVATE A SENSE OF WHATS AROUND YOU ON THE MAT. This will make you a responsible student. CULTIVATE THIS SENSE IN THE CLASS AS A WHOLE. This will create a safer training environment. I’ve been knocked out cold twice in my career by unintentional kicks to the back of the head while sparring in class (both times someone was thrown or swept and slammed feet down to the mat and my head got in the way) and I’ve seen numerous broken noses, chipped teeth and facial cuts along the way. Not only will this make you a safer jiu jitsu player, it will make you a better martial artist. Why? Because a great fault of many dojo trained martial artists when they fight in self defense is TUNNEL VISION. Developing a keen sense of your immediate surroundings as you grapple with intensity is a great way to train yourself to see more than your opponent.

What you get is a reflection of what you give: When you drill with a training partner you work cooperatively to research and understand a technique - it’s a team of two. If one member of the team drags his butt and is day dreaming, distracted or just plain not even trying, inevitably this will influence the other partner in to behave similarly. A substandard performance from half the team will quickly create a substandard performance from both. However, if you come in with a positive and enthusiastic attitude and most important of all - a spirit of experimentation - you will have an uplifting effect. That’s when the magic happens. As one partner lifts the other a symbiotic effect occurs where each lifts the other in turn and a drilling session can create genuine progress. Next time you’re drilling take a proactive role from the start - your enthusiasm will lift your partners and in turn his rising attitude will further lift yours - But it has to start with one of you - why not you?

Win one battle at a time: When you are caught in a bad situation in jiu jitsu it is unlikely that you’ll immediately and effortlessly escape. After all, if your opponent is good enough to force you in to a bad position, he’s probably good enough to keep you there. Instead, FOCUS ON WINNING SMALLER BATTLES FIRST THAT DIMINISH THE CONTROL YOUR OPPONENT HAS OVER YOU. As you win a series of smaller battles that weaken your opponents control, THEN you can win the big battle and get out of the situation altogether. For example, if you’re caught in a heavy side pin, don’t just try to blast out of there. Start by winning a smaller battle - the battle for an under hook. If you’re opponent gets an under hook , he solidifies his control over you. If you get an under hook, you rob him of control over your torso. Then win the battle for the cross face. If you get your head inside his cross face he loses control of your head. Now you’ve won two minor battles and your opponent no longer controls the movement of your head and torso. Now win the battle for positioning - a bridge removes your opponent from direct chest to chest position, rendering his weight ineffective. Once these three minor battle are won - NOW YOU’RE IN A STATE WHERE YOU CAN ESCAPE THE POSITION OVERALL. At this point you can pick and choose among the escapes - elbow escape, knee escape, whatever you want. Next time you’re in trouble, take on the mind set of identify the minor battles you need to win first before you win the big one.

Paths to the top: We all want to be the best we can in whatever we decide to dedicate our lives to. In my time coaching I’ve seen many people who got to the top of their respective sports. The thing that always strikes me about them is how DIFFERENT they are from each other in many superficial ways - looks, body type, personality etc and how SIMILAR they are in a few important ways. The most important similarity they all share is their dedication to a mindset of FOREGOING A CURRENT PLEASURE OR EVEN ENDURING CURRENT SUFFERING IN THE EXPECTATION OF A GREATER FUTURE REWARD. This mindset of current privation in favor of future reward is one of the great commonalities they all share. The pattern of their lives is to identify a distant and difficult goal in an industry or area about which they have genuine passion and to lay down a flexible routine that enables them to build the skill set required to attain that distant goal - all this is made possible by a mind that is perfectly comfort with the idea that hard and desolate times now are normal and expected for a golden future. This is not a sufficient condition for greatness but it is certainly a necessary condition. I cannot even conceive of a great person achieving remarkable things without this mindset as their foundation

Conversion: People ask me all the time what characteristics the best athletes I work with or see exhibit - here’s one that rarely gets mentioned - CONVERSION SKILLS - the ability to take a position with promise and potential to score and convert it into an actual score. It’s a lot like golf - the spectators are wowed by the impressive looking fairway drives and long shots; but in reality it’s the boring action of putting that distinguishes the champions from the guys you’ve never heard of. Learning to convert positions that have potential - top turtle position or side control for example - into actual scoring positions such as mount and rear mount - is one of the characteristics of the best player. If they have a chance to score, they almost always convert it successfully into points. It’s not the most exciting part of the sport, but it’s one of the most important to become a consistent winner.

A solid start makes an easier path to the finish: Jiu jitsu is a lot like life - we always hope for the best but usually have to dig ourselves out of disasters. The good news is that the strong defensive emphasis of jiu jitsu allows us to get out of bad situations in most cases. Nonetheless if you can get off to a good start, it makes the job of control leading to submission considerably easier. The two factors that determine how good or bad your start will be in jiu jitsu are usually DISTANCE and GRIP. As a general rule it’s easier to control distance from top position. The idea behind distance control in jiu jitsu is to place yourself in a position where you can get to grips with your opponents but he will find it difficult or risky to get to grips with you. You can use this initial advantage of distance to compound your advantage by taking a grip upon your opponent that gives you more control over him than he has over you. Going from one form of advantage (distance) to another (grip) sets a direction where you can try to keep advantage from start to finish - this is an ideal - obviously you won’t be able to maintain this at all times in every match - but it’s the ideal we strive for; and that ideal requires a good start. Make DISTANCE and GRIP dominance your first goal when engaging with opponents and the rest of the game will generally run smoother as a consequence

Victory in Dallas! The squad went 3-0 with every match won by submission here in Dallas tonight. South African purple belt phenom Luke Griffith wowed the audience with a spectacular submission via strangulation in the opening minutes of his match against a champion black belt. Keep your eyes on this guy! Brazilian super star Nicholas Meregali made his no gi debut and won with a beautifully applied arm bar in the closing seconds of the match. Gordon Ryan showed the kind of devastating pressure he is renown for to win via chest pressure submission against the very game emerging star Jacob Couch. It was fun taking the road trip from Austin to Dallas and having the event in the Dallas Cowboys home gym! Now it’s time to get back to Austin and get to work for the next performance! Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Counting down: Gordon Ryan, Brazilian super star Nicholas Meregali and talented South African up and comer Luke Griffith weighed in for their matches against very tough opponents tomorrow night here in Dallas, Texas. The main event event between Gordon and Jacob Couch came on very short notice and so will have an X factor to it that should be very interesting. Mr Meregali has begun the journey of taking his world class jiu jitsu into the no gi game so it will be fascinating to watch him in a very new environment. Luke Griffith goes up against a physically powerful champion black belt - but this purple belt phenom from Africa has greatly impressed us with his focus and skill development and is excited to show how far he has come in a short time. Tonight we will work out and then it stage time time tomorrow night 😜

Two approaches to strangulation: The classic and time honored approach to getting rear strangles in jiu jitsu has always been to establish position and control first and then strangle second. In the vast majority of cases this is definitely the better approach. However, you should not neglect the skill of setting the strangle first and then establishing the positional control as they fight to defend the initial threat of the strangle. Many opponents have strong defensive skills and it may not always be possible to sink a strangle after you get to rear mount. Sometimes you will get better results by immediately sinking your strangle arm in deep in the midst of a scramble, creating a strong threat and distraction that will allow you to then set your position. You will then find yourself with both position and a fully set strangle in place - which very few of your opponents will be able to stop. So yes - in the majority of cases, stick to the classic method - but don’t close your mind to occasionally reversing the usual order of things and attack the strangle first - especially when you’ve already found it difficult to break through with the usual methods.

Attack the obstacle - then the submission: Every move has its counters - no exceptions. When you see an opponent employing a counter to your move - attack the obstacles he has placed in your path rather than just grind away and hope perseverance will make your move work. If you’re trying to strangle an opponent from the back and he is fighting your strangle arm with his hands - attack his hands. Pin them down with your hands and legs so that these obstacles are now removed - allowing your strangle to now become effective again. In the midst of the action you must be able to identify the method and manner of your opponents counters and then run interference on those counters. That’s why we put such a high priority on a calm and relaxed demeanor as you work into your submissions - only then can you identify and counter the problems in front of you. Here, Gordon Ryan controls his opponents two defensive hands and is preparing to pin one down with his leg to completely remove them as a means of defense - only then will the strangle come in unopposed

Getting ready: Grappling super stars Gordon Ryan and Nicholas Meregali training with Georges St Pierre and Giancarlo Bodoni in preparation for this Friday night at WNO in Dallas Texas! This will be Mr Meregali’s No Gi debut. He has been training very hard and making great progress. Gordon will be taking his match on very short notice after brother Nicky had to pull out with knee problems. He takes on rising star Jacob Couch. Looking forward to seeing these two beasts in action in Dallas!!

Distance: one of the most important determinants of your actions towards an opponent when working from guard position is DISTANCE. Whichever attacks you choose to use against your opponent will have to figure in distance as the main factor in your choice. Some attacks are well suited to an opponent at long range, some at medium and some at very close range. It’s crucial that you have attacks for every range. I would rather have only three attacks from open guard but one for each of long, medium and close range; than have nine attacks at only one of these three ranges.

If you can clearly articulate the problem - it’s usually easy to find a solution: The only truly unsolvable problems in jiu jitsu are those where you don’t identify it as a problem - and as a result you never even begin looking for a solution. Just as bad is a situation where you fail to identify the problem accurately and look for solutions to the wrong problem, or a pseudo problem or a part of a problem. Always have a very clear understanding of two essential questions
WHAT EXACTLY AM I TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH?
And
WHAT ARE THE MAIN OBSTACLES THAT MAKE IT DIFFICULT TO ACCOMPLISH THESE GOALS?
If you keep a healthy focus on these two questions, you will find it much easier to create effective solutions to the obstacles that hold you back. THE FIRST STEP TO FINDING A SOLUTION IS ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTION. Know what you want to do and know what stands in your way and you’ll have a better chance getting the question right from the start.

Your strength is in your stance: It’s good to be strong. Strength helps almost every aspect of combat sports. Understand however, that your greatest source of strength in a match is not from your muscles but from your stance. Show me the strongest man in the room and make him perform in a poor stance and I’ll show you a man who gets manhandled by smaller, weaker opponents who hold a strong stance. In addition that strong man will quickly get exhausted as he compensates for failures in stance with muscular strength. If you want to increase your mat strength, your first step is to improve your stance. Understand that for all the major positions of Jiu jitsu there is an appropriate stance. If you’re just beginning Jiu jitsu and you have no clue what constitutes a good stance in a given position I suggest you watch footage of great champions in competition or even in training and watch not for the flashy elements, or who wins and who loses, as most people do, but rather, focus on observing their STANCE and try to replicate what you see. A well set stance maintained over the course of a match and adapting appropriately to every rapid change of position will give you greater improvements in mat strength and endurance than any attempt to add strength to your muscles alone

Lever and fulcrum: Strength plays a big role in the outcome of matches. Thankfully however, there is hope for the weak - it’s not how strong you are per se, but how much strength you can APPLY in a specific scenario that counts. Your APPLIED strength potential is very different from your raw strength. There are many factors such as position, fatigue level, balance and stance that can make a weak man feel strong and a strong man feel weak - but chief among them is LEVER AND FULCRUM. Just as a weak man can use a long lever to lift a heavy rock that a strong man cannot lift with his arms, so too, a weaker grappler can use his body to create lever and fulcrum to overwhelm a stronger grappler. Again, your raw strength is not nearly as important as your ability to apply the strength that you have - and if you apply it at the end of the lever over a well placed fulcrum - you will be plenty strong enough to get the job done against even your strongest foes. The weaker you are, the more diligent you must be in your study of making your body into lever and fulcrum, and the more you must trust in the mechanical power that it confers to you.

Reflections on the mounted position: The founders of Jiu jitsu conceived the mounted position as a platform for striking with fists and elbows in a fighting/self defense context. In this context the basic mounted position is devastating all by itself. However, when strikes are prohibited in grappling, it’s loses much of its bite. In grappling, the mounted position only really becomes dangerous again when you can move from the basic mount into other variations of the mounted position that facilitate submissions, in particular, variations that get either get your opponents arm extended up and over his head or that get you high up on opponents chest and perpendicular to your opponent. When you can transition from basic mount to mount variations - THEN the mount regains its bite and becomes dangerous even in a pure grappling context. Next time you’re mounted in grappling training - play around with high mounts and getting angles - don’t be satisfied with just getting mounted - that’s fine when you’re allowed to strike, but for submissions you’ll need the other variations to make your mount dangerous

Adaptations: It’s been fascinating watching the adaptation from gi to no gi for Nicholas Meregali. Things are still in early stages but his progress has been dramatic. Much of this progress can be attributed to Mr Meregali himself - he already had world champion skill level before he entered the door and in addition he has shown himself to be very professional and dedicated with his daily training schedule. In my experience the top Brazilians always bring a special quality of movement that is quite unique to their Jiu jitsu culture - a great flair for hip movement in bottom positions and misdirectional movement on top and a great propensity to find and maintain the back in a scramble - almost all the best Brazilians shine in these areas and none more so than Mr Meregali. Adding to this the more structured, step by step systematic approach we favor has been fascinating to observe. The results in the gym have been very impressive so far - still a big journey ahead but a journey is always more fun when the start is strong 😜😜 I’m excited to watch this great athlete step out on stage March 25 in his first no gi match at @flograppling Who’s Number One event!

Sad to report that Garry Tonon lost his title fight here in Singapore via KO to champion Thanh Le. Garry went early for one of his trademark heel hook attacks. Initially he did a good job turning his opponent and got good early pressure on the joint. Mr Le showed excellent composure and did a good job of turning back into the lock and fired a very accurately placed punch from on top that stunned Garry and then swarmed in with several more to take a fine and decisive victory. The referee did an excellent job of intervening quickly to prevent unnecessary damage. I’m with Garry now - he is fine physically - we will as always, get back to training, make adjustments and work towards our goals. Thank you as always for your support - now we head back to Texas to start on new challenges

When you’re climbing a rope or ladder - it’s always one step at a time: The general nature of control in Jiu jitsu is to begin contact at the extremities - the hands and feet - and work progressively up to the hips/waist and ultimately the head. Any attempt to skip steps along the way always comes at the price of sacrificing control. Don’t get me wrong - sometimes you have to skip steps and lunge for the next grip when circumstances demand, sometimes you can get away with it, but the best general pattern is the same as when climbing a rope, a ladder or a cliff - if you let go and try to jump to the next grip, bad things tend to happen. In most situations it’s better to take your time and focus on control. Progressively work from joint to joint, grip to grip until you secure the two focal points of Jiu jitsu - the hips/waist and head (and of course - this is Jiu jitsu so you must avoid your opponents guard/legs as you do this). Combat sports always look like scary chaos - and sometimes it is - but the goal is always to make it mundane step by step procedures whenever possible

Counting down: Garry Tonon @garrytonon will face by far his biggest challenge this week here in Singapore as he takes on @onechampionship 155 pound champion Thanh Le @thanhlemma for the World Title. Mr Tonon has gotten to his title fight after only six bouts and losing a year and a half to Covid interruption. Mr Le brings Olympic level Tae Keon Do skills merged with MMA training with double the number of fights Mr Tonon has been in and much longer in the fight game. He can kick with either leg in any direction, and in addition has developed powerful knee strikes both in the clinch and as a weapon in the open against grapplers who try to take him down. He has sniper like accuracy with both hands and once he hurts an opponent he swarms on the them relentlessly to get powerful finishes. This is one of the those match ups where both men are very dangerous to each other but in totally different ways. What Mr Tonon lacks in experience he makes up for with dangerous submissions game and ability to scramble from anywhere to advantage. This should be a fascinating match between two great athletes who have been matched together for over a year but for whom unforeseen delays and impediments kept delaying the bout - until now. Both men are in top shape and well prepared in their own way - hope you all enjoy the show!

The remarkable power of underhooks in ground grappling: It’s never enough to just pin someone with body weight in Jiu jitsu. To exert meaningful control you need to go further and anchor yourself to your opponents body in ways that
- shut down his ability to escape
- set up submission holds
- facilitate moving to another pin
Probably the single best best thing you can do to achieve these things is to underhook your opponents arm. This immediately anchors you to your opponent in ways that make escape difficult and control easy. This should be one of the first things you look to attain once you get to half guard top or any pin except north/south. Don’t settle for just pinning - get your underhook as soon as possible and you’ll double your effectiveness from top position

I am very pleased to announce the release of my latest instructional video - NEW WAVE MOUNTED PIN ATTACKS. In this video I look in detail at no gi mounted position and show exactly how my students first control opponents, then shut down their ability to escape, then attack their ability to breath and then finish them with refined versions of the most high percentage finishes from the mounted position. Gaining confidence in the mounted position without the GI can be a tough journey. Without a collar to stabilize you and set up strangles and arm bars it can feel like riding a barrel down a river when you’re perched atop an strongly bridging and twisting opponent. Yet the potential rewards are huge. It’s no coincidence that the two greatest grapplers of all time, Roger Gracie and Gordon Ryan, both favored the mount above all other top pins. If you want to know how to get the most out of this position and use it to dominate your toughest rivals and training partners check it out! Link in my Instagram Bio

Making your mounted position intimidating (even when you can’t punch): The original purpose of Jiu jitsu was to build a positional game where you attain what was considered the ultimate positions in a one on one fight without weapons - the mount and rear mount - from where you could rain down uncontested punches and elbows on an opponent to finish with either the strikes themselves, or submissions based on defensive reactions to those strikes. Now you have to ask yourself - are those positions still any good when you aren’t allowed to strike in grappling matches? Well, obviously rear mount is still a great position since strangleholds from the rear are the highest rated finishing method in Jiu jitsu. What about the front mount? Is that still the best position when you are grappling. At first look I would say no. The mounted position by itself is nothing special in a grappling match. It is actually less stable than most side or north south pins and offers fewer submission options. The magic of the mount is only realized WHEN YOU BEGIN TO MANIPULATE YOUR OPPONENTS ARMS INTO COMPROMISED POSITIONS SO THAT YOU CAN DIRECTLY ATTACK HIS BREATHING AND SET UP DEVASTATING SUBMISSION ENTRIES WHILST SHUTTING DOWN HIS BEST METHODS OF ESCAPE. It is only THEN that the mount becomes a scary position again when there are no strikes involved. The problem is that the mount is usually taught as a SCORING move - that is understandable since it’s the highest scoring move in the sport - but the scoring criteria are only based on your LEG positioning, whereas the PRESSURE, SUBMISSION and CONTROL aspects of the mount come from the interaction of your legs and the management of your opponents ARMS and head. If you are going to build a devastating mount without strikes, you need to go beyond the scoring criteria and into the PRESSURE criteria, which means not being satisfied with the position itself but going the extra distance and manipulating your opponent arms and head into vulnerable positions from where even breathing is difficult, forget about escape - and from where resistance to submission holds is exceedingly difficult. Only then does the mount become scary in grappling

Twenty seven hour flight to Singapore: At Narita Airport in Japan on the long haul to Singapore for Garry Tonon’s title fight against Champion Thanh Le @onechampionship Its reminder of how vast the mighty Pacific Ocean is. Just landed in Singapore where local Covid regulations require strict isolation for the athletes. Looking forward to a week of preparation back in Asia!

Space: Whenever you play bottom position in Jiu jitsu a fundamental requirement for you to be effective is enough space between you and your opponent for you to be able to move freely into your techniques. You seek a middle ground. Too much space and you won’t be close enough to actually apply techniques. Too little space and you won’t have adequate room in which to move to get into your techniques. A good rule of thumb is that if you have space to bring one knee and elbow close together under an opponent while still maintaining contact - you have enough space to move and enough proximity to be effective. This state of affairs won’t last long - a good top opponent will always seek to rob you of space - so once once you’ve created space it’s time to get to work!

When you have one - you have the other: There are certain submissions where if you have that submission, you always have easy access to another submission. So for example, if you have an inside heel hook, you almost always have easy access to an outside heel hook (among other options). One of the most important examples of this is the relationship between ARM BAR (juji gatame) and TRIANGLE (sankaku). It is almost always the case that if you have one, you can easily switch to the other. It’s important that you are always cognizant of this because there will be many times that a simple and prompt switch from one to the other will be necessary to finish a strongly resisting opponent. Interestingly these two options often have a symbiotic relationship - the more an opponent resists one, the easier it becomes to apply the other, so that the threat of one aids the application of the other. We all have a tendency to get locked into tunnel vision when focusing hard on a move - knowing ahead of time that certain moves are closely linked to others and that you always have that second option is a good way to restore the vision you need to see the full range of opportunities in front of you

Do you remember the first time you successfully applied a submission hold? What was it? Did it become one of your main moves? When you first begin Jiu jitsu is probably fair to say that the positional moves are easier for most people to apply than the inherently more complex submission holds. Most of us successfully apply guard passes and pin transitions long before our first submission. I remember my first submission clear as day - it was an arm bar from guard - it was a move I struggled even to drill well as a beginner. One day I was sparring from guard with another white belt and I clumsily threw my legs around his head and yanked with lots of enthusiasm and zero technique - to my shock and amazement he tapped! Probably he tapped more from caution than the actual effect of the move since it was poorly applied - but it didn’t matter! Now the arm bar was my freaking move!! 😂😂😂 For the next month I began in guard and that’s the only damn move I tried 😂😂 This focus actually made my arm bar considerably better and by the end of the month I was actually having a lot of success with it! Remember: SUCCESS BEGETS SUCCESS. If you have early success with a move that is considered fundamental (not some crazy move that works once a year) - take it as a sign that you ought to focus on it for a while and see how far you can push that early success! You will often find that your body has its own way of showing where your talents are independent of your mind - when it speaks to you with initial success - sometimes it’s good to listen!

Pinning - get stable first, create pressure second, and work for submissions third: The essential goal in classical Jiu jitsu is to get opponents into the two types of mounted positions - front and rear - and from there, finish them. This is a time tested and true tactic that works well at all levels and should be heavily emphasized in your early training. When working in the mounted position on top of opponents, take your development in stages. Your first goal is just to gain STABILITY. Even that can be tough when you begin since opponents will be bucking and bridging and twisting to get out from under you. Once you feel you hold people for extended periods of time, the next challenge is to put them under PRESSURE and duress. This is usually done by pressure on the jaw via cross face grips and keeping your chest on their face to hamper breathing. Understand that the more duress you can put opponents under, the easier submissions will become as they react to the uncomfortable pressure of your pin. Only then do we work on the final goal of submitting people. Start with STABILITY and PRESSURE - the better you are in these two skills, the easier the final goal of submission will be.

The mount and the rear mount are always linked: The mount and rear mount are the two highest scoring positions in Jiu jitsu. At any given time - whenever you have one - you are only one turn of your opponents body from the other. Learning to play between mount and rear mount is a huge part of your journey to developing a devastating pinning game. If you squeeze too tightly with your legs you lose this ability to move effortlessly from one to the other. Sometimes you have to open up and relax a little to let them move themselves from mount to rear mount and vice versa. Understand however, that if you play loose with your legs, you’ll generally have to play tight with your upper body to compensate. Here, Gordon Ryan expertly plays the gray zone between mount and rear mount - it could go either way at this point - which way it falls will depend on his opponent - but either way he will score the maximum and be in a fine position to finish

The more risks you take in the gym - the less risk you’ll have to take when it counts: It’s natural to want to play a conservative, low risk game in the gym sometimes. Our training partners are often very tough and skilled. This will make you want to play a low risk game centered around your best moves and staying away from your partners best weapons. By staying in that comfort zone however, you limit your exposure to new techniques and new situations. Competition has a way of putting you in situations you didn’t count on happening and exposing you to attacks you aren’t used to defending. This is a consequence of the fact that in competition you will face opponents you know nothing about and who come from a totally different coaching program which may emphasize very different aspects of the sport in ways very different from what you do. Learn to really USE the gym environment to make yourself better. The gym is a place to TAKE RISKS AND EXPERIMENT - not a place to win at all costs - that’s what competition is for.

Alarm clocks and Jiu jitsu: Imagine a friend challenged you to solve a fairly complex math question within a set time. He sat you in a chair, placed some paper and a pen on the table in front of you and set a clock. Just as you begin the challenge the clock emits a loud and continuous alarm sound - perhaps someone else set the alarm earlier in the day. What’s the first step you’d take to solve this math problem? YOU WOULD TURN OFF THE DAMN ALARM!!! It’s very difficult to solve complex problems when distracted. Jiu jitsu is no different. When you go to engage with an opponent it’s always good to begin by SHUTTING DOWN THE OTHER FELLOWS GAME TO THE GREATEST DEGREE POSSIBLE BEFORE IMPOSING YOUR OWN. This means you can focus without the distraction of your opponents attacks whilst doing your thing. Work is always better without distraction - make sure your Jiu jitsu work is also done with the least possible distraction by consciously shutting down your opponents attacking options before trying to impose your own.

I am very happy to see that my teacher Renzo Gracie has just been admitted to the ADCC Hall of Fame! Renzo was my teacher from white belt to black belt and it was my greatest honor to be his longest serving teacher at his school in NYC. He was two times ADCC champion and won a super fight against former ADCC champion Sanae Kikuta in 2017 - nineteen years after his first ADCC gold medal!! Mr Gracie was a true pioneer in ADCC - the events were totally different in those early days than they are now. You were often matched against people you’d never seen before, against styles you had no experience of, in a rule set that was totally new. Renzo competed while running his own school in a city and training mostly for MMA instead of specialized grappling and coaching himself - an amazing feat. In that time he created an room of great talent in a city that had no Jiu jitsu culture whatsoever and yet produced great athletes, champions and teachers such as Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra, Rodrigo Gracie, Shawn Williams and many more. In time he became a very important coach and cornerman for Roger Gracie and cornered him to one of the greatest ADCC performances of all time at the Long Beach ADCC in California. I am so happy to see this great athlete, teacher and mentor get recognition from ADCC for his achievements! And Renzo, from me and all your students from the earliest years to today - thank you for all you did for us, for giving us technical vision when we were blind, the best training room an athlete could hope for, a friendly word when we needed to be picked up, a kick in the ass when we needed to be pushed and the best times of our lives. Thank you Sensei - and congratulations! 🤗🤗🤗 No one deserves it more 🇧🇷🇺🇸

The guard position will always be the most important position in Jiu jitsu: The guard most always be the foundation of your game. The guard represents the single best method of fighting effectively from bottom position for extended periods of time that enables you to protect yourself from a single unarmed attacker in a real fight and to employ almost the full arsenal of submissions against an opponent whilst also allowing you sweep your way into top position or stand back up to your feet without exposing your back if the situation should demand it. Nature doesn’t do a very good job preparing us for fighting effectively from our back. If you watch two completely untrained people fight on the ground whoever gets top position generally prevails. However, with knowledge and training you can make this position perform in ways that seem near miraculous. However much of a struggle and no matter how initially frustrating it may be, make sure you focus the majority of your early training on bottom position and developing a solid guard. Whenever you are outgunned, exhausted or smaller, it will be the first and best refuge for you to shelter in and regain the initiative.

Isolation: The most impressive displays of strength from the human body all involve the unity of the body working as a whole, arms, legs and core moving with unity of purpose. Our bodies are strong when they are unified. When it comes time to play the game of Jiu jitsu you want to reduce your opponents strength to the greatest degree possible. The best way to do this is to isolate his limbs. A single limb in isolation is not strong. THE ESSENCE OF JIU JITSU IS TO MATCH THE UNIFIED STRENGTH OF YOUR WHOLE BODY AGAINST THE ISOLATED WEAKNESS OF AN OPPONENTS SINGLE LIMB - whether it be leg, arm or neck. If you can do this you can make a strong man weak and easy to control.

The mount is mastery: When I first began Jiu jitsu I was deeply impressed by the power of the mounted position for self defense and fighting. However, when I grappled my experience with the mount was like that of most people - it can be a frustrating position - it’s great when you can punch and elbow in a fight, but rather less useful in grappling when you can only do submissions. I felt that the mount was not as stable as side and north/south pins. It wasn’t as good for strangles as the rear mount and it had a rather limited number of submissions compared with other pins and these submissions were tricky to apply from the relatively unstable mount position. As such in my early years I didn’t spend much time working on mount skills outside of mma training. As I spent more time in the game I came to see the error of my ways. Even in grappling the mount can be a devastating position when used well. There is a reason why the two greatest Jiu jitsu pinners of all time, Roger Gracie and Gordon Ryan, used them MOUNT as their primary pin above all others. Even if you currently feel the mount isn’t your favorite position in grappling and that it’s frustrating getting reversed from there or falling off when you attempt submissions - stick with it - the long term benefits are enormous. A real sign of mastery in Jiu jitsu is the ability to get to the mount, maintain the mount against strong resistance and finish from there

One of the single biggest differences between BEGINNER and EXPERT in Jiu jitsu is that experts employ their HEAD while grappling and physical means of pushing, blocking, trapping their opponents to a MUCH greater degree than most beginners. Most beginners have a natural tendency to shy away from head contact and often look away from opponents or hang back with their head for fear of hurting themselves or training partner. This is something you have to get over. You head is one of your most effective mechanical tools in grappling. Use it whenever you can. Here I use head position combined with an underhook to block a training partners ability to move his own head and thus facilitate a half guard pass. This is just one of numerous ways you can use your head to gain advantage or defend yourself in grappling. Start experimenting with head position as a means to increase the effectiveness of your favorite positional moves or as a way to stop your opponent performing his moves - you will soon find there are many effective ways to do so!

If he can’t grip you, then he can’t control you: It’s often a good idea to focus on controlling your opponents hands and arms whenever you feel they are controlling you with grip. Some opponents just feel like once they put hands on you they can dominate. Don’t give them the luxury of putting grips on you. Control their hands or get your hands and elbows inside their arms and you will severely limit their ability to use their superior strength through grips upon your body. You don’t want to play this game exclusively as it can degenerate into a negative game where you focus too much on interfering with what the other fellow is doing rather than focusing primarily on what you want to do, but used for short periods of time and/or specific opponents it can be a big help when fighting bigger and stronger opponents

Changing angle changes everything: Whenever you are in engaged against a skilled opponent he will adopt a stance that is designed to shut down your ability to attack him FROM YOUR CURRENT POSITION. However, if you CHANGE your current position by taking an ANGLE on your opponent, that stance will no longer be as effective at stopping your attacks. Changing your angle relative to your opponent changes things considerably and makes possible what was impossible just a second before. Make a habit of moving to a new angle prior to attacking and you’ll soon find that you are breaking through defenses that were previously shutting you out.

Quintessential Jiu jitsu moves: Do you think there are certain moves that represent the spirit of Jiu jitsu better than others? I’ve always believed that among the various submissions, the TRIANGLE and the REAR STRANGLE are more representative of the ideals of Jiu jitsu than the others. The rear strangle because it represents the Jiu jitsu ideal of ASYMMETRY IN ATTACKING POTENTIAL. A central theme of Jiu jitsu is to get to positions where you can attack your opponent at will, but he cannot attack you in return. Because the rear strangle is innately tied to dominant position, it is extremely difficult for an opponent even to defend himself, forget about attacking you. You on the other hand, can attack with the single most high percentage finishing hold in the sport - it doesn’t get any better than that. The triangle represents a different ideal of Jiu jitsu - the ideal of FIGHTING YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY WITH YOUR LOWER BODY. The human body is set up in a way where the strength of our lower body is far greater than that of our upper body. If you want to be capable of beating bigger and stronger opponents, you must be able to grapple their upper body with your lower body - the triangle is among the finest examples of this in operation. I love all the major submissions of Jiu jitsu, but these two in particular stand out for their alignment with some of the most fundamental ideals of Jiu jitsu.

The power of wrestling! We had a visit today from some truly outstanding wrestlers - Jason Nolf and Geno Morelli from the Penn State program came in and deeply impressed everyone with their skill on the mats! We’ve been extremely impressed in the past by Penn State wrestlers Roman Bravo Young and Dan Vallimont - that program seems to create wrestlers who adapt extremely well to Jiu jitsu. Wrestlers who exhibit a smoother, movement and set up based style (J’den Cox is a good example) seem to make the adaptation to Jiu jitsu easier than other wrestlers. It was a great experience watching them in action - Mr Nolf successfully performed his patented Dixie roll in live sparring! It’s always a pleasure to see and learn from talented visitors and they don’t get more talented than these fellows. Interestingly the general pattern for the future is towards increasing integration of wrestling with jiu jitsu rather than the silly tribal rivalry between grappling arts that was prevalent when I began. We learned a bunch of stuff today that could easily be integrated into Jiu jitsu and make it a better sport for the future

Nothing ever gets better by panicking: Pretty much every time we spar your opponent will do something that catches you and you’ll have to dig yourself out of trouble. It’s perfectly normal to feel some anxiety when an opponent is getting into a position that could finish you or score on you - but realize this from the start - however natural it is to feel the beginnings of panic when things go wrong, PANIC NEVER HELPS PERFORMANCE. It will be SOUND PERFORMANCE that gets you out of bad situations, not EMOTIONAL ZEAL. Step number one in getting out of bad situations is the simple admonition to CALM THE FUCK DOWN - everything is secondary to that. When things go wrong your mental direction should always be towards increased FOCUS and ALERTNESS, never panic. Next time your battling out of danger, don’t start with panic and blind instinct - start with ASSESSMENT and CALCULATION - and realize that the only way this is possible is with a relatively calm mind.

It’s a game of posture: Good Jiu jitsu players always feel very difficult to attack for a simple reason - they are almost always in good posture and have the discipline to maintain that good posture through an entire match. Your job in Jiu jitsu always comes down to this simple edict: Maintain your own posture at all times whilst doing your utmost to break your opponents posture. Who wins and who loses in a tightly contested match will usually be decided by who did a better job of maintaining their own posture while undermine that of their opponent. Next time you feel stymied in your attacks against a tough opponent - start your attacks with an attack on his POSTURE and THEN the actual attack itself. I promise you this will garner you better results. Every position in Jiu jitsu has a posture appropriately it - once you know each posture and can correlate it the positions in which it is needed, then it’s a matter of maintaining yours while breaking his - that is the essence of the entire game

If you want to ruin your opponents day - nothing beats a high pressure pin: A big part of grappling is fatiguing an opponent over time. There are many good ways to do it, one of the very best will always be to get to strong upper body pins with chest to chest contact. This puts the onus on your opponent to recover his position against your positioning and body weight and set in the context of further threat of you advancing to another pin and increasing your score. This creates a lot of physical and mental stress for an opponent and allows you to cook him over time. Learning to read your opponents fatigue level is important. It’s easy from a pin due to the close proximity. Once you ascertain that he is starting to tire - start increasing the pressure. You can do it mechanically with methods such as cross facing and you can do it tactically with threats of submission and transitions to other pins. Learn to use the inherent power of pinning to develop your skill in INDUCING EXHAUSTION - a skill that you must master to beat your toughest opponents!

Finding a diamond: There are a vast number of moves in Jiu jitsu, your job is to first master the fundamentals so that you have a strong foundation and no obvious weaknesses for an opponent to exploit, and then the fun part - selecting a small group of favorite moves that will define your game. How does this selection process occur? How do you come to choose what are to be your main weapons? There are several main methods. The first is exposure through a teaching program. I was blessed to have an excellent teacher, Renzo Gracie, who always did an excellent job of exposing us to a wide and interesting variety of moves so that we had a deep set of choices to work from. The second is talented mentors or sparring partners. Sometimes a busting athlete will come in with a new perspective or moves you aren’t familiar with but which seem very effective to you and this inspires you to emulate them. Third is watching great athletes from the past and present and being inspired by something you observe in their game. The fourth and most important is personal experimentation on the mat. Some days you try a move and find that it just clicks for you. Something about it seems more natural and easier than most moves and you apply it well from the start. When this happens, don’t ignore it. This may well be a sign that you’ve stumbled on to something important. When this happens don’t just be happy with a good application of the move that day and then forget it - take it as a sign to engage in further research and study and see how far you can take that promising start!! Understand that sometimes you’ll find that it leads to a dead end - better to try and lead to nothing a few times but occasionally find a diamond that can transform your game than ignore them all and go through your career with no diamonds in your collection. Next time you find that you have a natural affinity for a move, don’t just smile and forget about - see just how far you can run with it!

Nicholas Meregali and the power of routine: The great Brazilian champion Nicholas Meregali has been training with us this week. In one of our first conversations he said something important that be be of great value to you. Having just arrived in Austin I asked him how things were going and whether he was well situated for training. He replied that everything was fine, he had an AirBnB and car and that now all he needed was to find a supermarket and ESTABLISH A DAILY TRAINING ROUTINE. That was his first concern - to establish a ROUTINE. This is the great characteristic I see in all champions. Human greatness is based on developing SKILLS and skills can only be developed by following a training regimen over time - that is, to establish and follow a ROUTINE. A life of routine is often disparaged as a poor way to live life. I agree that a life of routine is terrible if you are stuck in a routine that is totally divorced from your life passions. If you have a routine job that you hate, surrounded by people you can’t stand, in a location you despise - then yes - a life of routine would be awful. However, if you have a deep passion in your life, then devoting yourself to a routine aligned with that passion, a routine that every day brings you a little closer to a cherished goal, then this is one of the best life directions you can ever have. So find that passion and build a routine around it - let the power of daily routine build skills over time, skills that one day, when fate puts opportunity in front of you, will let you shine

Controlled but dangerous: There is a huge difference between a match where you find yourself against an opponent from whom you feel no danger versus one where you feel the opponent can hurt you at any moment. In the first case there is a light hearted feel to the match, in the second case you will feel significant stress. More significantly you will take FAR LESS RISK when matched against a dangerous opponent and play with a safety first attitude that will inhibit your game a little. The point is this - WHEN PLAYING A DANGEROUS OPPONENT YOU WILL PLAY A VERY DIFFERENT GAME THAN WHEN FACING AN OPPONENT FOR WHOM YOU FEEL NO FEAR. Make yourself dangerous and opponents will play a very respectful game against you. When I say dangerous I do NOT mean RECKLESSLY DANGEROUS. No one enjoys being being matched against someone who intentionally or uncontrollably injures training partners. Play like that and very soon you won’t have anyone to play with. I mean someone who plays with control but who conveys the feeling that if they wanted to do harm, they absolutely have the firepower to do so. The best way for you to create this aura is to have a STRONG SUBMISSIONS GAME. Nothing scares opponents in Jiu jitsu as much as the threat of being FINISHED. Make sure that you devote time in your training to developing a strong submissions arsenal and you’ll always get a healthy respect from all opponents that will result in them taking fewer risks and attacks against you for fear of the consequences. Never be happy with a neutered Jiu jitsu that presents no danger to opponents. What makes Jiu jitsu a MARTIAL art is submissions - never lose sight of this

Had a great day training with this monster from Brazil - Nicholas Meregali came in to train with the team and impressed everyone with his attacking flair and movement. It’s very impressive to see a player who trained almost entirely in a gi adapt very quickly and effectively to no gi techniques and tactics. At the end of the day Jiu jitsu is Jiu jitsu - whether you’re wearing clothing or not - the goal is to control the body and good Jiu jitsu will always do this whether the body is covered in cloth or not. Looking forward to seeing how far this immensely talented athlete can take his no gi game!

Jiu jitsu in a nutshell: Sometimes it’s very helpful to have a simple set of instructions that can cover a lot of complex ground and give you a clear sense of direction when complexity makes things foggy. For me, Jiu jitsu always comes down to three major directives
1 - When in bottom position always strive to keep your legs (guard) between you and your opponent
2 - When in top position always strive to get past your opponents legs (guard) and into upper body pins.
3 - Always seek to get behind your opponent whenever possible.
These simple rules express the main tactical desiderata of Jiu jitsu. Almost all the myriad techniques of the game are just a means to these ends. In time you will learn exceptions to these rules. You will learn to exploit an opponents overly strict adherence to them; but at the start of your journey they are the compass that will give you good direction in the chaos and confusion of sparring. In some ways the game is very complex, but at its core it is very simple. You can learn these three simple rules in less than a minute and they can guide you for a lifetime

Great night of grappling in Austin: Tonight the regional grappling show FIGHT TO WIN came to Austin and put on another great show at the Sheraton Hotel. Emerging athletes Giancarlo Bodoni and Luke Griffith had outstanding performances against very tough opponents with Mr Bodoni winning with a finely applied heel hook and Mr Griffith via rear strangle - both athletes sat to guard early but used wrestling reversals from bottom to get up into top position and create the pressure needed to get their submission victories. It’s a great chance for developing athletes to get stage experience and showcase their skills in front of an audience. Thank you to Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan for fine cornering and coaching work. Back to the gym tomorrow to keep working on those skills!

Neither of you is the same person in the tenth minute of a tough match as you were in the first minute: Everyone feels tough in the first minute. It’s natural to be intimidated by the initial clash with an opponent who feels like Hercules when you first get a hold of him. Have faith. Understand that as time passes his strength and explosiveness will diminish. Even mental attributes such as aggression will be affected by the passage of time. Note that this goes both ways. You too, will be affected by the passage of time. Feeling of physical fatigue can start an inner voice pushing you towards panic and defeatism. Your job is control your own inner voices while activating your opponents. How to do this is a huge topic, but it starts with the simple realization that YOU MUST NOT BE OVERLY INTIMIDATED BY YOUR INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF YOUR OPPONENTS POWER AND AGGRESSION BECAUSE TIME WILL MAKE IT WANE. If your opponent feels like he has the strength and aggression of a wild animal, take heart and know that with every passing second things get better not worse. Most matches will be decided by who you and your opponent are in the tenth minute - not the first.

Getting under opponents: When it’s time to fight underneath an opponent it’s natural to want to keep their weight as far away from you as possible. This can certainly be an effective tactic, but there is much to be said for the opposite approach - IF YOU ARE GOING TO FIGHT UNDERNEATH SOMEONE, THEN GET AS FAR UNDER THEM AS YOU CAN. The advantage of this is that you can get under their center of gravity and LIFT people, and if you can get that incredible feeling of of effortless lifting that comes with good positioning under their center of gravity - you can make even the heaviest people feel light. That’s when the most beautiful sweeps in Jiu jitsu become possible and you can whip an opponent over and take top position in style

The general nature of Jiu jitsu is that of climbing the body to the hips and head: All Jiu jitsu is based on connection - no physical connection means no Jiu jitsu. The goal of Jiu jitsu is control. The best part of the body to control is the head with the hips a close second. Nonetheless is very difficult and even hazardous to attempt to start by connecting directly to the head and hips. The great pattern of Jiu jitsu is to begin with the extremities and work methodically up to the hips and then the head - like climbing - you don’t begin at the peak - you start at the base and work your way up. In Jiu jitsu you begin at the wrists and ankles and work up to the elbows and knees, from there to the waist/hips and from there to the head. Think about passing guard. Contact usually begins with your hands on an opponents ankles, then closing distance and gripping a knee, then battling forward and getting to the hips and from there battling up to chest to chest position and capturing the head to solidify the pin. This general pattern of climbing from the extremities to the waist and head is the eternal pattern of Jiu jitsu - it must become the pattern of your thinking and acting in the sport and in your training and in your mindset. Like all things in life there are rarely shortcuts to the final destination you seek - climb methodically and be prepared to start again every time you fail - your patience in observing this basic feature of Jiu jitsu will be rewarded

Make use of the most distinctive features of Jiu jitsu: There are many distinctive features of Jiu jitsu that separate it from other grappling sports. One that doesn’t get much attention but which is of the greatest importance is that Jiu jitsu, unlike wrestling, judo and sambo, score CHEST TO BACK pins. In judo, only chest to chest pins where you have passed your opponent legs count. In wrestling only pins that touch your opponents back and shoulders to the floor count. Sambo is similar to judo except that they do allow pins when you have not passed an opponents legs in some circumstances. None of them score rear mount as a pin. In Jiu jitsu the rear mount if the highest scoring position (along with front mount). It score twice as much as a takedown or sweep and more than passing guard. Not only is it the biggest scorer in points, it is also the number one position for submitting opponents. In addition it is the safest position in the sport. There is very little an opponent can do offensively from there. As such, Jiu jitsu athletes put a higher value of getting to the rear mount than anything else in the game. It may not score in other grappling sports - but in Jiu jitsu it is the king position. If your goal is excellence in Jiu jitsu then you must make excellence in taking, maintaining and finishing from rear mount as your number one priority.

Making yourself stronger and opponents weaker: It’s a great thing to be physically strong and it will definitely help you in any match. As such every Jiu jitsu athlete has a responsibility to work diligently on their strength and other physical attributes. Nonetheless, the ideal of Jiu jitsu is always to put the primary focus on MAKING THE OTHER FELLOW WEAKER RATHER THAN YOURSELF STRONGER. The human body is set up in such a way that it can exhibit impressive strength in good postures, but is pathetically weak when those postures are broken. For example, you can make the strongest arm feel very weak indeed by putting it behind the strongman’s back. If you can maintain good posture while breaking that of your opponent you can create the impression of greater strength even when grappling opponents who are objectively stronger than you. You know you’re doing well when strong opponents are praising you for your strength when you know damn well they are stronger than you.

There are many forms of advantage in combat sports - but ANGLE will always be one of my absolute favorites. It’s never easy to beat tough opponents by barging in the front door, it gets a lot easier when you sneak in the side door. Get to your angle and get to your winning positions 😜😜

Push and pull: All grappling is based on contact and connection with an opponent and a large factor in whether that connection will be favorable to you or your opponent will come from your ability to push and pull your opponent in ways that create advantage for you. PUSHING creates and maintains space; PULLING denies space. The COMBINATION of pulling and pushing off balances and breaks an opponents posture. LEARNING TO USE PUSHING AND PULLING TOGETHER KEEP SPACE WHEN YOU NEED IT, DENY SPACE WHEN YOU DON’T AND JOLT AND OFF BALANCE OPPONENTS IN NEUTRAL POSITIONS TO BREAK THEIR STANCE IS THE FOUNDATION OF GRAPPLING. Next time you put hands on an opponent, don’t just grip them - PLAY WITH PULL AND PUSH TO GAIN ADVANTAGE FROM THE ONSET OF CONTACT!

The ideal of classical Jiu jitsu is to use your legs to fight your opponents upper body: One of the defining elements in the sport of Jiu jitsu it is the heavy emphasis it puts on using the LEGS as the primary means of connection and control of an opponents body. The mount, knee on belly and rear mount are the only pins that score in Jiu jitsu - and they all use the legs to connect to opponents upper body. The guard is the only acceptable bottom position and it uses the legs to connect to opponent. In top position the whole game is to prevent an opponent connecting to you with his legs because of how dangerous that can be. The best submissions holds either use the legs directly (triangles, arm bar) to control and finish opponents or indirectly to anchor you to an opponent (rear strangle etc). If you’re doing most of your work with your hand and arms - YOU ARE DOING IT WRONG. Make sure every time you train you make the mental association between your legs and your opponent. Make sure the bulk of the workload is done by your legs. Be sure to emphasize training your legs for flexibility and strength over everything else. Your legs are the key to greatness in this game

Pressure: The single greatest determinant of victory or defeat in grappling is the ability (or lack of) to apply PRESSURE OVER TIME on an opponent. Remember always that the opponent you face in the first minute of a match is not the same person as you face in the tenth minute of that match. Pressure wears us down, makes us poor decision makers, makes us settle for acceptable outcomes rather than optimal, makes us incapable or unwilling to perform moves we are capable of. The more pressure you impose upon an opponent the more dramatic will be the degrading of the opponents abilities over time. The skill of pressure fighting is to be able to CONSTANTLY KEEP YOUR OPPONENTS WORK RATE HIGHER THAN YOUR OWN OVER TIME AND ULTIMATELY HIGHER THAN WHAT HE IS CAPABLE OF SUSTAINING FOR THAT LENGTH OF TIME, WHILE KEEPING YOUR OWN WORK RATE WITHIN ACCEPTABLE LIMITS. Learning and expanding your repertoire of techniques is your first goal in Jiu jitsu but as you progress you will find it becomes more and more about the ability to take what you’ve learned and apply it with pressure over time.

The great advantage of half guard passing: There are many excellent ways to pass a tough opponents guard and get into your upper body pins; but the one I always favor above all others is half guard passing - why? The vast majority of guard passes always finish with control of an opponents head as the final step. You generally begin at the feet, progress to the knees and then beat the all important hips before settling into the penultimate step of pinning the head and shoulders. It’s almost always LEGS AND HIPS first and HEAD last. Half guard switches that all around. Most half guard passes begin with control of the head and shoulders first and then passing the hips second. This fundamental change of order creates a very impressive degree of control in half guard passing. Of all the methods of control, HEAD CONTROL is the most powerful, and the fact that you get it EARLIER in the case of half guard passing makes for an impressive improvement in control over most other passing methods. This allows it to be used by every body type, age category and people who would be considered un-athletic. You can truly use it to render a very athletically talented opponent ineffective.

The positional core of Jiu jitsu is the task of getting to the mount or rear mount position: Jiu jitsu is a complex game with a great many moves. Underneath that complexity however, is a very simple desiderata - GET TO THE MOUNT OR REAR MOUNT POSITION. The mount and rear mount are the two highest scoring moves in Jiu jitsu for a reason - no other positions offer such an imbalance of attacking potential of the athlete holding these positions versus the athlete defending them. As such they represent the philosophical core of the sport - to attain a position where you can reliably attack an opponent with far greater effect than he can attack you. All of the takedowns, sweeps, passes and lesser pins are just a means to the ends of mount and rear mount. You don’t need mount or rear mount to submit people, but they are damn good positions to do so, so they fit in well with a submission specialist’s game as well as they do a positional player; and of course, when you simply can’t get an opponent to tap - you’ll need a positional game to win the day. Make sure your positional game has a goal - and remember always that the entire rules, point structure and philosophy of Jiu jitsu is to make the mount and the back the goal - make your training and your mentality line up with this and your game will always be in the spirit of Jiu jitsu

When you’ve got a simple goal…Very often Jiu jitsu requires us to enter into fast and complex scrambles where it’s hard to know what to do because there are so many variables and so little time to figure things out. My advice is this: play scrambles with a few simple heuristics - simple rules of thumb that give you a CLEAR SENSE OF DIRECTION in the most confusing scrambles. Here, Georges St Pierre and his partner are in fast motion. There are good possibilities for both athletes. From Georges’ perspective the heuristic KEEP YOUR OPPONENTS HIPS BETWEEN YOUR KNEES gives clear and concise advise that will direct him through the scramble and allow him to finish in winning position. The more complex and dynamic the situation - the more valuable simple and effective rules become for guidance.

The story of the Kenyan runner: One day early in my coaching career I was teaching in Manhattan, when a slender but athletic fellow came in and enquired about beginning Jiu jitsu. He explained that he was a former Olympic level runner for Kenya in the 3000m Steeplechase. He now lived in NYC where he made a living as a running partner - he had clients who liked to jog and he ran next to them as a pacemaker/coach. He was booked all day every day and so must have been in phenomenal shape as he essentially ran all day for a living. He had seen some MMA and was curious to try some grappling. We arranged to meet on Sunday morning for an introduction class since that was the only free time he had and begin a Jiu jitsu session. That Sunday he came in for class and began with a warm up jogging around the dojo. When you see most people run (myself Included) it’s a rather sorry sight - a clumsy, heavy gait where the movement seems forced and inefficient. This man ran like a mix of gazelle and cheetah. I watched in amazement and admiration as he effortlessly performed lap after lap with steps so long and light that it appeared he barely touched the ground. Never in my life before or since have seen such perfection in running movement. After a while he came to begin grappling. We did some basic pin escapes and drilled them for a while and then began light sparring with him trying to escape some pins. Shockingly after just a few minutes the runner was completely exhausted, this despite the fact that he appeared a thousand times fitter than most Jiu jitsu athletes will ever be. We stopped and rested and then went again. This time both of his hamstrings went into spasm from exertion and we had to stop the lesson as he was totally exhausted and had to run with his clients for the rest of the day. It was a surprising thing to see someone so athletically gifted in one area become so tired so quickly in another. Of course if I tried to do his workout I would be equally exhausted also. It’s a valuable lesson that there is much specificity to what we call fitness. Make sure SPARRING is the basis of your fitness work - nothing else creates the specificity of Jiu jitsu as well

In a tough match against an opponent your own size and skill level you will probably get less than three opportunities to finish - your training must reflect this reality. As much as we like to learn new novelties and tricks, it must be understood that these are generally of use only when matched against easy opponents. In a tough match you will always be forced back to your most trusted weapons. MAKE SURE YOUR BEST WEAPONS ARE YOUR MAJOR FOCUS IN MATCH PREPARATION AND THAT YOU CONSTANTLY LOOK FOR WAYS TO IMPROVE YOUR PERFORMANCE OF THEM AND ADD NEW SET UPS, VARIATIONS AND FOLLOW UPS TO KEEP THEM EVOLVING. You will be judged NOT BY HOW MANY MOVES YOU KNOW, but rather by HOW MANY YOU CAN APPLY ON THE TOUGHEST OPPONENTS, and this number is quite small EVEN FOR THE BEST IN THE WORLD.

Finding your pace: One of the most important factors in determining the outcome of a grappling match is the least discussed - the PACE of the match. Beyond all the techniques and tactics lies the overall pace of the two athletes. The pace will determine their work rate and if the work rate of an athlete exceed what he is physically capable of for an extended period of time, he will lapse into exhaustion. Exhaustion is almost always a precursor of defeat. Work rate is a fascinating concept. You can work in different ways. Sometimes the work will be isometric, with a demand for static holding strength for time. Other times the work will be movement, with heavy aerobic demands. Other times it will be explosive speed work. Each is tiring in a different way, and most importantly, different athletes usually excel at one type of work but not others. You can exhaust an athlete with excellent aerobic fitness by making him work hard in isometric situations such as pins. You can exhaust an athlete who has great isometric strength and endurance by engaging in a speed and movement match. Learning to keep a match in your preferred work type and away from an opponents preferred work type is a big part of winning tough matches. Know your own body. Know what kind of physical work you best engage in. Create a game and style that keeps you inside that type of work and the ability to keep an opponent there as well. This can often be as important as your skill and tactics in bringing you victory.

Conversation: I had the great pleasure of a conversational podcast with Lex Fridman and my two great students Georges St Pierre and Gordon Ryan. Mr Fridman went through some great questions on sports performance and greatness and Mr Ryan and Mr St Pierre have some brilliant replies. We chatted for over three hours on everything from Jiu jitsu to mma to animal combat to alien life 😂😂 It was a truly great honor me to work with these two kings of their respective sports for so many years and it was a joy to reflect on it all in conversation with Lex. The podcast should be released pretty soon - hope you all enjoy it!!

What’s the hurry? Submission holds all have their own character. Sometimes speed of application really does help get the breakthrough. Other times a submission hold can be a long process of control and switching from one position, grip or even a different submission altogether. As a general rule - submissions where you position an opponent on their back or butt tend to be the slower paced submissions where it’s wise to emphasize control first and submission second; whilst submissions performed is rolling on to hands and knees with chest down to floor are usually best performed at a quicker pace - though there are exceptions. The most important thing is this - LEARN TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THOSE SUBMISSIONS THAT OPERATE BEST WITH HIGH PACE EXECUTION AND THISE WITH LOW PACE EXECUTION AND PERFORM THEM AT THE SPEED APPROPRIATE TO THE SITUATION. Understand that pace of execution is an important factor in the success or failure of most submissions and that mixing up speed versus control usually has bad consequences. When slow and steady is appropriate - go slow and steady. When fast and aggressive is appropriate - go in fast and aggressive. PACE is one of the least talked about factors in the application of submission holds but one of the most important for good results. You’ll need to be able to go both fast and slow - and crucially, recognize when you use one and when to use the other

Tactics without technique won’t work at all; but technique without tactics will never allow you to beat someone as good as you or better. One is more important than the other, but you’ll need both to maximize your potential.

Priorities: Whenever you’re in a bad situation understand this: You will be faced with a set of dangers and problems. Your job is to assess WHICH DANGER IS THE MOST IMMEDIATE AND DRAL WITH THAT FIRST. THEN TO RANK THE OTHER PROBLEMS AND DANGERS AND DEAL WITH EACH IN TURN, BEING SURE TO DEAL WITH EACH PROBLEM PROPERLY BEFORE TURNING TO THE NEXT. Be aware that this can all happen quickly and usually the progression through the problems is fairly rapid. Here, Gordon Ryan has had his back taken. The first and most pressing problem is always the threat of strangulation - so that gets first priority before anything else - hence the inside thumb grip at the wrist with primary defensive hand. Only when the most pressing problem has been addressed so you go to the next. Then you go quickly from problem to problem until successful resolution of the whole problem - which means escape from the position overall and hopefully the beginning of a counterattack. Always have a crystal clear notion in your mind for all the crises positions in Jiu jitsu as to what the first danger is and have a good first response and then work progressively from there. You must be able to rank dangers and problems - once you can do that you can address them by rank - and once you can do that you’ll be a much harder opponent to control and finish!

The three most important elements of your game: In time you will rise to a given skill level. Whatever that level is it will be a reflection of the seriousness of your study and industry. The three most@important elements that determine your effectiveness on the mat will be your SKILL, your TACTICS and your AUTHENTICITY. The first two make sense and are universally acknowledged by all - but authenticity? What the hell is THAT? This is the degree to which your game is a reflection of WHO YOU ARE AS AN INDIVIDUAL. Nothing will wreck an athletes effectiveness faster than trying to play another athletes game. I don’t care what kind of game you ultimately express except that it is technically sound (skill), tactically sound (tactics) and YOURS (authentic). No matter how technically proficient and tactically a game is, my experience is that if it is not something that genuinely expresses your individuality as an athlete, it won’t be something you apply when the pressure is on. Just as you don’t feel comfortable wearing another persons clothes no matter how fancy and well tailored they might be, so too you won’t be comfortable playing another persons game. You can learn a LOT from others - but be SELECTIVE in what you take on board. Take what suits YOU and make modifications according to your needs and individual traits. When you can combine technical proficiency with sound tactics AND authenticity - you will have a very powerful game indeed

Getting under your opponents center of gravity is good. Getting out to an angle is good. Getting both angle and under the center of gravity together is even better! We’re always looking for advantage in Jiu jitsu. Getting one form of advantage is good - getting two or three together will make you unstoppable. Don’t be satisfied with some degree of advantage. Once you gain one form of advantage it is usually quite easily to compound its effects by snatching a second or third form of advantage. When you are matched with the toughest opponents in the room, you’ll need every form of advantage you can get, so get greedy with advantage and take every form of it you can! Grip, balance, position, elevation, angle, are all a form of advantage. Each one is an ace in your hand of grappling cards - the more aces you hold - the more likely you’ll break through!

Yep - I’m in trouble: There are times for all of us when we screw up and an opponent gets an imposing position that has us 100% defensive. First reaction? Mentally - don’t panic. There is not a single instance in history of a bad situation being made better by people panicking - so don’t. Physically - contract your body so you don’t leave any loose ends out for an opponent to make a bad situation worse. REPLACE PANIC WITH RESOLVE AND MAKE YOUR FIRST RESOLUTION TO NEVER GIVE UP AN EASY WIN TO AN OPPONENT - CONTRACT YIUR LIMBS IN TIGHT AND INSIDE YOUR OPPONENTS LIMBS. If this guy is going to beat you it’s because he EARNED his victory not because you gave it to him for free. Get those two reactions - one mental and one physical and you’ll do better than most in a bad situation next time you’re in one

How your opponent behaves in a match is largely determined by you: When you have a match with any given opponent either in the gym or on the stage, your opponent will act a certain way towards you - I’m not talking about unimportant things like what they say or their demeanor - I’m talking about the important stuff - the techniques and tactics they try to use on you. THE WAY AN OPPONENT ACTS IN A MATCH WHEN THEY ARE AFRAID OF YOU IS TOTALLY DIFFERENT FROM A SITUATION WHERE THEY HAVE NO FEAR OF YOU. How aggressive or attacking their game is, what level of risk they find acceptable when selecting moves, their willingness to engage - this is largely determined by their assessment of the danger you lose to them. The biggest fear every opponent has is the fear of being submitted. If they have no fear of that they will attack at every opportunity and without regard for whatever you’re doing. If they fear your submissions they will approach you with trepidation and be reluctant to use many of the moves they normally like to employ. YOU OWE IT TO YOURSELF TO DEVELOP YOUR SUBMISSION GAME NOT JUST AS THE BEST MEANS TO TOTAL VICTORY BUT ALSO AS A MEANS OF REDUCING YOUR OPPONENTS ATTACKING SPIRIT. Put a healthy fear in your opponent and you will have a lot less to fear from him!!

Back in Boston! I’m happy to be back in Boston for a few days with two great students Placido and Giancarlo filming more videos for BJJ Fanatics. Always a pleasure to experience the four seasons in the North East (I’m lying - it’s fucking freezing and I miss Texas warmth already 😂😂😂) Now it’s time to get organized for tomorrow and get back to work! Wishing you all the best from Boston! 🤗🤗

Passing guard - head and hips: Whenever it’s time to pass your opponents guard, the two key elements are your opponents head and hips. In most cases you will use the hips as the first goal. You will need to close distance and gain angle in order to pass the line of your opponents hips. From that position you out your opponent into a defensive framework where he must focus upon recovering his guard rather than attacking you. Then the next goal is to get control of your opponents head and shoulders in order to finalize the pass. So for most passes, it’s a case of hips first, head last. A very important exception to this is half guard passing. This allows you to control the head PRIOR to passing. This is a huge advantage. It enables far greater control over an opponent and takes away the wild scrambles often associated with guard passing. If you are not the fastest or most agile player on the mat, passing from half guard may well be your best option. Moreover, half guard passing combines exceptionally well with other passing methods. When basic passing methods fail, they almost always present opportunities to drop into half guard and continue passing from there. Make sure you exploit the great power of passing from half guard as a centerpiece of your overall passing game - it works equally well gi or no gi and works for all body types and ages.

Daylight: When it’s time to restrain an opponents movement you want to connect as tightly to him as possible. A simple test to assess the level of connection you’ve achieved is the daylight test. The more daylight you see between your limbs, torso and head - the weaker the connection between you and your opponent. When you want to shut down movement through connection, be sure to fit the shape of your body into that of your opponent so that there is very little daylight between you. If you can combine that level of connection with good positioning, you will be a very difficult opponent to shake off. This will require an interesting compromise between softness and hardness on your part. Your body will need to be soft enough to conform to the shape of your opponents body for connection without daylight, but hard enough to have sufficient muscular tension to stay connected to a strongly resisting opponent.

I am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video from the NEW WAVE series NO GI GUARD PASSING. When my students first burst on to the grappling scene they made their name primarily from guard pulls into leg locks. While this was a devastating and game changing approach, it was never the whole picture. No one technique or tactic, no matter how devastating, can create SUSTAINED success at the highest levels. Always the goal is a COMPLETE game that enables you to attack the whole body. If you want to exert true control over the toughest opponents you must be able to attack the upper body and back from on top. As time developed my students came to be known also for a devastating no gi passing game that supplemented their lower body game brilliantly. Understand this: IN JIU JITSU THE VAST MAJORITY OF YOUR MAT TIME WILL BE SPENT EITHER PASSING OR PLAYING GUARD POSITION. You owe it to yourself to focus on those skills to a greater degree than any other. In this video I show the technique and tactics that enabled my students to pass the toughest guards at the highest levels. We focus on a relatively small number of passes that are particularly well suited to no gi and which combine together into a proven system to make you effective in the least time possible. If it sounds like something you’d be interested in - check it out at BJJ FANATICS - link in my Instagram bio.

Guard passing without a gi: The single most common activity from top position in Jiu jitsu is passing guard - the act of getting past your opponents legs into dominant pins where no part of your opponents legs intervene between your upper body and his upper body. By removing your opponents legs from the equation you shut out the vast majority of his attacking options and open up your own attacking options. When it comes time to pass an opponents guard with no gi my favorite methodology by far is to use standard methods of passing as a distraction and in the ensuing passing vs retention battle - DROP INTO YOUR OPPONENTS HALF GUARD IN A CHEST TO CHEST POSITION AND PASS FROM THERE. The great advantage of this method is that it enables you to control your opponents head PRIOR to passing, as opposed to most passing methods that ask you to pass first and control the head last. This prior head control takes away much of the confusing high paced scrambling that besets most no gi passing methods. Next time you’re struggling to get control of and pass slippery and dynamic opponents without a gi - drop into half guard and let that chest to chest head control work in your favor!

As long as you’ve got a heart beat you’ve got a hope - Hope and belief are powerful tools in combat sports. If you believe in your mind that you have no hope of victory, you will almost always prove yourself correct with your body soon after. Hope for the future has kept many a struggling athlete in the fight longer than he would have done otherwise and brought about many against the odds victories when all seemed lost. Athletes that lose all hope lose matches. Of all the many skills of Jiu jitsu the two that I associate the most with HOPE are escapes and submissions. Escapes give you the belief that no matter how grim your current position you can get out and fight again. Submissions give you the belief that no matter how far behind you’ve fallen in a match, you have the ability to win it all with a match ending hold. IF YOU BELIEVE YOU CAN ESCAPE ANY SUBMISSION YOUR OPPONENT MIGHT TRY AND APPLY YOUR OWN SUBMISSION SUCCESSFULLY ON HIM IF GIVEN THE CHANCE - YOU’LL FIGHT TO THE LAST OUNCE OF YOUR STRENGTH UNTIL THE LAST SECOND OF THE MATCH. If you feel that you lack the ability to stay the course in tough matches, I often counsel a strong focus on escapes and submission training as a great way to foster a sense of hope that will keep you mentally in the fight longer when you come to believe that he can never finish you, but if you got a chance, you could definitely finish him.

Using gravity from underneath: One of the most common beliefs in grappling is that the top athlete always has gravity working in his favor against the bottom athlete. In fact the bottom athlete also has gravity working for him - JUST IN A DIFFERENT WAY. The top athlete gets to use gravity in his favor as a means to make an opponent CARRY HIS WEIGHT. The bottom athlete gets to use gravity in his favor by BREAKING HIS OPPONENTS BALANCE SO THAT TOP ATHLETE STUMBLES AND LOSES THE INTEGRITY OF HIS STANCE. As the bottom athlete you can use gravity just as effectively as the top player by CONSTANTLY FORCING HIS CENTER OF GRAVITY BEYOND HIS BASE OF SUPPORT. Every time you do this you will break his stance and force him to immediately focus on recovery. Do this many times over a match and you’ll exhaust even the fittest opponents. Combine it with sweeps and submissions and you’ll rack up a landslide of points and submit a lot of people. Never forget - you BOTH have gravity working in your favor. Victory will go to the athlete who uses it appropriately from whatever position you currently occupy

A New Years challenge: Are you unhappy with your recent Jiu jitsu progress? If so, here is a fun challenge for you. Name a champion Jiu jitsu athlete who has a body type and personality that seems in line with your own. Watch a highlight reel of him or her in action. Select one of his signature moves that you believe is something that would apply well to your own game, but which you do not currently use, or don’t perform well. Watch his set ups, mechanics, tactics, follow ups. Note what he does well and try to assess what he doesn’t do well with it and what could be improved (I know that might seem difficult at first but try even just as a learning exercise). Now start to think of ways you could integrate that move into your game and how you would both incorporate and modify your champions methods. Once you have a good mental picture of the move, start working on it physically with a friend. Try to teaching back to your friend what you figured out in your own study. When it starts to feel quite natural in drilling - try to hit it in sparring. Afterwards think about your successes and failures with it. Work on this for one month and see how far you can take it. IF YOU COULD DO THIS EVERY MONTH FOR A YEAR YOU WOULD HAVE A SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT GAME IN TWELVE MONTHS. This is more than a great learning experience, it’s a fine way to kick start your game out of a lull and add something good in a practical way - give it a try! You have nothing to lose and everything to gain!

Happy New Year!!! Wishing all of you a great 2022!! Set your goals high. Make a realistic and flexible plan to attain them. Divide your goals into short, Medium and long term. Work hard to reach them, don’t get despondent if you don’t - keep plugging away and make adjustments when necessary. Play a line between desire and patience and in time what seemed difficult will become easy and maybe what seemed impossible will be a stepping stone to an even more ambitious goal. Most of all - let happiness enter whenever it can and make that journey of yours a pleasant one!

When you’re tired: All the combat sports are exhausting in their own way. The bad news is - they stay exhausting your whole career. As you get better and better, so do your opponents - so you’ll always be under great physical stress that has your body drenched in sweat and chest heaving, utterly exhausted after a rough round. IT’S OK TO BE TIRED - BUT IT’S NOT OK TO SHOW IT. Learning to mask fatigue is an important skill in itself. Your opponents draw hope and optimism from seeing you exhausted. A tired opponent who is himself thinking of quitting will find renewed energy and drive if he sees you doubled over with exhaustion with the posture of a beaten man. If you are a competitive athlete (obviously what i am saying does not hold true for recreational athletes, older athletes, beginners or if you’re simply out of shape due to interruption in your training routine) When you’re tired, practice holding your composure and posture. No matter how hard your heart is beating and lungs burning - stand tall and composed, face neutral - YOUR FACE IS A MASK FOR WHATS REALLY GOING ON INSIDE YOUR HEAD - when an opponent can penetrate the mask he gains strength - when he can’t - he loses hope. Controlling your body language under stress is a real skill, and like any skill - it’s needs practice - practice begins next time you’re feeling like you’ve got nothing left to give.

Next! The round is over and the next one begins - what’s going through your head? Remember always that mental engagement is every bit as important as physical engagement in the sparring rounds. In the time between rounds have a sense of who you want to spar with and what skills you want to work on. If you choose some better than yourself it will be a good opportunity to work on survival and escape skills. If it’s someone bigger and stronger it’s a good opportunity to work on moving and managing weight from bottom position. If it’s someone of lesser skill, then it’s a fine to work on control to submission. If it’s someone of equal skill, an opportunity to work on wearing an opponent down physically over time to gain tactical advantage over the course of a match. Next time the round ends and you’re looking around the room - do so with a plan rather than leaving it to chance.

Know what you want - make a flexible plan to get there: People who know what they want usually get there. Those who know what they want and have a good plan to navigate their way get there get there often. Those who know what they want and have a flexible plan that adjusts to the many variables and contingencies that life throws at us over time almost always get there. Those that have no idea what they want have to be content with whatever fate gives them - sometimes good, sometimes bad, but never an expression of your will. Your work outs must reflect this pattern. If you come in with no goal and no plan, the worth of your workout will be determined by those around you, sometimes good, sometimes bad, never an expression of a vision you have of yourself as a better player in the future, but only a vague hope that one day maybe you’ll be good. If you come in with a clear goal and a plan to enact it that can change intelligently according to changing circumstances over time you will find over time that goals get realized and the you of today beats the you of yesterday, just as the you of tomorrow will defeat the you of today. You carry a lot into every workout - your physicality, tactics, technique, enthusiasm, passion, worries, anxieties, fatigue, injuries, burn out - but the most important thing you can ever bring is A GOAL AND A PLAN

Integration of offense and defense: Jiu jitsu and fighting in general is always divided into OFFENSIVE and DEFENSIVE skills. This is a useful division when you begin learning as it enables you to focus on a given skill domain. However, as you game matures let’s be clear - your ultimate level in the game will not be measured so much by your skills in offense and defense but rather by your ability to INTEGRATE offensive and defensive skills. The final steps of the offense/defense dichotomy is to break down the barrier between them and see that ALL GOOD OFFENSE HAS DEFENSE BUILT INTO IT, AND ALL GOOD DEFENSE HAS OFFENSE BUILT INTO IT. Your long term goal is to bring them together to the greatest degree possible at all times.

When it all seems confusing…There are many times when the moves of Jiu jitsu seem damn confusing and difficult to perform even in basic drilling with a cooperative partner - forget about live sparring. Whenever this occurs remember this - every move is a sequence of component moves each requiring mechanical details in order to be effectively applied. For any given move, certain stages in that sequence and certain mechanical details are more important to the overall success and failure than the others. If it ever seems too confusing and complicated - FOCUS ONLY ON ONE OR TWO MAJOR FEATURES OF THE MOVE RATHER THAN THE WHOLE MOVE. If you can adequately perform two components of a six stage move on Monday, then add another on Wednesday, two more on Friday and the last on Sunday - you can perform the move in a week. Don’t get discouraged when the whole move doesn’t come quickly - focus on the components instead. Your goal is to learn the move - no one ever said you have to learn it all first time around. I would be happier seeing a student learn and competently demonstrate the first stage of an elbow escape in a session than make a hackneyed and clumsy rendition of the whole move that would never work in sparring. In a single workout - BETTER TO LEARN A PART OF A MOVE WELL THAN THE WHOLE MOVE POORLY - you can always learn the next steps next time.

The pattern of champions: In Jiu jitsu and in life, some individuals seem to rise to a level above their peers. It’s worth asking if there are any patterns that emerge in this process that perhaps we could emulate in order to improve our own performance in whatever field we wish to progress. There are many factors that I have observed over the years but let’s focus on one for today. Jiu jitsu offers an ocean of moves - far more than you could learn in one lifetime. Our lives are short and our minds limited in capacity. So what are we to do? We are caught in a conundrum. There are ten thousand moves in Jiu jitsu. Any one of those moves could be used by an opponent to defeat us. Yet we can’t hope to learn them all in depth as it would take ten lifetimes to do so. The way champions respond to this problem can be stated in a single sentence. To excel in your field - YOU NEED TO LEARN A LITTLE ABOUT A LOT AND A LOT ABOUT A LITTLE. Yes it’s true that there are far more moves than you can ever learn - SO FOCUS ON A SMALL NUMBER OF MOVES THAT ARE HIGH PERCENTAGE AND FIT WELL WITH YOUR BODY TYPE AND PERSONALITY AND YOUR VISION OF WHAT YOU WANT TO EXPRESS - so learn a LOT about a little number of crucial moves that form your core skill set - they will be responsible for the vast majority of your wins and success. Yes it’s true that any one of the thousands of moves of the sport could be used by an opponent to defeat you - so learn a LITTLE about all of them - just enough so that you have awareness of the danger. As long as you can perceive danger ahead of time you can defend a move with minimal knowledge by disengaging early - ignorance of encroaching danger has gotten more people submitted than all other factors. This is how champions get around THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE. They learn a lot about a little and seek MASTERY in a small set of skills that make them powerful; and, they learn a little about many moves, just enough to perceive danger early and move away before it’s too late. In this world it’s impossible to know everything - AND YOU DON’T NEED TO - you just have to know everything about a few things and a little about the rest.

Some moves come naturally and some don’t: I am sure you’ve all had the experience of learning a move and the first few times you drilled it, it seemed to fall into place very readily. Perhaps later in sparring you got it to work or came close to getting it to work against a tough opponent. It stood out as a move that seemed natural and unforced to you. I’m equally sure you’ve had the experience of being shown a move that looked valuable but when you drilled it it felt very awkward and unnatural. When you tried it in sparring not only did it not work, it wasn’t even close and perhaps even got you in trouble. It can’t be denied that we all have this kind of experience. The question is, what should we make of it? Should we only focus on the moves that come naturally and ignore the ones that feel immediately difficult? That is certainly tempting and understandable, but we can’t take that option. Some moves, for example an elbow escape, are so fundamental and determine so much of our overall potential that they simply cannot be dismissed no matter how awkward and unnatural they might feel when you begin. Some moves are interesting but low percentage, rarely figuring in top level competition. Even if they felt very natural I’d be reluctant to invest huge amounts of training time in that direction no matter how natural and easy the move felt to me. The right way to think about it is to take the intersection of both considerations. Is it high percentage - that is, is it successfully used by a wide array of athletes across all belt levels, all weight divisions and all body types over a considerable time period? And, does it feel natural in its application for you as an individual, the kind of move you could employ with confidence and power in a very tough high stakes match? If the answer to both is yes - YOU’VE FOUND YOUR MOVE - train it, research it, develop strong follow ups to it and win with it!

In a world of many options, focus on the scenarios: When it comes to selecting techniques, Jiu jitsu offers far more choices than you can realistically master in a life time. Your task isn’t to master them all but rather to select a few and spend your Jiu jitsu career mastering those. This begs the question - OK if I’m supposed to learn and master a smaller number of techniques and largely ignore the rest, which ones should I focus on? To a large degree this will be answered organically over time. Your body type and personality will tend to favor certain moves and create an aversion to others. Over time you will invest in those you favor and they will be the bedrock of your game. Your coach will influence your selection also. Every coach has their own philosophy of Jiu jitsu and tends to push that in their teaching and naturally the students tend to think and act upon similar lines to the doctrines they are exposed to daily. You can go beyond this however and start asking yourself what general scenarios always seem to emerge in a given skill area and which need to be covered. For example, in guard passing the basic choice is between standing and kneeling passes. Whichever passes you decide to incorporate into your game, make sure that they cover both standing and kneeling methods. Don’t select only kneeling or only standing methods - you need to cover both scenarios. Go further, you need some passes that work through pressure/weight and some that work through movement/positioning. Make sure you have a solid representative for both approaches. It’s good to focus on the moves that come naturally to you, but make damn sure that they cover the main scenarios the sport presents in that domain, otherwise you will be left with an incomplete skill set that a good opponent can take advantage of.

If you could have a superpower…Imagine God came to you one night and declared that he wants to give you an entry level super power - not a crazy super power like Thanos or Superman that makes you into a God - but a genuine human level superpower. He gives you a choice. You either choose the ability to make yourself massively stronger than everyone else on the planet, or you can make everyone else on the planet massively weaker than yourself (so you aren’t any stronger, but you can make anyone in front of much much weaker). Which would you choose? There is definitely a sense in which the first choice is smarter, since if you become much stronger you can apply that new strength to anything - you could use it to fight humans or lift cars or perform tasks that no one else can. The second choice only applies to humans and so would only have value when trying to overcome someone in a match. So in a fantasy world the first option makes more sense. But what about the real world of Jiu jitsu? Is it smarter for us to focus on greater ourselves stronger? Or making our opponents weaker? Well, I strongly urge you to work on both. As athletes we all have a responsibility to try to improve every aspect of our physicality - it’s an important part of performance in Jiu jitsu. However, in the real world there are definite limits on what can be done to improve your strength, speed and stamina. Once you get to a certain level you start to experience diminishing returns on the time invested in training. There is no great difference in sparring against someone who bench presses 400 pounds versus someone who presses 550 pounds in Jiu jitsu. They both feel strong - yet the amount of time and effort it takes to get from 400 to 550 pounds on the bench is very considerable. When it comes to making people weaker however, there are virtually no limits. Small improvements in position, angle, biomechanics,
can severely degrade an opponents strength and overall athleticism and you can keep making improvements forever. We all have a responsibility to make ourselves as strong as we can - BUT JIU JITSU IS MUCH MORE ABOUT MAKING THE OTHER FELLOW WEAKER THAN IT IS ABOUT MAKING OURSELVES STRONGER

What’s next? Here is an unpleasant truth. The vast majority of moves you attempt in Jiu jitsu will fail. This is true regardless of your skill level. The better you get, the better the opponents you will face. You both know the major moves of the sport. You both know the most reliable counters. Therefore, the vast majority of the moves you attempt against someone your own size and skill level will fail. Once you realize this, you realize that the most important question is not “what move should I use?” But rather, “what moves will I follow up with after my initial move.” Your whole way of thinking in Jiu jitsu must reflect the simple reality that most moves against a well matched opponent will fail and that you must always think in terms of WHATS NEXT? This is not something you can reliably figure out in the moment - you can get away with that on occasion but it’s much better to MAP THE OPTIONS OUT IN ADVANCE. I started with an unpleasant truth. Now let me offer a pleasant one. Against a well match opponent, most moves fail, however, well applied failed moves CREATE VERY PREDICTABLE DEFENSIVE REACTIONS FROM YOUR OPPONENT THAT ARE EASY TO EXPLOIT WITH SECOND, THIRD OR FOURTH MOVES. THAT is where the fight is really won or lost. You know what your best attacks are - now it’s time to learn the most common reactions you see to them and map out your responses. In the great majority of cases the match is not won on the first attack, but by the second third or fourth - make sure your training and thinking reflects that

When the gi comes off: Jiu jitsu is a sport with four faces. Gi grappling, No gi grappling, MMA Jiu jitsu and self defense Jiu jitsu. Though they are all part of the same family there are significant differences between them. When it comes to gi vs no gi grappling it’s important to ask what the most significant differences are between them and even more importantly - what the consequences of those differences are when you’re on the mat trying to improve. The three most obvious differences are simple enough - First, the gi provides a much greater number and efficiency of strangles. Second, the gi provides a much greater variety and robustness of grips. Third, the gi provides much greater friction between the two athletes that slows the pace of the match in most areas. Getting further into the discussion, the idea of GRIP has important practical ramifications. The grips provided by the gi allow for much greater overall pulling power than the no gi pulling grips. A grip on the lapel is like a grip on a rope - very robust and difficult to break. None of the basic no gi grips can compare in robustness to the grips one can make with the jacket and pants, especially when sweat is factored in. The one great exception to this is LOCKED HANDS. Locking your hands around your opponents waist, head and arm or upper legs (and many other more specific applications) creates by far the strongest and most robust pulling force available no gi. It is crucial you learn to harness and utilize its power and control. You can’t always lock your hands, nor is it always desirable to do so - but when it is - no other no gi grip gives you such a robust pulling grip that allows you to control the toughest and slipperiest opponents and get to your score or submission.

What does it really mean to say you should attack 100% of the human body? The ideal of Jiu jitsu is to be able to attack specific and vulnerable parts of an opponents whole body with our whole body. In this regard most people think in terms of upper body and lower body. In the last decade Jiu jitsu has made remarkable progress in lower body attacks (a traditional weak area). However, in order to really attack the whole body you need to go further than just thinking in terms of upper body lower body. For the purposes of submission attacks the human body is best divided three ways
1 - upper body/lower body
2 - left side/right side
3 - front side/back side
In addition the means of attack - submission holds - can be divided into joint locks and strangles. So if we are to maximize our attacking versatility - and this should be the goal of all of us if we are to call ourselves submission specialists - then we ought to be able to attack upper body and lower body, left side and right side, from both front and back, with both strangle holds (where appropriate) and joint locks. THAT will allow you to cover all the possible ways in which submissions can be employed against an opponent. You don’t need to know a lot of submissions to do this, but you DO need to know how to cover the whole of an opponents body with them if you are to reliably break through against the toughest opponents. Widen your perspective with this understanding of what it really means to attack the whole body and soon you’ll widen your submission arsenal in ways that improve your performance

No one ever said your back has to stay on the ground: When we first start learning guard position we typically start in supine positions (usually closed guard in most coaching programs). Because we START there we usually tend to STAY there. This can become a problem when an opponent starts passing your guard. As they gain angle and distance and threaten to pass there are many times when it’s a good idea to get up off your back to stage some last ditch resistance and recover. You don’t always have to do this - but when an opponent is very close to passing it’s often a good idea to get up off your back and post on your elbow or hand to get your shoulders off the mat. This will first, prevent an opponent cleanly pinning your shoulders and head to the mat and completing the pass. Second, give you greater mobility to recover your leg position and put your opponent back in your guard. Like everything in Jiu jitsu (and life) it comes at a price. You can expose your back to a rear mount specialist and your waist to a body lock passing specialist - but sometimes you have to take a risk to prevent a score. If you feel opponents are passing too easily try propping yourself up on hand or elbow to give yourself the mobility you need to recover.

The other side of guard passing: The single biggest aspect of the Jiu jitsu positional game is the struggle of the top player to get past his opponents guard (legs) vs the bottom players struggle to get to guard and retain it. It’s probably fair to say that that is three quarters of the positional game in Jiu jitsu. When it comes to guard passing, we get taught initially to think mostly in terms of passing guard into side pins. This is good thinking since it accounts for the vast majority of passing outcomes at beginner level. However, as you get higher in the sport and the level of guard play and retention of your opponents rises, in MANY situations (perhaps even most) you won’t be passing to side pins so much as getting defensive reactions from opponents performed expressly to PREVENT you getting to a side pin that expose their BACK to you. The score won’t come from passing to side, but rather scrambling to your opponents back and taking rear mount. In a competitive match the bottom athlete will never willingly concede a side pin and the three points - he will instead turn to his knees - this will always create momentary back exposure. If your mind is only thinking in terms of side pins, you won’t react to the new opportunity. WHEN ENGAGED IN A HEATED PASSING BATTLE AGAINST A TOUGH AND SKILLED OPPONENT YOU MUST BE THINKING ABOUT TAKING THE BACK AS MUCH AS THE SIDE. That way when that half second of back exposure occurs you will pounce on the opportunity without hesitation and score. Here Oliver Taza does a good job exposing Gordon Ryan’s back during guard drills - the chance won’t be there long against an opponent of this caliber - having your mind set in that direction from the beginning lessens the time needed to see an opportunity and pull the trigger!

Push and pull: We don’t believe in super powers - you don’t have to - the power that good mechanical understanding and efficiency can give you is more than enough for anything you need to do in Jiu jitsu. The greatest power in Jiu jitsu is the ability to successfully utilize the potential of action and reaction. When you can elicit a push from an opponent and then pull him in the same direction as his push - you will use his own strength to off balance him. LEARNING TO EXPLOIT THE INCREDIBLE POTENTIAL OF ACTION/REACTION IS THE GREATEST STEP YOU CAN MAKE IN JIU JITSU. This is the best means of defeating faster, stronger and more athletic opponents. The key to learning is to engage in push and pull at every opportunity during drilling and sparring and so develop a sensitivity to where your opponents energy is being directed at any given moment. When you push, feel his push back, and PULL. When you pull him, feel his pull back and PUSH. This sounds simple, but making a habit of it in a hard sparring match takes time and awareness. What is simple in concept is not so simple in operation. Start small. In drilling out hands on an opponent and start pushing and pulling each other with only moderate force and low speed until you develop an ability to read his energy level and direction and then give a little push when pulled or pull when pushed - try to use the least force you can to get the biggest reaction you can. You can use this EVERYWHERE - standing, ground, top or bottom. It is a foundational principle in most martial arts - make it the foundation of your game and you will add a level of depth and skill that will make you stand out among your peers

Two mindsets in Jiu jitsu: When it comes to attacking an opponent there are two mindsets. The first is to decide what form of attack you want to use and impose that upon your opponent. This methodology is all about knowing your own strengths. You know what you’re good at - impose those skills upon the opponent regardless of what he is doing and be so good at them that he can’t stop you even if he knows your intentions. The second is to observe your opponents stance and movement and harmonize your choice of attack with whatever opportunity his stance and motion offers. This methodology is all about knowing what attack is appropriate for a given opportunity. The first is a matter of building a small set of highly developed and unstoppable attacks. The second is about building a large set of attacks that only need to be good enough to break through a momentary weakness. Both approaches are highly effective. In my experience the unstoppable attack method is best in shorter matches where there is a discrepancy in skill or size in your favor. The opportunistic attack method does better in longer matches where skill and size is more even - however this is a generalization and there are notable exceptions to this. Over time most athletes gravitate naturally more towards one than the other but most great athletes can play both approaches even though they generally favor one over the other. I generally find the opportunistic method has a smoother and more refined look to it and as I have aged and grown weaker I have favored it more - it generally requires a less physical game. Essentially it is a choice between the ability to amass great strength to smash through very strong defenses vs the ability to see a weakness and quickly attack with adequate strength to break through in the time available. Try to develop both but it’s natural that you will probably favor one over the other

Wasted minutes: A minute or two of your time doesn’t seem like much - unless you’re in a six minute Jiu jitsu match. In matches less than ten minutes a minute or two is a big deal. It’s not enough to simply be able to perform moves - you must be able to do so in a timely manner. A good example is sitting inside an opponents closed guard. Time spent inside an opponents closed guard is wasted time. You can score anything there and you can’t attack with any high percentage submissions from there - but your opponent certainly can! As such you want to spend as little time as possible inside an opponents closed guard - nothing good happens inside there. I find that the most reliable method is to stand up and open the closed guard. It’s not the only way of doing it but it’s the best one for smaller and shorter athletes to realistically open a bigger and taller opponents closed guard. It can be done in a short time period and allows you to minimize time spent in a position where you can’t score but the other guy can - never where you want to be in this game. Next time you’re in a closed guard don’t just think of getting out, ask yourself how long it took you to do so.

Your game reveals who you are: In daily life you reveal much about yourself by choices you make - you reveal superficial aspects of who you are by where you live, where you work, what car you drive, who you spend time with, how you dress. You reveal deeper aspects by life goals, your most cherished beliefs etc. Jiu jitsu is the same. The kind of game you play, the moves you favor, the manner in which you employ those moves, the level you aspire to and the time and effort you invest in training all spell out much of who you are as a person. The three most important things that influence your Jiu jitsu development are your body, your personality and your teachers. Who you are on the mat will be a reflection of these three factors. Two athletes can have the same favorite moves but have two totally different personalities, say one is brash and confident and the other shy and withdrawn - they may favor the same moves but their differences in personality will make them employ those moves very differently. Two athletes can have similar bodies and personalities but if they come from very different teaching lineages they will usually have very different games. Your body and personality are yours - they are your internal influences. Your teachers are an external influence. When you first begin the external influence is more important because you know nothing and need direction; but as time passes and you mature the internal influences naturally start to take precedence and your game becomes an authentic expression of who you are physically and mentally.

Distance control: Controlling the distance between you and your opponent is among the most important and fundamental skills in all combat sports. It is done very differently from one combat sports to another, depending upon the rules and objectives. In Jiu jitsu it is done primarily through grip, although movement is also very important. From guard bottom position distance control is usually achieved with the collar grip, but in no gi Jiu jitsu you will need other methods. Closed guard is the one we usually start with when beginning Jiu jitsu. Ultimately distance control is the ability to control an opponents ability towards and away from you. Locking your legs around your opponent is a good way to do this. However, you’ll need good methods from open guard too. My favorite is always ashi garami. It fulfills the most important requirement of distance control - it controls movement forward and backwards because you have one leg behind an opponents leg (controls movement backwards) and one in front (controls movement forwards). In addition it allows you to attack your opponents balance and threaten leg locks at all times. In order to have an effective bottom guard game you’ll need an effective means of controlling distance. It doesn’t matter which you choose, ashi garami, de la riva, reverse de la riva or any other method, just so long as you have at least one good form of connection that controls movement forward and back and sets up attacks.

Athleticism: I think it’s fair to say most people in Jiu jitsu have a feeling that everyone else in the room is a better athlete than they are. Yet when you ask them what they mean by this they point to a list of physical attributes - speed, flexibility, endurance etc and say that most people possess these in greater amounts than they do and this makes them inherently better athletes or possessed of greater athletic potential. In fact the single biggest contributor to your athletic potential at any given second in a match is not genetic - it’s learned - it is your STANCE. Every task in the sport has a stance or posture that determines how efficiently you will perform that task. I don’t care how good someone’s genetic athleticism is (however you understand that) - IF THEY ARE IN A POOR STANCE FOR A GIVEN TASK, THEY WILL STRUGGLE TO PERFORM THAT TASK. The converse is also true. NO MATTER HOW POOR YOUR PERCEIVED ATHLETIC POTENTIAL IS, IF YOU ARE IN A GOOD STANCE TO PERFORM A GIVEN TASK, YOU WILL MAKE IT LOOK EASY. Your objective athletic potential is heavily dependent on factors outside your control, but plays much less of a role than many people think in the here and now of a match. Much more important is MAXIMIZING WHATEVER ATHLETIC POTENTIAL YOU HAVE BY TAKING A STANCE THAT MAXIMIZES PERFORMANCE OF THE TASK IMMEDIATELY IN FRONT OF YOU. Don’t worry too much about whatever objective athleticism fate gave you. Focus instead on the athletic potential you give YOURSELF by adopting a strong and appropriate stance for the task in front of you. Here, Garry Tonon takes a good stance for toreando guard passing that allows easy side to side movements and makes entanglement by opponents legs difficult while allowing his hands easy access to grips upon opponents legs.

If you could have only one finishing hold for the rest of your life - what would it be? For me it would be the rear strangle without question. It is the most reliable finishing hold of all. It does matter how mentally tough the opponent is - a strangle will incapacitate him and end the match. If an initial attempt should fail - you still have the position and can keep trying until you succeed. The position you use it from puts you in a situation where you can attack at will as many times as it takes to get the breakthrough. It requires no special physical characteristics and can definitely be used by smaller people to defeat bigger and stronger people. It works for short people, tall people, thin people and thick people. It works equally well in both grappling and fighting. It is the perfect embodiment of the Jiu jitsu philosophy of position before submission. With this in mind - you owe it to yourself to develop a PERFECT rear strangle. Study it and perfect it. If there is ONE finishing move in the sport that is truly worth perfecting it is this one. Don’t settle for a decent rear strangle - make yours the very best you can. Life is full of sham products that aren’t worth the time and effort we put into acquiring them - the rear strangle is a true gem that is worth every second of time and ounce of sweat you put into its development, refinement and perfection - don’t settle for anything less

When you’ve got one - you’ve often got another: We tend to think in terms of what’s right in front of us and get myopic about what’s further ahead. While it’s certainly good to be focused on the here and now and try hard to finish the task in front of us - we have to be realistic also - and the reality is that when you’re matched against someone your own size and skill level most of your initial attacks will fail due to strong resistance. As such, it’s very important you be able to look past the current attack and see the next possibility. A really good place for you to start training your mind and body this way is with the arm bar juji gatame. Why? Because juji gatame cuts across the upper middle of the human body at an angle that gives you direct access to triangles and ashi garami leg locks as well as the original arm bar - any time you have the position for juji gatame you can thread yourself easily into variations of triangles and ashi garami leg locks (and if you’re creative you can find other alternatives as well). Spend some time playing around in the juji gatame position - thread your legs into different types of triangles. Reach down for a leg and drop into leg locks - pretty soon you will find yourself habitually looking beyond the first attack into follow up attacks - and that’s a big part of what will get your beating better opponents in the future

Contrasts: Look at this picture and you see a very strong contrast in application of strength. Georges St Pierre is a close to maximal tension while alongside him Gordon Ryan is at minimal tension. Both are in good position - why the contrast? Mr St Pierre is beginning the application of a submission hold, Mr Ryan is simply maintaining a position. The game of Jiu jitsu requires us to work with extremes of physical tension from very high to very low. As a general rule, you want to keep your body tension as low as possible to get the job done and recognize that some jobs require a considerable amount of tension for short periods of time. So for example, submission holds, guard passes, sweeps and takedowns will require short burst of massive physical tension and output when you go to complete them. Understand that you can only maintain that level of intensity for short bursts - don’t stay above the redline too long and exhaust yourself. This game is characterized by LONG PERIODS OF RELATIVE CALM INTERSPERSED WITH SHORT BURSTS OF EXTREME EXERTION. If you break this pattern by being too relaxed all the time you won’t have sufficient energy to finish moves and score. If you break it by maintaining tension too long you will exhaust yourself and lose to your own fatigue. Keep this behavioral pattern of tension and relaxation in mind as you train every day and you will last longer and break through more

Getting the gang together: Had a fun day of training with @georgesstpierre @timkennedymma @garrytonon and @gordonlovesjiujitsu I’ve always loved the fusion of grappling and MMA and watching these fellows innovate and explore the boundaries of each was a sight to behold.

A life of routine: We talk about a routine life as though it’s a bad thing - disparaging it as dull and boring and indicative of failed life choices. Let me be clear - almost all of our progress and achievement in life is founded upon the acquisition of skills, and skills are only acquired through the maintenance of a routine that gives you sufficient time and repetition to let them develop. If you want progress in Jiu jitsu or any other aspect in life, you will need to establish a routine and everything else in your life will have to be arranged around that routine. That doesn’t mean you have to condemn yourself to a dull life of boredom - but it does mean that you will have to avoid anything that interrupts the routine in a significant way. Routine isn’t something to be disparaged - on the contrary - it is the source and wellspring of your greatest resource - skill - and if you wish to rise to the top of your domain it will be skills developed by adherence to that routine that allow you to do so.

The power of the triangle: Oliver Taza had a fine win last night in the Emerald City Invitational grappling tournament last night. It featured EBI rules and had some great matches. In the finals he came up against talented former team mate Nick Ronan and it went to over time. In an arm bar situation Mr Taza made a transition to a side triangle - yoko sankaku - and took a fine submission win in addition to his other submission victories via his powerful leg lock game. The triangle is one of the very best upper body submissions and one you all must devote serious study to. Unfortunately in Jiu jitsu when people talk of the triangle they usually only refer to one form of triangle - the front triangle - and mostly think of it as a weapon from guard. Interestingly in judo the side triangle is seen much more than the front triangle due to the fact that guard position is not as heavily emphasized as it is in Jiu jitsu and Turtle position is more heavily emphasized than it is in Jiu jitsu. There are five major forms of triangle and they can be done from many scenarios. Only when you see all the types of triangles and the many scenarios they can be employed from will you start to reach your potential with this great move

In the midst of all defense are the seeds of offense: It’s natural when an opponent attacks you to focus only on saving yourself. Early in your development that’s the best thing to do, but at some point you have to see ANY TIME AN OPPONENT ATTACKS YOU HE MUST MAKE COMPROMISES WITH HIS DEFENSIVE INTEGRITY, HIS BALANCE, HIS STANCE AND HIS FOCUS. This means that an astute player will see his opponents offense as a fine entry into his own offense. This kind of counter offense has significant advantages over conventional offense since it is performed against an opponent who is compromised physically by being over extended and mentally by being focused on attack rather than his defense. It can be difficult initially to make this mental shift. You will need to clearly identify points at which the attack has been neutralized and a turning point achieved where you can initiate your counter attack. I suggest you start this project with you current favorite submission since you have greater expertise here. Ask yourself what criteria would make it fail and make you abandon it. Then have an opponent attack you with it. Work to satisfy those criteria and as soon as you’ve done so - counterattack! Once you’re comfortable with you favorite submissions, start expanding the project into others. Soon you will have an arsenal of counter attacks that will greatly increase the number of submission attempts you make per match

Your opponent can never cover all the potential targets: In all combat sports the basic game is to be able to attack vulnerabilities in an opponent whilst defending your own. Sometimes opponents have excellent discipline with their stance and positioning so that it feels impossible to breach their defenses. Take heart - it may seem this way - but it’s an illusion - there’s ALWAYS an opening somewhere. The more an opponent focuses his attention on defending one piece of real estate, the more vulnerable he becomes at some other area. If he spreads his defenses over his whole body, he won’t be able to stop a determined attack anywhere. That’s the basic dilemma that must guide your target selection. This why is why two things are necessary for you to breach tough defenses. The first is a wide enough array of attacks to cover the whole body. This means you should have at least one strong attack for lower body, upper body and neck from front and back. The second thing you need is the ability to feint an attack in one area to draw his defenses into one zone whilst being able to redirect to another which is now undefended. Don’t just choose your main attacks randomly. Make sure you have enough variety to cover the whole body from front and back and top to bottom; and on top of that, the ability to trick an opponent into believing that an attack is imminent in one place when in fact you will attack another target. When you have these two elements in your attack game, you will find that even tough defenses that used to shut you out can be breached

Failure vs potential: When we look at our performance in Jiu jitsu we tend to lump everything into two categories - success and failure. Moves either work or they don’t - they succeed or fail. If you adopt this mindset there is little chance that you will make technical progress over time. The reason is simple - whenever we learn new moves it is almost certain that the vast majority of applications when we start out will fail. When we first learn a move our performance of it is usually ( and understandably) poor. It takes time to build skill. It will take time for you to take a move from infancy to adulthood. A much better approach is to asses moves not by success or failure, but by potential. The best indicator of general potential is usually not from you, but comes from watching high level athletes performing the move in top level competition. If the move works repeatedly there then it’s likely it will work at whatever level you are. Then start asking if it has specific potential for YOU. As yourself if it works for a wide array of body types and levels of athleticism. If it requires such extreme athletic abilities that only a handful of people can apply well, it may not have potential for you. Then start your personal journey with the move. Start small. Don’t try it first with the toughest guy in your gym. Try it on lesser targets until you feel ready to move up. When you first try it you will soon get a sense of whether the move feels natural to you. Even if it’s not fully succeeding at first of you can feel POTENTIAL - perhaps you ALMOST get it to work a couple of times, that’s a good sign that it’s worth more work and time. In time a move that almost works can become a move works really well almost every time. Success or failure isn’t the yardstick of new moves - potential is.

What is Jiu jitsu really about? More than anything else Jiu Jitsu is about compensating for inequalities in physical attributes between different people. The day we are conceived we are thrown into the genetic lottery which will determine our size, speed and many other physical attributes. The day we are born we are thrown into the hands of fate which will determine much of our development. By the time we are old enough to think we start to note that many or perhaps even most of the people around us have considerable physical advantages over us. So often everyone else seems faster, stronger, more flexible, heavier, taller, longer reach - the list goes on. It can reach into mental attributes as well. Our peers seem more confident, smarter, more aggressive etc etc. We are left looking at ourselves in the mirror as ungifted in comparison. JIU JITSU IS OUR ATTEMPT TO USE MECHANICS, TECHNIQUE AND TACTICS TO COMPENSATE FOR OUR PHYSICAL AND EVEN MENTAL SHORTCOMINGS. Leverage can make a weak person strong. Good position can make a strong person feel weak. Anticipation can make a slow person fast. Precise pinning can make a light person heavy. Good off balancing can make a heavy person light. Strangleholds can pacify even the most aggressive people. Success over time in training can make a coward brave and the timid confident. There are many things in life in which you have little choice. Jiu jitsu is a means by which you can make a stand and redefine who you are through study and training. In this sense the choice to study Jiu jitsu is your chance to overcome all those areas of your life in which you felt you had no choice and in which it seemed you were disadvantaged. I’ve seen many things in the course of my life but perhaps one of the most remarkable has been the degree to which the study of Jiu jitsu grips so many people from so many backgrounds with a passion and enthusiasm for participation and improvement that I don’t see in most sports, where most involvement is simply as a spectator or as a game that is fun to play rather than as a way to change who they are.

You always go out alone: Jiu jitsu is an odd sport insofar as it is practiced as a group but when it’s time to perform it’s you and you alone who steps out in the mat. You can be surrounded by your friends, coaches and teammates but when your name is called it’s only you that walks out. This dichotomy between the social aspect of group training and the inner loneliness of your solo performance is at the heart of your Jiu jitsu experience. It manifests itself in athletes in dramatic ways - some athletes excel in the gym and struggle on the stage. Others look ordinary in the gym and shine on stage. The main thing is to grasp the significance of the fact that ultimately you can be given all manner of advice, comfort and encouragement by everyone you know - but it’s YOU and you like who will have to perform - so make sure you develop a game that suits YOU and and that your game is an expression of who YOU are - not anyone else. Just as you can easily see when a person is not comfortable inside their own skin, you can easily see when an athlete is not comfortable with their own game or match persona. So when it’s time to build your game - yes it’s good to take advice and learn from the experience of others - but don’t do so to the extent that your game is more an expression of someone else’s Jiu jitsu than your own, because when your name is called they won’t be coming out on the mat with you

Angle: We all figure out how early on in our development that is hard to attack someone directly from the front - you immediately run into their strongest lines of defense - the hands and head. Most success comes from circumventing those major lines of defense. In grappling this is done in two major ways - LEVEL and ANGLE. You can go UNDER and AROUND your opponents defenses much more easily that going THROUGH them. It’s not easy to get advantageous angle on good opponents. Usually there has to be some form of distraction or misdirection first - but once you’ve got - it’s a great momentary advantage that you must use immediately as it won’t last forever. Understand that angular change doesn’t have to be dramatic to be effective. Here in a drill I have gotten to perpendicular - that’s great but difficult on a resisting opponent - you only need enough angle to slip outside head and hands - even a small angular advantage can yield good results. It’s particularly important when working to pass guard on top of attack from guard on bottom. Next time you’re working from either - don’t make your first move TOWARDS you opponent but rather AROUND your opponent and see if you can get better success with your attacks as a result

Defense into offense: The moves of Jiu jitsu are divided evenly into offense and defense. A perfect defensive game would make you undefeatable. A perfect offensive game would make you capable of defeating anyone. As a general rule it’s best to begin your study with a bias towards defense, since the most common scenario for anyone starting out in the sport is to be overwhelmed by their more knowledgeable and experienced classmates. Somewhere along the road of your development however, you must begin to synthesize defense and offense. THE COMPLETION OF ALMOST EVERY DEFENSIVE MOVE IN JIU JITSU IS RICH IN ATTACKING OPPORTUNITY FOR THOSE WHO LOOK FOR IT. Here I have stopped an initial leg tackle down on the mat - the second the initial danger has passed it’s time to switch gears from defense into offense. There are great positional opportunities here - go behinds to the back will always be foremost among them - and also submission opportunities - anything out of front head lock will be a great choice, but there are many others as well. Next time you’ve successfully stopped an opponent with your defense - don’t be satisfied with stopping them - go immediately into counter offense. You will soon find that opponents are much easier to attack due to being somewhat out of position after their failed attack and you can make the synthesis of defense and offense work strongly in your favor

When one part of your body is in trouble - other parts have to come to the rescue: The game of Jiu jitsu is all about isolating one part of an opponents body and attacking it. Sometimes you will be on the wrong side of that methodology and find one part of your body has been isolated and about to be attacked. If you can react early enough then it’s usually possible to simply pull the endangered limb free. However, if you’re opponent is doing a good job of restricting your movement you’ll need a more sophisticated approach. Rather than desperately try to extract your isolated limb - look to use other parts of your body to protect it. Here I am being effectively pinned in side control and my left arm has been isolated by an under hook. I react by wedging my right knee at the pocket of my opponents right hip and right forearm at the pocket of the left hip. This immediately restricts my opponents movement and makes it more difficult for him to transition into mount or move around to the other side of my body for upper body submission attacks. There is a sense in which I lost a battle on my left hand side and so I must win on the right hand side in order to prevent further loss. Once this barrier of elbow and knee on the right side has been established, any movement by my opponent will create sufficient space to join knee and elbow together as a locked frame and out the opponent back in guard where the isolated left arm won’t be any use. Next time your stuck and and arm or leg isolated - use this line of thinking to first protect yourself and then work safely out of the position and back on the attack!

If you want to move people - get under their center of gravity: it is never easy to move someone who doesn’t want to be moved. It’s even worse when they are bigger and heavier than you. Probably the most reliable means of doing so is to get UNDER THEIR CENTER OF GRAVITY. If you can do this it becomes MUCH easier to lift and move your opponent. From bottom position you have to make your body compact and get down low. You will need some form of effective connection to your opponent - it’s no good getting under someone if you can’t stay there long enough to complete a move. A good place to start playing around with this concept is bottom half guard. From there is relatively easy to burrow under an opponent if you can get an arm under theirs and around the waist. Once under their center of gravity you will find it quite easy to roll side to side and carry them with you - that’s the location and feeling you want - like their center of gravity is floating over yours - once you can move an opponent you can sweep or throw him.

Extraordinary degrees of resistance: I’m sure you’ve had the experience of sparring with a physically imposing opponent and you find that your moves, even your favorites, don’t seem to work against this level of physicality. You will often find that extraordinary levels of flexibility or strength can make your moves feel inadequate. When you feel this this - take heart - you’re not this first to feel this way!! Some general words of advice. If your opponent has rubber joints that seem immune to your favorite locks - focus on strangles. If you can’t strangle successfully with your arms due to freakish hand strength or jaw blocking of opponents - strangle with your legs. If your opponent has the strength to bench press you out of any form of top control - focus on getting behind him. If your opponent has a Gumby like guard that appears impossible to pass into top position - focus on taking the back instead. There is always a shift in tactics that can make up for physical freaks that frustrate your favorite lines of attack. Don’t get intimidated by unusual physical attributes - get inspired - inspired to try a new approach that shows how tactics and technique prevail or physicality

Interfering hands: It always seems every time you go to hit a move from guard your opponents hands are always working to dislodge the grip of your legs and shit down your sweep attempt. Whenever this happens - attack his balance. If he doesn’t use his hands for balance he’ll fall. If he does release and use his hands for balance and base - he won’t be able to interfere with your guard and you can attack again. Don’t accept those disruptive hands. If he puts hands on your legs - knock him off balance immediately and play off his reaction to it.

Stacking the odds in your favor: Jiu jitsu is never easy, any time your engaged against someone your own size and skill level every match will be a tough trial. Nonetheless there are some things you can do to make things a little easier. You can see here that from bottom position I have focused on. First, distance control. I have applied an ashi garami that puts a knee in front of my opponent to prevent him easily moving forward and a knee behind him to prevent him easily moving backwards. In addition I have knocked his hands to the floor. This immediately means he is carrying most of his own weight on his hands. If he is carrying his own weight, then I don’t have to. As such my work load has decreased significantly. In addition his lower body becomes lighter as he carried weight on his hands making leg submissions easier to enter into. Perhaps most importantly, if his hands are on the floor then they aren’t on me - as such it will be very difficult for an opponent to engage in any guard passing until he has corrected his posture, giving me uncontested attacks until he corrects himself. Thirdly, I have an advantageous angle where I have positioned myself outside his elbows and thus can attack from the side rather than frontally. Seen in this light you can see that attacks that begin with a deliberate attempt to stack the odds in your favor are far more likely to succeed than those where you simply make up your mind to use a certain move and go straight to it. Understanding what undermines an opponents defenses is critical to developing your ability to beat skilled opponents. Just as important as learning moves are the precursors to those moves so that you can create an unfair advantage in your favor before you even attempt them.

Sitting on the sidelines: There will always be times injury takes you off the mat. Whenever that occurs I always encourage students to come in and watch. Part of the motivation is to keep their spirits up, but far more important is the need to keep their progress going even when you can’t physically participate. Never forget that every physical action in Jiu jitsu begins with a mental decision to act that way. You can use this insight to help your progress when you can’t physically perform the moves. Watch matches from the sideline - but don’t watch for ENTERTAINMENT by simply seeing who wins and who loses. Watch to LEARN and IMPROVE by MENTALLY PARTICIPATING IN THE MATCHES YOU WATCH. Put yourself in the place of the two athletes, sometimes the offensive player and sometimes the defensive player. Don’t FOLLOW the action with your eyes, PREDICT and JUDGE the action with your MIND. This is the best and most important participation you can engage in when your body can’t engage. When the body can’t engage - THE MIND STILL CAN - and that mental engagement will allow noticeable improvement when you return. Never forget that physical action action begins with mental decisions and use this to your advantage next time you can’t physically train.

Approach as every match and every scenario within a match as A PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED rather than as an ORDEAL TO BE OVERCOME. Your problem solving ability is among the most important elements in attaining victory - arguably the most important. Courage, tenacity, will, strength, resilience and all the other attributes and virtues are wonderful things - but when there is a door to be opened, hammering, kicking, smashing and ramming may do it, nothing does it so well and so easily as a key. Your ability to apply knowledge and figure out solutions is the key to every lock. Put your emphasis on that above all else.

The first guard you learn: When I began Jiu jitsu it was standard practice to begin the study of guard position with closed guard. There is a lot of wisdom to this. Closed guard has good value as a self defense position and that was an important consideration at that time as Jiu jitsu was closely linked to early MMA and fighting in general. As my experience as a coach grew I came to question whether closed guard was always the best choice for the first guard position for everyone. I always noticed that most beginner students had an easier time becoming effective from half guard than they did from full guard. Moreover closed guard tended to favor the longer legged athletes over short limbed athletes. Half guard seemed to work equally for all body types. In addition, half guard integrated extremely well with pin escapes and allowed students to easily transition from a defensive elbow escape directly into half guard offense. Ultimately I came to believe that there is no one guard that ought to be learned before all others. Like everything in life, different people will gravitate towards what they are best suited for. I therefore don’t dictate what kind of guard comes first but rather show a variety of fundamental guards (nothing crazy at beginner level) and let people decide whether they prefer guards based on outside control such as closed guard, or inside control such as butterfly guard or a mix of both, such as half guard. In the end, you’re going to have to learn all the various guard positions to some degree, which one you learn first doesn’t seem to affect long term development that much, so start with the ones best suited to your body. The main thing is that you gain COMPETENCE THAT LEADS TO CONFIDENCE in your bottom game as early as possible that you overcome quickly our natural trepidation about fighting from underneath tough opponents.

The biggest sale of the year just started at BJJ Fanatics! All my instructional videos on sale at 50% off for Black Friday! Get the knowledge that can make a difference to your performance!

When working from guard position - actively seek to get your opponents hands on the floor: It can be difficult learning to grapple effectively from bottom position when you begin Jiu jitsu. It always seems that the top player has everything in his favor and that you begin with a massive disadvantage. In time you’ll see that this is not the case, but early on it’s natural to feel that way. One piece of advice that can greatly help speed up your development in this area is this - LOOK TO GET YOUR OPPONENTS HANDS TO THE FLOOR WHENEVER POSSIBLE. It’s not always possible nor necessary to get his hands to the floor to attack from guard, but it does create a very effective line of attack that will give you direction and focus when starting out. When you off balance an opponent and force his hands to the mat against his will, he cannot present any passing danger to you not use his hands defensively against whatever follow up attacks you employ until he recovers his balance and stance. In that time you will have an open door through which to attack. In addition, hands on floor opens his whole body to attacks. You can attack lower body or upper body with equal efficacy. Next time you’re feeling frustrated with your bottom game start by getting his hands to the mat and THEN attacking with your favorite moves. You may be pleasantly surprised that opponents who were previously shutting you down are suddenly a little easier to attack with success

It doesn’t seem like a big difference…One of the hardest truths to convince a beginner in Jiu jitsu of is that there is a world of difference between being FLAT ON YOUR BACK underneath an opponent, as opposed to BEING ON YOUR SIDE. To the untrained eye they look pretty much the same. You are lying down underneath an opponent in both cases after all. In fact the difference will determine how effective you will be from bottom position. When you’re on your side you can bear an opponents weight much more easily. You can move side to side far more readily. You can prop yourself up to an elbow or turn easily up to your knees, or reach out with your legs and catch an opponents leg. You can create an action/reaction sequence by turning from one side to another. In short - you don’t bear weight directly and you can move much more readily. Understanding the importance of this fundamental insight and making it part of your daily training is absolutely critical to your progress in most Bottom positions, particularly those your opponent is threatening to pass your legs. Next time you’re suffering under an opponents weight - turn to your side (almost always towards your opponent) and you’ll feel an immediate easing of pressure and a newfound ability to move with effect

The heavier your opponents chest becomes - the lighter his legs become: Jiu jitsu is a game of weight distribution. Sometimes it can very intimidating to feel an opponent putting all his weight on to one part of your body. Remember however, that the more an opponent uses his weight to crush one part of you, the more he must lighten some other part of his body. If you remember this you can use this to your advantage. Here, my training partner has committed weight into chest to chest pressure - that’s a good thing as long as he has stepped over over one of my knees, but an elbow escape allows me to recover my guard and now that heavy chest to chest pressure that was so useful and beneficial a moment ago is now a liability. With all the weight being applied at the chest, the legs have become light and easily flipped over by my legs. Next time your suffering under weight distribution - be confident that the heavier the distribution in one area - THE LIGHTER IN ANOTHER - and navigate a course to take advantage of that the light zone (hint: it’s almost always some form of elbow escape or bridge escape) and turn a hard time into a success

Taking the power out of your opponents side pins - getting under hooks: It’s never any fun getting pinned by a good top player. Not only is it hard to move - sometimes it’s hard even to breath - and a skilled opponent is constantly threatening to convert the pin into a submission hold. You can take way much of the power of your opponents side pins by consistently pommelling your arms under and inside his into under hooks. This greatly undermines his connection to your torso and allows you turn onto your side rather than flat on your back. This immediately takes pressure off the diaphragm and helps you breath more easily. It also allows much easier movement towards guard position and/or getting up to your knees to escape the pin. In addition it greatly reduces the immediate danger of most of the standard submissions from this position. It doesn’t take much to get that under hook in, but the rewards are great. Next time you’re suffering under a smothering side pin, rather than just try to bulldoze your way out, work to get both your arms under his first. Then get on to your side and you’ll find that everything from breathing to movement to escapes become significantly easier and less risky.

Posture: For every task in grappling there is an ideal posture that maximizes your effectiveness and minimizes your workload. These posture vary wildly depending upon the task at hand. Sometimes it will require upright posture. Sometimes a sprinters posture. Sometimes a hunched posture. The list has as many variations as there are tasks. What works well in one scenario will perform poorly in another. Your task is to understand which posture is suited to which task and then stay as true to that ideal posture as you can until the task is completed and you switch to the next task and a new posture. If you want to know what is the ideal posture for a given task - try the task - you will quickly find that a certain posture makes it seem easier and any deviation from that posture is progressively punished depending on how far you stray from the ideal. At the end of the day this sport of ours is ultimately a game of MOVEMENT and POSTURE before anything else. The deeper your knowledge of these two elements and how they pertain to the goals of the game, the further you will go with everything else in the sport. Here, you can immediately see the positive effect of posture as Georges St Pierre switches from single leg to head inside double leg (often called a Barsargar here in the US). Good posture makes defense difficult and allows him to easily carry and move the weight of a bigger partner.

When you’ve got a choice…Very often the scenario we find ourselves in presents a choice in finishing options. A classic example is triangle and arm bar. WHENEVER YOU HAVE ONE OF THESE OPTIONS - YOU ALMOST ALWAYS HAVE THE OTHER AS WELL. As a general rule - I always urge my students to take the triangle option over the arm bar option all other things being equal. Of course there will be exceptions to this general rule. For example, if your opponents has very broad shoulders and you have short legs, it’s probably best to stick with the arm bar option. However, the triangle offers the option of both strangle and multiple joint locks at the same time - all backed up by a much tighter control of the head than an arm bar due to the figure four lock. The arm bar on the other hand offers only a single joint lock and much looser head control. So given the choice, triangle will be my preference. Next time your attacking arm bars and the finish isn’t coming quickly - perhaps try a switch to a triangle and see if you can use some of the inherent advantages to help your cause

Breaking posture: If there is one word of advice I could give students who are trying to attack an opponent with positional moves or submission a greater chance of success it would be this - START EVERY ATTACK WITH AN ATTACK ON YOUR OPPONENTS POSTURE. Your opponents defense is only as strong as the integrity of his posture. Break his posture and it will be relatively easy to break whatever else you want. Here, Gordon attacks the back with an initial attack on his opponents posture that destroys the defensive integrity of his turtle position - opening his up to both positional and submission attacks that will now easily follow

Starting with an advantage: Imagine if you were practicing takedowns with an opponent your own size and skill level and he told you he would let you start in a full single position - no hand fighting, no level changing, no shooting needed - you get the position for free. I’m sure you’d be pretty happy about that because it would take out some of the most difficult elements of takedowns and let you start with half the task already completed. Well, that’s pretty much what happens when you start in a good half guard position with an under hook. You essentially start in a single leg position. No need for all the difficulties of hand fighting, level changing and shooting - you’re already in on the leg and ready to go - that’s a big advantage! You could also say similar things about getting to an opponents back - you’re half way there also - the only thing between you and your opponents back is his over hook/wizzer. Beat that and the back is yours. Next time you’re working from half guard with an under hook - remind yourself that you begin half way to a single leg and/or the back and take heart that by getting to half guard you’ve gotten half way to two great situations before the action has even begun!

Beginners in Jiu jitsu ignore their opponents grips and entanglements because they don’t understand the dangers they lead to. As they learn and develop expertise they come to see the danger and start to break grips as soon as they become a threat. But the very best athletes go back to the start and ignore grips - this time not from ignorance, but from the knowledge that if you reach a high enough level you can let an opponent take any grip he likes and use it as the opening to your own attacks. The opponents grip becomes a shortcut to your own offense.

Most targets get more difficult to attack as the match goes on - the back is the exception to the rule: I’m sure you have all had the experience of trying to attack a submission hold towards the end of a match and found out the hard way that the inevitable sweat and overall slipperiness makes it very difficult to control and finish many of the major submissions. Most arm locks and leg locks become more difficult as sweat and slipperiness increase. Interestingly however, getting to an opponents back is barely affected by increases in slipperiness and arguably may even be EASIER. Many transitions to the back are helped by increased slipperiness rather than hindered. Sliding your strangle arm into position also becomes easier with less friction. Holding the back for extended periods of time can be a little more difficult, but nothing that wrist control, good head position and a tight body triangle can’t take care of. Next time you favorite submissions are failing in slippery conditions - focus on transitions to the back - they will make your work easier rather than harder

Push and pull: Every grappling exchange has a beginning based around establishing grip. Once that is attained it’s natural to want to go straight into your attacks. That can certainly work, but often you are well advised to start with a brief period of PUSH and PULL that creates the possibility of ACTION and REACTION. Learning to play constructively with those reactions to your pushing and pulling is one of the biggest steps you can make in your grappling journey. Next time you lock up with your partner, don’t rush to your moves. Start with a brief period of push and pull using both arms and legs and try to feed of the reactions you get and use those reactions to enter your moves. Adding that intermediary step of push and pull - no matter how brief - will add a whole new dimension of attacking skills to your game

Outstanding!! The ADCC North American trials have been on this weekend with many amazing performances from the athletes across all weight divisions. Among those great performances were two that have a remarkable element that pertains to many of my readers. I teach my instructional videos at BJJ Fanatics in Boston and two of the main demonstrations partners I work with are Placido Santos and Giancarlo Bodoni, both of who regularly appear in my videos. Over the years they have diligently worked on the material we cover and often travel long distances for extended periods of time to come to train with us. Giancarlo recently moved to Austin to train with us full time. That dedication paid off with both men having outstanding performances in the trials. Giancarlo won Gold in his division and punched his ticket to the biggest event in grappling - the next ADCC world championships next year. He won against the biggest field in trials history over two grueling days. Placido came out guns blazing on the first two with a spectacular run of submissions - both men had a very high submission rate. It’s amazing to see the transformation that new knowledge and new ways of thinking can have on a self motivated and dedicated student who puts in the work necessary to transform knowledge into skill. I am so proud of their performances and the way they showed how long distance learning can have a powerful effect on your Jiu jitsu game. Thank you also to Gordon Ryan who did a very fine job of cornering both athletes - his experience in ADCC competition is such a help. Thank you also to BJJ Fanatics Bernardo Faria and Micheal Zenga, who came to watch their two most famous employees put on the best performance of their lives this weekend! Well done Giancarlo and Placido!

If you can SEE your opponents back - you can TAKE his back: The back is a big part of the surface area of our body - that makes it a big target. Not only is it a BIG target - it’s a LUCRATIVE target. Nothing else scores more points and nothing else gives more high percentage and safe position to submit your opponent. As such, there will be MANY opportunities to take an opponents back in any extended engagement. In fact there will be MANY MORE THAN YOU REALIZE AND THAT YOU TAKE ADVANTAGE OF. You have to train your mind to see the opportunities before your body can make the movements to take advantage of them all. If you can see even a small percentage of your opponents back for just a second or two - there is almost always a way to navigate your body to his back. Learning to believe and take advantage of this insight is one of the greatest ways to speed your progress and success rate in Jiu jitsu. What the eyes see, the rest of your body can capture - next time you see a flash of your opponents back - be ready to take the prize!

Keep your hands up!!!! Every time you go to watch a boxing match there is some guy screaming at every fighter to keep their hands up. Of course there is an undeniable validity to the old cliche even if it is an over simplification with many exceptions. It expresses the need for defensive awareness and soundness - to protect the most vulnerable part of the body in a boxing match - the chin. Similarly in Jiu jitsu. We also also need to keep our hands up at times, but not to defend the chin since there is no striking - it is to defend the NECK - not from the danger of a punch, but from the danger of a STRANGLE. Make sure always to use your hand OPPOSITE the entering strangle hand if he is behind you and SAME side if he is in front of you. Keeping your hands up in these circumstances can stop small problems becoming big problems. As in boxing, don’t over do the “hands up” philosophy - but just as in boxing, don’t under do it either - defensive soundness is the core of sensible Jiu jitsu and early neck protection is a big part of that

The magic of half guard: Every Jiu jitsu athlete has a responsibility to excel in bottom position. If you can work effectively from bottom position you’ll never reliably defeat bigger opponents or opponents with better takedowns than you. The question becomes - which bottom position will be your workhorse? There are many choices, each with their strengths and weaknesses. There is a lot to be said for half guard as your bottom game foundation. Any time you work from half guard with a good under hook you are immediately half way to your opponents back and halfway to a single leg takedown. This is a huge potential advantage if you know how to use it. It gives you a definite initial advantage that can be made to work strongly in your favor. Your opponent has to compensate for this with grip and body position and you can play off this compensation and play a very simple but strong sweeping game. In order to shut down that sweeping game he will make himself vulnerable to the initial threat of back exposure and single leg takedowns that he was trying to compensate for! The whole time there is so much body contact that it’s extremely difficult for your opponent to simply disengage - it can be a real problem for even very tough opponents. If you struggle to be effective from bottom position and are looking for a sense of direction that will work well in almost very context - gi or no gi, grappling or mma, try half guard. The whole method of Jiu jitsu bus to gain prior advantage before attacking, and half guard bottom can definitely offer that if you know the right starting positions

Your mind may be your most powerful weapon - but your legs are a close second: The entire philosophy of Jiu jitsu bottom game is based on the idea that BOTTOM POSITION IS ONLY DISADVANTAGEOUS IF YOU CAN’T USE YOUR LEGS TO GRAPPLE YOUR OPPONENT. The whole game from bottom is to keep your legs between you and your opponent and to use them as your primary weapon. Here I work with a classic tripod sweep - a fine example of using the legs to engage an opponent standing over you. Remember that even though your legs are the power source behind the guard, it is your FEET that connect that power to an opponent - so make your feet grip your opponent with the same dexterity as your hands. This is a skill that takes time to develop but will be a key element in making your legs the basis of your bottom game.

New Wave Half Guard: I am very pleased to announce the release today of my latest instructional video NEW WAVE JIU JITSU: NO GI HALF GUARD: THREE DIRECTIONS OF ATTACK. I put a very heavy emphasis on half guard training. In fact I believe that many athletes half guard makes more sense as a primary bottom position game than most of the more traditional bottom positions. Over the years I have noticed a general trend whereby many students get faster positive results in bottom position from half guard than they do from more standard variations of guard positions. This is particularly true of older students or those who are less flexible, slower, shorter limbed - many of these students struggle with classic variations of guard but quickly find a natural home in half guard and make faster progress there. In addition, half guard offers great potential for extremely effective distance control and so applies extremely well to MMA and self defense applications where striking is involved. Another great advantage of half guard is the ease with which it integrates into the scramble game as part of failed takedowns and sweeps and the ensuing scrambles - it often gives those with a weaker takedown game a second chance at gaining top position after an initial failure. Perhaps the most important aspect for beginning students is that half guard integrates so well with escapes. In live sparring escapes are often easy to initiate but difficult to complete. Half guard gives you the ability to take even a minimal start with an escape and build it into a half guard from where you can fully reverse or submit even very tough opponents. If half guard is a skill set that sounds like it may help your game and your progress - check it out! Link in my Instagram bio

Bad position? Stance first - escape second: We all know that when you get caught in a bad position in Jiu jitsu the onus is on us to escape. Escape takes time however; and in that time, a good opponent will use that position to attack us with submissions. Therefore your first responsibility in bad position is not escape, but rather, STANCE. You must adopt an appropriate defensive stance that reduces the possibility of an opponent submitting you and which facilitates your eventual escape. Initial Failures in defensive stance make it almost impossible to employ the escapes you know and make it much more likely you’ll be tapping rather than escaping. When caught in a bad position start by getting your hands, elbows and knees inside your opponents hands, elbows and hips to the greatest degree that you can. Off balancing an opponent with bridging, bumping and kipping helps this a lot. Once your arms and legs are inside your opponents you will find escape is considerably easier and there is a lot less danger of getting submitted. Here, Gordon Ryan finds himself in a bad situation and has immediately positioned his left arm safely. His right elbow however, is still trapped outside his opponents hip. Before he can even think of escape he will have to off balance his opponent a little and pull that elbow inside to a position of safety from where he can start his escape. Next time you’re in a bad position - start with recovering your defensive stance - only then will the escapes you’ve been working on prove effective

Distance control: One of the most important aspects of guard play is CONTROLLING THE DISTANCE BETWEEN YOU AND YOUR OPPONENT. If your opponent is move to move towards and away from you at will - he gets to choose when and how you engage - that’s a big advantage for the top player. It’s important you take those luxuries away from him and bestow them on yourself. Controlling distance without a gi can be a challenge as you don’t have the gi collar to help you. I generally find the best all round method is ashi garami. Your knee positioned in front of him makes it difficult and risky for an opponent to push towards you and also difficult to back away as you have a leg positioned behind him as well. As soon as you control distance it’s time to attack the opponents balance - and then attack with sweeps and submissions. Start with grip into distance control, then off balancing, then the real attack. Multi tiered approaches like this are what will make your guard a formidable weapon for any opponent

Leverage and the spine: The spine is the longest lever in the human body. It can be used a a great benefit in countless moves and situations - and it can be used AGAINST you in just as many. If you can control both ends of the lever - your opponents hips and head - you will have gained a very significant mechanical advantage over your opponent. Look at how Gordon Ryan traps his opponents head between his under hook and his own head, whilst simultaneously blocking the hips with his right knee. Control of both ends of the spine like this almost guarantees the guard pass. Controlling one end of the lever is good - controlling both ends is great. Look for this whenever you can - it doesn’t always come easy, but when it does, you will be unstoppable

Adjustments: submission holds are an all of nothing affair. A submission hold that was 99% perfect allows a skilled opponent to escape through that 1% error. A submission hold that was 99% perfect that failed scores nothing LEARNING TO TAKE A MOVE FROM 95% PERFECT TO 100% PERFECT IS ONE OF THE GREAT KEYS TO YOUR PROGRESS. Most submissions begin with an entry that is far from perfect, but good enough to hold an opponent in place long enough for a PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENT that transforms the move into one capable of actually finishing a tough opponent. Learning to ADJUST UNDER PRESSURE is the mark of the submission expert - and it must become part of your game. Submissions START with entry - but they FINISH with adjustment. Take the time to adjust and convert them from decent to good and from good to great - this is the way of the submissions expert.

Rising up from bottom position: Too often we have a mindset in Jiu jitsu that once we start in bottom position we have to stay there until we sweep or submit the opponent. This is unfortunate. Just because because you start in bottom position doesn’t mean you have to stay there. There are MANY occasions in sparring and competition where sufficient space develops between you and your opponent which will allow you to come up from bottom into takedowns (as opposed to conventional sweeps) and scrimmage for points in the ensuing scrambles you create - either reversing position or taking the opponents back as he tries to scramble away from the takedown. This mindset of staying down only when you are forced to stay down creates real pressure from bottom position and forces the top player to engage much more actively - this in turn makes conventional sweeps and submissions much easier, so ironically, by adding a little more wrestling into your game, your submission percentages often increase. Next time your opponent backs away from the sweeps and submissions you are using from guard position - rise up into takedowns - you will be pleasantly surprised how often this can get the score that was eluding you when an opponent is disengaging.

The greatest positions in Jiu jitsu - mount and rear mount: The game of Jiu jitsu rewards the mount and rear mount with more points than any other positional moves. I fact they score twice as much as takedowns, sweeps, knee on stomach and even outscore guard passing. As much as possible you should seek to get to these high reward positions. It’s a fascinating question which is is the better of the two. I generally put a premium on back over mount in grappling but slightly favor the mount in fighting when striking is involved. The real point is not however, which is better, but rather, how will you move smoothly from one to the other. Both positions involve the use of your legs wrapped around your opponents hips or torso to exert control. WHENEVER AN OPPONENT TURNS OUT OF ONE POSITION HE WILL OFFER OPPORTUNITY TO TRANSITION TO THE OTHER. Learning to take advantage of this transition from mount to rear mount and rear mount to mount is key to your development in utilizing these devastating positions to maximum advantage. Understand that when an opponent goes to turn you want to HELP them by opening a little space with your legs. Look at how Gordon Ryan lifts his knee to let an opponent turn inside and go easily from mount to rear mount. He does this without losing upper body pressure - that’s important because it’s that pressure which motivates an opponent to turn in the first place. Jiu jitsu rewards these two positions more than any other - make sure you learn to move between them to reap those rewards to the greatest degree possible!

Never underestimate what a simple change of angle and level can do to improve your attack: At any given moment of a match your opponent is making calculations and predictions and what you can and can’t do based on his observations of your body positioning. He will position himself appropriately based on the beliefs he forms as a result of those observations. All this happens very quickly and changes very quickly as the match unfolds second by second. If you attack from where you currently are you will run directly into the positional roadblocks a good opponent will have put in front of you and get stopped or worse, countered. You need to change angle and level first so that you attack from a direction that your opponent has not blocked and press the attack before he can adapt his positioning to stop the new threat. Level changing in Jiu jitsu has many faces. Here, Gordon Ryan is level changing at the hips in an upwards direction. This, when combined with angle, will create an excellent entry into ashi garami variations and strong leg lock attacks. Next time you want to press the action - don’t just attack from where you are - change the level of the relevant part of your body (usually hips and head) and angle and THEN attack - you’ll get a lot more success that way

When you control the head…An old cliche in grappling is that if you control the whole body. There is a LOT of truth to this. Learning to exploit the value of this insight is a big part of your progress in Jiu jitsu. It has many manifestations. One of the most important for grappling is the use of the triangle not in its usual sense as a stranglehold, but rather as a means of immobilizing the head so that joint locks become more powerful. A fine example of this is Kimura. It can be very difficult to finish a Kimura when your opponents head is free to move around. When you begin in a triangle that immobilizes the head and THEN apply a Kimura the results can be devastating. The same goes for armbars, even American locks and wrist locks. Much of the defense to these moves involves a preliminary movement of the head - when that is taken away the locks become far more difficult to escape and more devastating in their effects. Next time your triangle isn’t working so we’ll as a strangle - use it to attack with joint locks - I’m sure you’ll be impressed with the results!

Not every day in the gym will be a good one. In fact there will often be periods of weeks and even months where you feel like you’re making no progress at all. There’ll be days you swear you’re going backwards. Disappointment and frustration occur more often than success in a tough room. Hang in there. Understand that everyone around you is progressing at a similar rate to you. Just as swimmers in a river current are carried at similar speeds by the river itself and so don’t see much reward for all their attempts at swimming; so too the room rises and makes everyone in it feel like their effort doesn’t make a difference. It does. You’ll have a day every so often where you get to see the fruits of your work. That’s how the game works. Long periods of of tough work with apparently little progress and a few golden days randomly interspersed among them that reveal how far you’ve come. It’s true that rates of improvement vary over time. It’s true that some people can make faster progress than others. It’s true that a change in training program can affect rates of progress - but I’ve never seen a case where someone trained regularly and sincerely and made NO progress. Rate of progress is important, but if your goals are long term, it doesn’t matter too much whether you get to those goals a little sooner or a little later. Remember always that whatever doubts are inside your mind about your progress - the only way you won’t improve at all over time is to stop showing up.

Footsweeps: I think we all have moves that our favorites because they are high percentage and very effective for us - and moves that are favorites because they have an intrinsic cool or wow factor. For me, that was always foot sweeps. No other technique in all of combat sports conveys the effortless effect of total magic trick domination as a well applied foot sweep. In an instant you can drop or stumble an opponent seemingly with no effort, very little movement and low risk. The key is always to catch an unweighted foot. This means it requires timing and sensitivity to an opponents footwork. As such it can be frustrating when you first try as you usually fail to catch the foot in a state of weightlessness. Foot sweeps are a move that either works brilliantly or not at all - there is no middle ground. So have some patience when you start learning. It won’t come overnight. However, the potential rewards to the patient student are immense. You will have a weapon that can drop an opponent in an instant or stumble them into a secondary technique. Usually footsweeps are applied with both athletes in the standing position, but be are they are equally effective when you’re sitting and opponent is standing. Learn to catch that unweighted foot and you can make the mat into an ice skating rink where everyone slips and falls in front of you!

Traps: If you face an opponent in a fiercely combative stance and posture you leave him nothing to work with and many opponents will be very reticent about engaging with you - leading to long bouts of passive inactivity. Sometimes you do better by deliberately leaving openings that will entice an opponent to enter. Lifting an elbow may entice an under hook, leaving a foot out unguarded may entice a leg lock attempt. Remember that the first line of defense is MENTAL - awareness of the threat. If you are not only aware of the danger but knowingly creating it yourself then it is extremely unlike an opponent will be able to exploit it before you spring the trap on him. As such, it’s actually a fairly safe way to play despite the appearance of danger. This approach will often create engagement where it would otherwise not occur with a nervous opponent and it will be the best kind of engagement - engagement on your terms.

The pressure of the first mistake: Gordon had a fascinating exhibition match last night in Austin Texas against talented MMA star Philip Rowe. Since it was an exhibition match there was not winner or loser - it was designed to give an interesting spectacle to fans who haven’t seen Mr Ryan onstage since his stomach issues deteriorated. The rule set allowed for as many submissions as possible in a given time (in this case fifteen minutes) so it had the feeling of a gym sparring session. This has a very positive effect in some ways because you get a second chance if you make a mistake and get caught in a submission hold - you just tap and start again. It’s important to understand that in championship matches the outcome is usually decided by WHOEVER MAKES THE FIRST MISTAKE OR WHOEVER MAKES THE LEAST MISTAKES. This is what makes championship matches so nerve wracking - mistakes are severely punished. The result is that athletes play a very conservative game built mostly around AVOIDING ERRORS rather than taking exciting risks. When athletes are given multiple chances to atone for an error they can open up a lot more and take risks. Last nights match reflected this with both men going for a full range of moves some of which they probably wouldn’t ordinarily use in a high stakes match. To be sure I believe there is not substitute for conventional rule sets for championship matches - the need to avoid making errors and to capitalize on an opponents errors is what creates the intense drama of big matches, but I do like the more laid back multiple chance rule set for exhibition matches where there is a bigger than usual discrepancy in skill level - it seemed to work well last night and could provide a fascinating alternative for spectators

The return: Tomorrow night in Austin Texas, Gordon Ryan will step out on stage again in an exhibition match against talented UFC middleweight Philip Rowe. Mr Ryan has been locked in the toughest fight of his career against a lingering and debilitating stomach illness that has over time time taken over his ability to train and prepare professionally for matches, prompting a time away from the game in an attempt to get it under control. Most of his biggest matches and victories have been fought under the shadow of this vexing problem - a testament to his ability to shrug off difficulties and focus on the win, but in the last year it has gotten to a point where daily training has been severely disrupted. He wants to stay active during this time and so exhibition matches are a good means of doing so. The rule set is actually quite interesting - almost like sparring in the gym as the two athletes will try to amass as many submissions as possible in the fifteen minutes allowed. This allows a full length match and incentivized both athletes to take submission risks as you can get a second or third chance if it backfires. Thanks as always to @flograppling and WNO for putting on great shows with interesting rule sets so that athletes can showcase their skills in what has become the premier industry event outside of the ADCC World Championships. @tazagarami and @bjjdamien will be stepping on stage against very talented opponents among many top level Jiu jitsu stars on this great card!

Two for the price of one - the dual power of leg locks from bottom position: When an opponent is in your guard his legs are his base of support. If you attack his upper body with submission holds he still initially has his legs under him giving him a stable base from which to defend himself. When you attack the legs with submission holds something interesting happens. Now you are attacking two things at once - his leg as a submission target and his base of support. It is so much harder to defend a lock when you are unstable. This usually forces the opponent to change his posture to sitting or kneeling to gain a new stable posture from which to defend his legs - and this immediately renders him vulnerable to follow up positional attacks. By attacking the legs you create an automatic double attack and a follow on attack that is extremely difficult to deal with when done well and which keeps an opponent on the defensive. Make sure you can threaten your opponents legs from bottom position - you’ll get twice the bang for the buck

You’ve got five grappling limbs - use them all: we think of ourselves as four limbed creatures, but in grappling your head can be used to push and pull an opponent just like your arms and legs - your goal is to maximize and integrate your use of all five. Grappling is all about connection to your opponent so that you can exert whatever forces you have upon him. Your limbs are the spearhead of that connection. Here, Garry Tonon uses his right hand to shut down his opponents left. His right foot to maintain distance. His left foot to threaten his opponents base and his left arm/hand to prevent his opponent gaining an underhook - and while all this is going on, his head is used to maintain his seated stance. That image of simultaneous and automatic use of all five limbs is what you must strive for as you grapple. Your torso is your engine, but your five limbs are the transmission that enable you to apply that power to your opponent

The other fellow: Many years ago I was in a UFC warm up room getting an athlete ready for competition. As the athletes get ready with exercises and drills they get their hands wrapped by the professionals. It’s fascinating watching a good hand wrapper go to work. They wrap with a precision that makes your hands feel like two steel encased weapons of war. As the wraps were being applied a young athlete was noisily expressing his approval and delight as his hands were encased in gauze and cotton. “Man! My hands feel like two bricks! Anything I hit I will go right through!” He stood up upon completion and smashed one hand into his other and growled as he felt the heavy power the wraps gave him. “I could punch a hole in the wall now! If I hit him with these - he’s sleeping!! I feel like a damn super hero!” The hand wrapper looked at him and quietly said, “very good - just remember that right now in another room your opponent is getting his hands wrapped the same way.” There was a quiet pause as the room reflected on the truth of those words. The athlete went silent and sat down with a reflective look of concern - the euphoria and confidence gone. Don’t put your confidence in things that your opponent has too. You may be strong - so is your opponent. You may be fast - so is your opponent. You may be confident - so is your opponent. Put your faith in the things that you can build to a degree that others don’t possess at your level - the things that training can create that separate you from others - your technique, tactics and preparation.

Got a good position? Get a better one! Don’t be satisfied with good when great is readily available. There are lots of good positions out there, but only a few great ones. Very often the transition from good to great is quite easy. Here, Garry Tonon has a good position - front head lock - but you can see his mind is plotting for better - the back! Nothings beats getting behind an opponent. Next time you’re doing well, ask yourself if you could be doing still better - usually the answer the yes. Don’t hesitate - take that next step and turn good into great

One of the biggest inhibitors of progress in Jiu jitsu is a disproportionate preference for either top or bottom position at the expense of the other. Only when you see them as complimentary parts of a whole will your game have the uninterrupted flow required for great Jiu jitsu performance

Hands: Almost everything we do in grappling begins with the hands. Our hands are weak compared with the rest of the body, but they are dexterous and fast moving. In truth they don’t have to be that strong since their real function in grappling is as CONNECTORS. Our hands connect us to an opponent and the big muscles of the legs, hips and back do the heavy work. Nonetheless, without that connection through hand grip we wouldn’t be able to apply force into an opponent with the rest of our body. As such, when it’s time to shut down a dangerous opponents ability to attack us in grappling - HAND CONTROL is among the best methods. If you can strip away an opponents grip, trap his hands in place and/or frustrate his attempts to reestablish a lost grip, you can render his grappling skills null and void. Learn to distinguish when a hand grip is liable to cause you problems and if it is, take the time to nullify or remove it, then you can set your own positive grips and focus on your offense

Finishing grip first or control grip first? There are some submission holds that involve a certain grip associated with the submission, for example a rear naked strangle involves a strangle hand around the neck, a heel hook a wrist under the heel. Without that grip the submission would never occur. In addition they require a control grip. In the case of a rear strangle it’s usually the rear mount itself with you legs as hooks locking you in place, in the case of the heel hook it’s whatever ashi garami variation you’ve chosen. The question is - which comes first? In the majority of cases the control grip ought to to come first. It will slow an opponent down and give you the ability to focus on getting your finishing grip in place. In this photo you can see Garry Tonon has established ashi garami control first to lock on to an opponents hips and now he can fight to get his wrist to the heel. At the higher levels however, there are good reasons to sometimes switch the order - usually because opponents have highly developed defensive skills. Sometimes slipping the strangle hand in first and then beginning a strangle to distract an opponent will allow you to then slide into rear mount uncontested. Similarly with a heel hook. Exposing the heel and getting your wrist to the heel first and then sliding into your favorite ashi garami will sometimes allow you to bypass the whole hand fighting phase of leg locking and grant you faster, cleaner finishes. Understand that usually the conventional method of control first, submission second is the way to go, but let let that blind you to other possibilities when circumstances change

Pressure: when we think of winning in Jiu jitsu we typically think in terms of MOVES. If a move is performed flawlessly it wins a match. In reality however, we rarely perform moves flawlessly against the strong resistance of an opponent who has the similar knowledge, skill and size to ourselves. Typically what determines winner and loser is PRESSURE OVER TIME. it is the ACCUMULATION of moves performed to a level that stresses an opponent that wears him down first physically and then mentally. As time passes his ability to counter your moves deteriorates faster than your ability to perform them. Learning to use pressure as a weapon is perhaps the single biggest factor in your effectiveness on the mat. You START Jiu jitsu learning MOVES, but you will FINISH it learning to impose and maintain PRESSURE.

One move - many variations: When we begin Jiu jitsu we talk about a given move in the singular - we talk about an “arm bar.” As you develop you come to realize there are other variations of the arm bar - they are still arm bars insofar as they share the same basic mechanics - but the applications and positioning are quite different. All the major moves of Jiu jitsu have this feature and it is crucial for your development that you understand each of the variations and how they relate to each other. This is a BIG part of what expertise in the sport means. As the skill of your opponents increases you will be required to show ever increasing knowledge of the nuances of variations and switching between them in order to defeat determined and skillful resistance. Here, Gordon Ryan applies one his favorite arm bar variations that does not have a crossface leg at all. This would seem to be a weakness, but the strong control over the near side shoulder makes direct head control unnecessary. Note that he has to switch the breaking fulcrum from right hip to left hip to get optimal breaking pressure with this variation. This kind of nuanced understanding of the variations is what you will require the further into the sport you go.

What do the three most desired positions in Jiu jitsu have in common? The two most dominant positions in Jiu jitsu are mount and rear mount. The best position when underneath an opponent is guard. What do all three have in common? YOU CONTROL AN OPPONENTS HIPS AND TORSO BETWEEN YOUR KNEES. This allows an extraordinary amount of control and also the ever present opportunity for the best submissions in the sport. Make it a habit to line up with an opponent and control him between your knees. This fulfills the Jiu jitsu ideal of grappling an opponent with your legs first and upper body second.

The single biggest demand of Jiu jitsu - use your legs as the centerpiece of your grappling game: The single most distinctive feature of Jiu jitsu as a grappling style is the degree to which it emphasizes the use of your legs as the main weapon to use against your opponent. The entire bottom game is based around guard position where you grapple your opponents body with your legs. The top game is based around getting to three pins, mount, rear mount and knee on stomach where your legs connect you to an opponents hips and torso. The upper body pins that don’t involve legs - side and north south - don’t even score. The most extreme example of legs as a weapon is the use of triangle strangle holds. The biggest obstacle every beginner in the sport faces is the fact that in everyday life we mostly use our legs for locomotion and not much else, so when we are suddenly asked to perform complex tasks with our legs we struggle. Developing strong suppleness and dexterity in your legs is thus of the utmost importance for every beginning student. Just practicing entering triangles with no hands is a wonderful way to start your journey into grappling first and foremost with your legs. However you start that journey, how far you progress on it will determine how far and how fast you go

Pinning: The notion of pinning is central to almost all forms of grappling. In sports like wrestling and judo, pinning can end a match just as submissions do in Jiu jitsu. Jiu jitsu approaches pins from a very unique perspective - pins are understood to derive their value from their FIGHTING value. Only pins that prevent and opponent using their legs to defend themselves and enter into sweeps and submissions are acknowledged - so the first prerequisite is that you get completely past your opponents legs. The other guiding idea is that you should be able to create an asymmetry in attacking potential - an ability to strike or submit an opponent far more readily than he can return fire. The more this asymmetry is exhibited, the better the pin. Learning to get to, maintain, move from one pin to another and attack from a pin is the centerpiece of the top game in our sport. Work first on MAINTAINING a pin against resistance - that’s the first skill of pinning. Then work on moving smoothly from ONE PIN TO ANOTHER (and back if necessary) without being put back in guard - that’s your second skill. Once you’ve gotten strong in these two skills, it’s time to move to the third - attacking from pins with submissions. This can be frustrating at first because you usually have to relinquish the pin itself to do so, but it represents the pinnacle of pinning so it’s a hurdle you must jump!

Memory: The great challenge of Jiu jitsu learning is not how much you can learn - it is HOW MUCH YOU CAN RECALL UNDER STRESS. That is what matters. As such, memory and retention is among the most important factors in your progress. Everyone learns and remembers differently. Some learn and retain best with WRITING - that was always my favorite method; others never write a thing and have other methods, repetition, a seminal imprinting experience that burns the knowledge into their memory - whatever works for you. If you ARE the type that favors writing as a memory aid, you don’t need to write everything you practiced down in excruciating detail every day. Just note the main ideas that were new in bullet point form. If it’s a move that you learned, just write the two or three most important elements in order of importance. If it’s a concept, describe it’s value and main applications that apply to you. Even if you never read those notes again in your life, the mere act of focus and writing has a good clarifying effect on your thinking that will carry over into your grappling and overall thinking about the game. If you are ever injured and off the mats for a time, try writing as a temporary substitute for mat time and see how much you can recall and how clearly you can expound it. You might be surprised at how it helps you when you return

What was the first guard you learned? Everyone agrees that guard position is one of the absolute foundations of Jiu jitsu. The heavy emphasis on guard play is probably the single most distinctive part of Jiu jitsu that separates it most from the other grappling arts. There are many types of guard - which did you learn first? Most students begin with closed guard. There are good reasons for this. Closed guard represents one of the great ideals of Jiu jitsu - the ability to attack while not being oneself open to the opponents attack - an opponent can’t attack you with passes or submissions until he first opens your guard. However, many students struggle to actually apply the major moves from closed guard as the position overall often feels very unfamiliar and unnatural to a beginner. I often find that beginners do better as far as effectiveness from bottom position is concerned with half guard rather than closed guard. So when it’s time to teach bottom position to a raw beginner, try using closed guard to illustrate important concepts and half guard to make them effective in sparring in minimum time.

When your opponents goes to initiate movement you’ve got two choices - either try to STOP the movement or GO WITH the movement. Both approaches are very effective - which one you choose in a given case will depend on the circumstances of that case - which one you choose in general will be determined by your body type and personality. One is not better than the other, but they do amount to very different expressions of Jiu jitsu. Garry Tonon was a master of FOLLOWING an opponents movement - Gordon Ryan was a master of STOPPING an opponents movement. Which do you generally prefer?

Negate first - attack second: Jiu jitsu can be a very scrappy game at times - especially when you and your opponent are launching attacks on each other at the same time. It’s not wrong to do this; it can certainly make for exciting and entertaining matches, but it’s hard to develop the control and focus needed to score or finish on tough opponents when you are simultaneously attacking each other because you’re worried about defense at the same time you’re trying to conceive of offense. Often it’s a better approach to first shut down an opponents ability to attack you with subtle positioning of your limbs and body before even thinking about your own offense. As your opponents attacks falter, you will be able to slow things down and focus on what you want to do. Here, Gordon Ryan uses good positioning of his legs, arms and head to shut down an opponents guard offense for a brief period so that as the attacks slow down in speed and intensity, he can launch his own passing moves without distractions

Weight vs weight distribution: Don’t let anyone fool you - weight is a big factor in combat sports and fighting. There is a reason why there are weight divisions. As a general rule between two athletes of roughly equal skill, the advantage will go to the bigger heavier athlete. Nonetheless there are some things you can do to make an opponents weight work in your favor. Understand that if you can make an opponent carry his own weight - EVERY POUND THAT HE CARRIES IS A POUND THAT YOU DON’T HAVE TO CARRY - and that means a heavy man can be made to feel light, even if only briefly - that’s enough to launch an attack! When underneath opponents in guard actively seek to off balance them to get their hands on the mat carrying weight. As their arms carry the weight of their upper body it will suddenly become much easier for you to move and manipulate their remaining body weight into submissions and sweeps. Remember - it’s not just about how much your opponent weighs - but rather what percentage of his weight is actually on you - that determines your ability to engage him effectively.

Speed: Speed is a wonderful attribute in combat sports. In Jiu jitsu it is probably less important than it is in most other combat sports because most of the action is on the floor where speeds are always much slower than standing position. Nonetheless a very quick opponent definitely creates unique problems even in Jiu jitsu. However, what if you aren’t particularly quick? What are you to do? Understand this - speed of body is great but speed of DECISION MAKING is better. Why? Because if you can make quick mental decisions you can build ANTICIPATION into your game and anticipation will create an artificial speed advantage - not because it makes you faster but because it enables you to START THE RACE EARLIER. If you don’t have the fast body - TRAIN YOURSELF TO HAVE THE FASTEST MIND THAT CAN IDENTIFY A SITUATION AND MAKE A DECISION BEFORE YOUR OPPONENT HAS STARTED MOVING.

The stronger your initial attack - the easier your follow up attacks: It’s rather rare in top level Jiu jitsu to smash through your opponents defenses on the first attempt and get the score. Usually it involves elaborate sets ups, fatiguing pressure over time or combination of moves to get a breakthrough. When it comes to combinations, a weak first attack is unlikely to evoke a sufficient reaction from a talented opponent to set up a good combination. Worse still, it may be strongly countered. You want a powerful first attack that throws your opponent into a totally defensive mindset and evokes predictable defensive reactions that you can capitalize upon. Don’t hang back from the opening attack even though you know it’s just a ruse to set up the subsequent attacks - go in hard to create the reactions you need to make the second, third or fourth attack score!

If you can trap an opponents head and arm between your knees, you will immediately be in position to attack the upper body with submissions. The ideal of Jiu jitsu is always to control greater strength and aggression with lesser strength and aggression. There are different ways to express this ideal - but one of the very best is to match the strength of your legs against an opponents arms. This is a battle you can consistently win even against much stronger opponents. A simple and extremely effective way to do this is to clamp your opponents head and one arm between your knees while taking an angle. This opens the door to arm bars, triangles, kimuras, omo plata - even leg locks if you know what you’re doing. It immediately turns a passive or neutral bottom position into a highly advantageous one - look to get there as often as you can!

Creating a threat: How your opponent behaves towards you in a match is closely tied to whatever perceived threat level he believes about you. The higher his assessment of your threat level - the more conservative and reserved he will be in his actions around you - the less risks he will take as he engages with you. It is important therefore, that you take every opportunity to create attacking threats at all times during a match. Make sure that your defensive skills are closely followed by counterattack and that any indecision on his part is ruthlessly attacked by you. Positional threat is good, but submission threat usually creates a higher threat level, so make sure you have some favorite submission attacks for every scenario.

When grappling strong opponents sometimes it feels like their arms are like iron bars - but I promise you - if you can can put an opponents hand behind their back, even the strongest arm will feel weak. Exploit this physiological fact whenever you can!

Hands and feet: when you use your arms to grab something you will usually use your hands as the connection to the object you are grabbing. So if you want to pick up your briefcase - you will use your hand to grip the handle and your arms (in unison with other body parts) to do the lifting - the arms do the heavy work, the hands provide the connection. The legs and feet operate in a similar way from open guard position. In most cases, Your legs do the heavy work, but the feet provide the connection to the opponent. Knowing this, when you are passing open guard, you must be mindful to control your opponents feet as much as possible and seek to prevent them connecting effectively to your body (usually your legs). Foot control is essential to success. If the opponents feet can connect securely to you, he will be able to use his legs very effectively to cause you many problems; but if the feet can’t make effective connection, it will be more difficult for the legs to play an effective role. So when passing - MONITOR HIS FEET and try to prevent them connecting solidly to your legs. You’ll have a much easier time imposing your passing game when you do so

The BJJ Fanatics fall sale just started! All my instructional videos on sale at 42% off! Link in my Instagram bio!

Don’t tolerate controlling/dangerous grips: Oftentimes in Jiu jitsu you will feel an opponent get a good grip that feels like it controls you in some way that signals danger - a strong passing grip for example. Don’t accept it - peel it off immediately to deny the advantage. You don’t want to degenerate into a negative player who only focuses on grip denial at the expense of offense, but still, you have to take care of defensive concerns early before they become insurmountable problems, even if if means backing off the offense for a short time. Here, Georges St Pierre peels a controlling hand that could be setting up a guard pass off his knee - once having done so, he can go back into offense with confidence

Train your mind to see possibilities and carry knowledge - train your body to make those possibilities realities and that knowledge into skill

Positions for less athletic people: A word that gets thrown around a lot in Jiu jitsu bus “athleticism.” No one ever tries to define what they mean by this but generally it refers to the an athletes potential for movement - how fast they can move, what range of motion can they move through, how far they can move via running or jumping and for how long etc etc. In general, movement is aided by space that permits greater freedom of movement. Any kind of physical encumbrances that reduce movement potential is the enemy of athleticism. This provides an important general rule - THE MORE CONNECTION THERE IS BETWEEN YOUR BODY AND YOUR OPPONENTS, THE MORE YOU WILL REDUCE HIS ATHLETICISM. So if you are older, slower, and just plain less athletic than your opponent - you want to maximize connection between your body and his to undermine his athletic advantage. So the best positions for older, slower athletes to work successfully against younger, faster, more explosive, more flexible opponents are those that put the maximum area of your body in contact with his. Arguably the best example of this from bottom position is half guard. This creates very significant connection between the top and bottom player which has a great slowing and holding effect that can be used to undermine faster and more athletic opponents. Next time you feel physically outgunned underneath an opponent, try locking him up in half guard and see if you can take the pace down to a level that works in your favor instead of his

The most fundamental forms of control over the human body will always be control over the HIPS and the HEAD. Interestingly, in most cases you have to choose one or the other (there are some powerful exceptions). In most cases of top positional control, we start with the hips and progress to the head, since the hips are typically closer. Make a deep study of hip control and head control and your game will improve greatly

Getting settled in Austin: It’s been a fun first twenty four hours in Austin! Teaching two or three times a day while scouting real estate to start a school and get a place to live 😜 This is a beautiful city and there is much potential for the future.

First night in Austin Texas! I flew into Austin this afternoon and went to teach at Renzo Gracie Austin tonight. It was fun going over back control techniques and tactics with an enthusiastic group of locals 😜😜 We will be teaching there while we get situated and organized and build our own place. I’ve always been impressed by the way change creates new outlooks and evolution in all of us - I’m sure the change will be a good thing and create a strong future. Tomorrow morning it’s back to the mats for more!

Last day in Puerto Rico: I had a great time today teaching a seminar here in Puerto Rico to benefit local Jiu jitsu schools and associations running competitions for local athletes. It’s been an amazing experience watching some of the local Jiu jitsu athletes learn and improve this last year. Today we went over many ways to control and finish from back positions - a favorite theme in my teaching. Tomorrow morning I will fly out to Austin Texas to start in a new locale and doubtless new adventures. Thank you to all the people who helped us train and prepare for competitions this last year in Puerto Rico!

Don’t just attack the submission - attack his base of support AND the submission and you’ll double your chances of success: It hard enough to defend a well applied submission hold at the best of times - it’s considerably more difficult when you’ve been knocked down to an awkward position from where you have no ability to apply strength or movement. Make use of this insight whenever you can. If you catch an opponent in a good lock - look immediately to go the extra distance and lock them out if their base of support so that they have TWO tasks - they have to defend the submission hold AND recover their base - the former is not possible until they perform the latter. This will give you a much greater chance of finishing them than just the hold itself. Here, Gordon Ryan makes an already very dangerous triangle even more so by knocking his opponent down - defending from a broken down position like this will be nearly impossible

There are many measures of dominance in Jiu jitsu. You have a dominant grip, balance domination, dominant angle, dominant position - but no single situation brings together so many aspects of dominance in grappling as getting behind an opponent. Seek it always. Hunt for it, fight for it - get it. Once you do, the game is so much easier for you and so much harder for your opponent

Getting ready for Austin Texas! Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and I are getting ready for a big move to Austin Texas to begin teaching and training. I will teach a seminar here in Puerto Rico to raise money for local Jiu jitsu schools who supported us in our time here - it will be sad to leave the Island but I’m excited for the future. Going to Texas was always fun adventure for competitions - now it will be to make a home! Initially we will teach out if a small local school Renzo Gracie Austin, but we will start scouting for our own place as we become more familiar with the city. The fun part will be re-learning how to drive! I have not driven a car since 1991! 😂😂😂 I will have to get a driver’s license like a teenager and learn to handle a modern car! 😂😂 I am pretty sure I will end up in some kind of vehicular disaster in the first week! 😂💀💀😂 Can’t wait to get in the ground next week and start the journey to make Texas a Jiu jitsu powerhouse!

When you can get the upper body and the lower body facing in opposite directions, you will generally dominate the top passing, pinning and pressure game. The two most powerful means of controlling the human body are the head and hips. If you can control both AND make them face in opposite directions, you truly put an opponent under pressure and he will find it very difficult indeed to stop you advancing to your next objective.

The basis of our open guard game - the hook sweep (sumi gaeshi): The most versatile and effective sweep from open guard whenever an opponent is on their knees is, in my opinion, the hook sweep sumi gaeshi. It takes very little athletic ability, works both against and for all body types, and if the sweep should fail it leads directly into devastating leg locks since it is based on inside control. It can be done from almost any grip, it is easy to perform on both sides and you can switch rapidly from one side to another. There aren’t many moves that I demand my students get good at - generally I try to encourage students to make their own choices - but sumi gaeshi is one of them. All of my senior students excel at it - you should too!

In a tough match you might only get one shot at victory…better to be damn good at a few moves than average at many. Nobody remembers the moves that ALMOST worked - they only remember the moves that DID work. You want enough diversity of moves to cover the whole body, but not so many that you never really master any of them.

You’re in a winning position - now is not the time for excitement: It perfectly natural and understandable that you should get excited when you get to a winning position against a tough opponent. However, getting excited won’t make it easier to finish. Now is the time for calculation and remembering the skills needed to finish the job. Stay cold and dispassionate and work methodically, the same way you would to solve a math problem - did getting excited or emotional ever help you solve a math problem? No - and it won’t help you solve a Jiu jitsu problem either. Save your excitement for after the job is complete and you will experience excitement a lot more than if you let it creep in too early

Always look to create a viable threat to your opponent whenever possible: One of the biggest determinants of how your opponent will behave in a match overall, and at a critical juncture of a match in particular, is his THREAT ASSESSMENT of you. If he doesn’t find you threatening at all, he will confidently attempt his moves. If on the other hand, he is strongly intimidated by you, he will be very reticent to attempt any but his absolute best moves and only when he feels it is safe to do so. Your opponents willingness to move is a direct reflection of the level of threat he feels. Note how Georges St Pierre immediately threatens a strangle when he gets behind Gordon Ryan. Even if the threat isn’t particularly strong, it will keep an opponent honest and force him to restrict his hands to a passive, defensive role. Most of those defensive roles are very predictable, which means you will have the tactical advantage in an ensuing hand fight. Always seek to create a level of threat that gets your opponents attention - without it he will move much more freely and prove to be a more difficult adversary

The enemy advances, we retreat. The enemy retreats, we pursue: In the ebb and flow of guard play, opponents will sometimes pressure forward and sometimes recede - it’s is crucial you be able to follow that movement to advantage. So often when opponents move back, we stop moving and wait for them to come back to us. This is a missed opportunity. When they disengage it is the perfect time to surge forward and actively come up from bottom position and take your opponent down. Don’t think that because you aren’t a wrestling specialist that this kind of tactic won’t work for you. It’s generally much easier to perform many forms of takedown under these circumstances because your opponents stance is usually compromised. Most Jiu jitsu players are very effective dealing with opponents driving forward into their guard - make sure you are equally effective when they pull away in the opposite direction

Last mission in Puerto Rico: I will be teaching a seminar in Puerto Rico on September 19. I am sad to be leaving the Island. Though there were obviously some sad elements to our time here, there were many more great ones. I will be eternally grateful to the many friends we made here and who generously gave time and resources to help us in our time in Puerto Rico. 100% of the money made in this seminar will go to gyms who let us train on their mats with no expectations of reward and to the Puerto Rico Jiu jitsu federation to help fund competitions for the many talented young athletes in the Island to show their skills in the future. We have greatly enjoyed showing our approach to the game in Puerto Rico over the last year and I look forward to a last chance to showcase it to a wider audience. ¡Deseandoles lo mejor! ¡Nos vemos ahi!!

I am happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video from the NEW WAVE JIU JITSU OPEN GUARD:SWEEPS AND REVERSALS today. It features our approach to open guard play. The pressure of lower body submissions creates reactions that feed into our sweeps and reversals game. No matter what an opponent does - drops to knees, backs away, tries to crowd you or defensively hand fights - there is an answer to will get you top position. This is the no gi open guard play you see my students use so successfully in competition. Any attempt to stop leads right back into lower body submissions, creating a dilemma that is very difficult to overcome! If you want to build a devastating no gi open guard game, check this out! Link in my Instagram bio

Open guard - so many possibilities - don’t restrict yourself: So many people start their open guard play with the idea that as the guard player, they have to stay on the back or buttocks until they get a sweep or submission. This is absolutely not the case. You will never maximize your potential in bottom position open guard until you get comfortable with the idea of getting up from your back or buttocks and coming up into reversals. This is even more so when training no gi. In live sparring against someone your own size and skill level it is very difficult to sweep cleanly or submit decisively. Most attempts fail. It is crucial that you be able to follow a failed sweep or submission with a reversal where you scrimmage up from bottom and come to your knees and/or feet and finish by taking your opponent down and taking top position. The same is true in situations where you have an opponent who stays out of range of your primary guard attacks. You need to threaten coming up from bottom into takedowns to cover distance and force the pace from bottom position. In response your opponent will have to stuff the takedowns - this gives you the perfect opportunity to gain the connection you need for more conventional guard sweeps and submissions. In this way you can create a dynamic and attacking open guard game that can threaten opponents at every range and where you control engagement from bottom position. Remember, just because you START on you back or buttocks doesn’t mean you have to STAY there. Play with a wider array of body postures and you’ll be rewarded with a wider array of attacks across a wider array of scenarios

Jiu jitsu is a series of exchanges that begin with contact and end with separation - these are repeated over time until there is a result. This is important; it means that every time you re-engage, there is a chance for advantage if you engage on your terms. If you start most of the engagements on your terms, you will probably prevail over time. Every time you break contact and come back to re-engage, come back with a plan and act quickly on it as you approach. Don’t just lazily step towards the opponent and complacently come to grips. Have a sense how you will gain advantage from the moment of contact every time and you will steadily wear down even the toughest opponents

Start small, with a plan of how to take it all: When you first come out to grapple with your opponent, the general pattern is to start with minor grips - usually starting at the hands or head. From there you work to increasing amounts of body contact and control. Because control is generally much easier on the ground than it is standing, the action typically transitions to the floor, where the idea is to get ever increasing amounts of body contact in ever increasing amounts of positional dominance. Make sure you realize this is a step by step process. Don’t try to take too much too early. Start with the small actions of gripping hands and head and build from there. Trying to grab too much too early makes you easy to counter attack. Work progressively towards your goals and don’t skip steps unless the opportunity is completely open (and even then be aware it could be a trap). You will probably have to repeat this process many times over the course of a tough match - get used to it - it is the way of all Jiu jitsu.

Everything important you ever do in Jiu jitsu will be done against strong resistance - be sure to factor this resistance into all your calculations BEFORE you make your move

What are you known for on the mat? In everyday life I am sure you are known by those around you to have a certain image of personality that is distinctively yours and which makes you recognizable to them. For example, you might be known as someone who likes fashion, or cars, or fishing or some activity or point of view that characterizes you. One of the most important elements in your development in Jiu jitsu is to develop your own Jiu jitsu image or personality that characterizes your Jiu jitsu game. Once you have this people will have certain expectations about you on the mat. YOU CAN EXPLOIT THESE EXPECTATIONS TO ADVANTAGE. If you are known as a dangerous back attack specialist, opponents will be very reticent about exposing their back to you. This will usually create defensive over reactions that you can use to win. If they focus on turning to face you to prevent back exposure, they will be easier to attack with guillotines, Darce and anaconda strangles. If they glue their back to the ground defensively, they will be very vulnerable to north/south strangles etc etc. Your image and reputation is important in this regard. It will influence how people behave around you, and their behavior will be predictable based on what you know about what they believe - and that is exploitable! So - what are you known for on the mat?

When you’re close to a win you’ve got two options - speed or control: There are quite often situations in Jiu jitsu where you are close to total victory - say for example, when you are starting to apply a rear strangle, or when you have an opponent totally immobilized in a tight ashi garami with the heel exposed - or in this case with Georges St Pierre, a locked in arm bar. Your basic choice now is this - you can either rush to apply the finishing move and get it completed before the opponent can get himself defensively organized, or, you can take your time and control your opponents movement so that you can make adjustments and even multiple finishing attempts over time to get the breakthrough. Both can work. As a general rule, however, I favor the control option. My reasoning is that speed options are almost always more likely to injure students in training and time lost in training makes victory in competition less likely. More importantly, speed creates momentum and looseness that can be used by a crafty opponent to aid an escape. Unfortunately the speed options almost always prevent you switching the a second or third attack option because everything is put into the quick application of the first attempt. Control methods allow multiple attempt and combination attacks that tend to do better at the higher levels. Speed attempts tend to work well up to a certain level or not work at all. You need to be able to apply both, as you may be attempting the move with very little time left on the clock or in a rule set that gives very limited time to attack (eg Judo), but if time is available, make sure you can work at controlled pace that enables you solve any puzzles the opponent presents to you, work through multiple attacks and variations before getting to the finish

Pressure: Pressure over time is the single greatest determinant of victory. It is rare to beat someone your own skill level quickly and easily - it can happen - but not often. Usually it will be pressure over time that breaks an opponent to a point where they mentally accept defeat. Don’t be upset when your moves fail - every attempt creates pressure that drains an opponent - each failure adds up over time and compounds upon the next until a breakthrough is reached and victory will be yours

Alignment and misalignment: The human body relies on good alignment to produce whatever strength it is capable of. When you watch champion Olympic weightlifters put up their mind boggling lifts you can see the near perfect alignment of their bodies throughout the lift is what enables them to put up weights that would crush the rest of us. In Jiu jitsu too we need alignment when we want to be strong and efficient. Good posture makes the moves of Jiu jitsu easy. The flip side of this is that when we attack an opponent - THE ATTACK MUST ALWAYS BE AN ATTACK ON THE OPPONENTS POSTURE. If you can put your opponent into a forced, unnatural, contorted position, he will find it very difficult to defend himself. Look at how Garry Tonon is not satisfied with just getting a guillotine - he goes the extra distance and rotates his opponents head into an unnatural position that weakens the opponents ability to defend the strangle. With the spine misaligned it’s very difficult to even begin an effective defense, let alone complete it. Whenever possible look to take your opponents body out of alignment to double the effectiveness of your attacks!

The relationship between POSITION and TIME: From your first day in Jiu jitsu you were told that position is the most valuable commodity in Jiu jitsu. The usual reason given for this is that superior position allows you to attack without fear of an opponent being able to attack you. Certainly this imbalance of attacking opportunity is a very important reason, but there is another. Position gives you the luxury of TIME. Once a dominant position has been attained, you can create pressure over time. You can attack and FAIL multiple times - IT DOESN’T MATTER. As long as the POSITION doesn’t fail, it doesn’t matter whether the first, second or third or fourth attempts at submission fail - just try again until you succeed - as with every failed attempt your opponent gets more tired, making the subsequent attempt more likely to break through. POSITION MAKES TIME A WEAPON, and of all the weapons at your disposal this often proves to be the dangerous of them all

You don’t have to rush: There are some times in Jiu jitsu where both you and your opponent know what you want to do. Attack will be more difficult know since your opponent will be putting himself in a strong defensive position. It’s tempting to rush it - perhaps if you get the move into operation fast enough you’ll get there before his position is set. Maybe, maybe not. Often a better way of doing things is stop and then let the opponent relax a little as he assumes you believe the move will no longer work against his defensive position - and then just as you feel him relax - go hard back into the move. Here, Georges St Pierre has one of his favorite grappling moves, Kimura from bottom half guard. Rather than attacking hell for leather against a good opponent who has already assumed a sound defensive position, you can see him waiting in a state of relaxed preparedness. He’s looking for feedback from his opponent. If he feels the opponent relax a little, he will explode into the kimura and get he opponents hand behind his back and force a roll either into top position or submission. This waiting game can be a great tactic in an apparent deadlock - make sure you learn to relax in sparring you you can think and act in this tactical fashion rather than just as fast and hard as you can

The magic of angle: Understand this - any time you are engaged with an opponent, any defensive stance he takes is predicated on the current angle between him and you (usually you are directly in front of each other at the onset of engagement) - ANY CHANGE OF ANGLE ON YOUR PART RENDERS THE OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE STANCE NULL AND VOID. In short, CHANGE OF ANGLE CHANGES EVERYTHING. If you can move to a new angle - DOORS THAT WERE PREVIOUSLY SHUT ARE SUDDENLY OPENED TO YOU - NOW is the time to attack!

Vary your intensity: Your first day sparring in Jiu jitsu was probably pretty similar to mine and everyone else reading this post - you locked up with your opponent and gave everything you had at maximum power until you quickly exhausted yourself and got finished. The path towards expertise is largely bound up with PACE and INTENSITY. It doesn’t matter how well conditioned you are - if you go at maximum intensity for a length of time, you will get exhausted. The key is to understand that high intensity is only required for brief periods in Jiu jitsu, usually when either attacking or defending a potential score or submission. This is only a tiny fraction of the total time of any given match. The rest of the time you should be a state of relatively relaxed, but alert, calm. Learning to cycle between long stretches of calm and short bursts of high intensity effort is a huge part of your development and is the true key to endurance on the mat. The better you get at this skill, the longer you can train and the fewer injuries you will suffer. In addition your sparring will become a lot more enjoyable as a side benefit. If you have a hard time playing calm, make a note to stop in certain positions where you feel you can recharge and compose yourself, then as you improve, stretch those positions out more and employ more positions. Make it your goal to spend 70-80% of a match in a fairly calm state so you can save yourself for the 5-10% where the match is won and lost.

Angle: Mount and closed guard are essentially inversions of each other (as far as positioning goes). As such, they have something important in common - they require a pivot of ninety degrees if you want to attack your opponent with arm bars. This perpendicular shift is the key to strong arm bar attacks from mount and closed guard. The main obstacle to this perpendicular shift is almost always your opponents ELBOWS. It interesting how when we set a goal in Jiu jitsu, say an arm bar from guard, it turns out the most important precursor has nothing or little to do with the goal - but if that innocuous precursor isn’t satisfied - the goal will never be reached. The only way to turn ninety degrees against a resisting opponent is get the elbow of the arm you wish to attack inside your hip. You have many favorite moves I am sure - be sure to clearly identify exactly what the essential precursors to all those moves are, so that you have a clear sense of what you have to accomplish before your favorite moves can work. This step by step approach is vital to your success and progress.

What’s your next move? When we begin Jiu jitsu our question is always “what move do I have to do to get out of this predicament?” As we grow in skill the new question becomes, “what move should I do to attack?” As you go further still the question you must constantly ask yourself is “what move comes next if this one should fail.” The reality of beginner Jiu jitsu is that is most about escaping bad situations. Intermediate Jiu jitsu is most about learning skills to with which to attack. Advanced Jiu jitsu is mostly about the exchange of attack and counter against a highly skilled opponent who knows all the same moves you do and also how to defend them. As such, the great skill you need is not attack per se, but combinations and chains of attack working on the assumption that the first ones will usually fail and it will be the second, third or fourth that gets the breakthrough. Even when everything is locked in and the end seems assured - your mind should STILL be asking - WHAT’S NEXT IF THIS FAILS? Here, Georges St Pierre’s triangle track looks final, but his arm position will make entry into leg locks easy and automatic should it fail nonetheless. This is the spirit you want to aim for. Remember always that as a general rule in Jiu jitsu defense is easier than offense, so your offense must carry a greater degree of precision and persistence than a potential opponent counts on.

Phases: an odd thing about my career in Jiu jitsu is that it went through three very distinct phases. When I began I was a bouncer working in night clubs and only interested in Jiu jitsu as a self defense skill. In time I became an instructor at my sensei Renzo Gracie’s academy and taught Jiu jitsu to all, but was most known for my work on MMA grappling through my student Georges St Pierre. Mr St Pierre was a super star and attracted many other great MMA athletes and grapplers. The emphasis accordingly was on no gi grappling appropriate to MMA competition with a heavy emphasis on takedowns, top control and escapes. After that came a third phase when submission grappling became very popular and the squad rose to prominence. Interestingly, each phase was around a decade in duration. Here is a classic photo of an afternoon class at Renzos probably around 2008. You can see Georges St Pierre, Roger Gracie, Romulo Barral, David Branch, my great unknown student Brian Glick, off camera is a very young Garry Tonon (he used to come in for MMA grappling with Tom DeBlass), Frankie Edgar, Rory MacDonald and Shawn Williams. It always brings a smile to my face when I think of those days - so many amazing people in one room battling towards their goals and helping others battle to theirs. I’ve seen so many changes over the years in the people and places around me and I am eternally thankful for the changes and evolution they have all created within me.

Why Gordon Ryan is the best no gi mount player I ever saw: Jiu jitsu is a game of position above all. At the top of the heap of the various positions are the mounts - front and rear. They both score the maximum points and you can argue as to which is the better of the two (in grappling I generally prefer rear mount over mount) but one thing is sure - they are both damn good. Of all the myriad athletes I have see over the years the two best practitioners of the mounted position by a landslide were Gordon Ryan (no gi) and Roger Gracie (gi). It is worth asking asking - what makes Gordon Ryan’s no gi mount game so much better? The position seems pretty simple on the face of it. There aren’t that many moves from there and most athletes know those moves by the time they’re blue or purple belts. Lots of people get to the position, so what makes Mr Ryan different? Well I could list quite a few features, but I want to focus on the most important feature - the use of the LEGS as the primary connection and control mechanism of the position. When most people get mounted they immediately focus their attention on the upper body. They fixate on chest to chest contact and connection through a crossface. This is fine, certainly these things can be very important, but never as important as what’s going on downstairs at the legs. The primary connection is through your legs. You have many choices as to how that connection is held. Each choice will make in you strong in some ways, weak in others. Each choice will have important ramifications for how an opponent can escape and how you can shut down those escapes. Each choice will facilitate certain types of submission attacks and rule out others. Never lose track of the fact that the mount is just a guard position upside down and guard is just an inverted mount. Just as your LEGS are the basis of connection and control from guard - so must they be from mount. Just as you play with many alternative foot positions from guard, so must you do from mount. Just as you must get angle and head control with your legs from guard, so must you do from mount. This lower body focus must be your goal from mount

Learning to fly - and fall: Even if you are a grappler who generally avoids standing position in favor of ground work, at some point you are going to get picked up and thrown hard into the mat - there is no getting around this. Learning to take the impact of a hard throw and get back into grappling with minimum fuss and interruption is very important. Failure to absorb the impact well will at best leave you discombobulated and easy to attack in the immediate aftermath of the throw and ; at worst, get you some time in hospital. Beginners are usually taught some simple solo drills that do a good job of showing how to distribute the impact on to a big surface area of the body and direct that impact onto parts of the body well suited for hard impact - that is what will protect you from harm. At some point however, you have to go beyond the solo drills and actually get thrown if you are to be able to apply your knowledge under the pressure and stress of hard competitive sparring. I know many people who look great doling their solo break fall drills but who fall badly in actual match conditions. The best way for beginners to bridge the gap between the basic solo drills and real world hard throws is to start with one or both knees on the floor and have a standing partner throw you repeatedly so that you get the feel of being thrown fairly hard by real throws but fall only half the distance of a real throw and thus take less than half the impact (because you never fully leave the ground). This is a good way for beginner athletes to get to the next level of confidence in taking standing throws that can help people who started the game later in life and simply aren’t used to getting thrown in a competitive match. Once this becomes easy for you it will be a lot easier to move on to being thrown from full standing position and your overall safety in hard training will be improved.

Your mind is your greatest weapon - but your legs are a close second: We’ve all had the disconcerting experience of grappling against someone far stronger than ourselves. It’s a bad feeling when your opponents hands easily peel off your best grips and pull out of your best holds. Whenever you feel outgunned in strength - it’s time to use your basic knowledge of the human body in your favor. No matter how much stronger your opponents hands and arms may be than your hands and arms - his hands and arms are not stronger than your legs. Make it a fight of your legs against his arms and you can realistically beat stronger people. The best place for you start this study is submission holds that directly match your legs against an opponents head and arm - and the triangle is king of this. Make it central to your training - and more importantly - central to your JIU JITSU MINDSET. THINK in these terms and you will begin to ACT in these terms, and then you may start to surprise yourself when grappling bigger and stronger opponents

Hands: Whenever you are working for the major upper body body submissions - be aware that in the majority of cases, YOUR OPPONENTS FIRST DEFENSIVE MOVE WILL BE WITH HIS HANDS/ARMS. As such, IT IS PRUDENT TO BEGIN MOST UPPER BODY SUBMISSION ATTACKS WITH A DELIBERATE ATTEMPT TO TAKE OUT YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO USE HIS HANDS DEFENSIVELY PRIOR TO COMPLETING THE SUBMISSION. It’s a simple but important concept - DOMINATE THE HANDS AND YOU WILL USUALLY DOMINATE THE SUBMISSION OVERALL. Don’t get tunnel vision on the submission. Remember that a skilled opponent will resist your attempt as soon as he identifies the danger. Take out the first defensive apparatus he can use and you will be a step ahead as you battle for completion.

Resistance: We never really know for sure what moves our opponent will do in a match - but one thing we DO know for sure is that he will resist every one of OUR moves. Learning to OVERCOME and MOVE AROUND resistance is a lifelong study in Jiu jitsu. No one cares how beautiful your moves look with a cooperative training partner during drills - what really counts is how successful you are at applying them in a competitive setting on a skilled opponent who doesn’t want to lose. This will require skills in SET UP. If you can disguise the entry to your moves in some way, then execution will be easier. It will requires skill in COMBINING MOVES, if you can follow a failed move with a second or third follow up, your opponent will often fail to follow the change in direction in time and be caught. Learning to disguise your intent and work in combinations are the two best ways to counter resistance in all combat sports - Jiu jitsu is no exception. Be sure to imbed your power moves in creative set ups and combinations and the principle problem of sparring - overcoming resistance - will be much easier

Your first priority - defensive soundness: I am sure on many occasions you have seen two completely untrained people fight each other. The first thing you notice is that neither is concerned with defense but instead they are totally preoccupied with their offense. As a result the fight looks like it will be decided on a coin toss - whoever lands first will win. The first sign of expertise in combat sports is constant defensive awareness. GOOD FIGHTERS AND GRAPPLERS ALWAYS WORK ON THE ASSUMPTION THAT EVERY TIME THEY ATTACK THERE WILL BE IMMEDIATE COUNTER ATTACKS. As such they never enter into offense with an escape route and positioning that will either deny counter attacks or make them difficult. MAKE A HABIT OF DEFENSIVELY SOUND POSITIONING and you will remove the randomness of outcome that is the hallmark of untrained fighters and replace it with outcomes that heavily favor you. Enter, apply and finish every attack with defensively sound positioning and the outcome will be something you can count on rather than wish for

Vertebrates: The most fundamental feature of our human bodies is our vertebrate nature - our bodies are completely dominated by our most basic structure - a spine connected to our skull. Everything is connected to this. Because the head is at the end of the spine and the spine functions as a lever - HE WHO CONTROLS THE END OF THE LEVER - THE HEAD - CONTROLS THE WHOLE BODY. There are many ways as to HOW you can control the head from standing and ground, top or bottom. There are even more variables as to WHEN you can control the head based on your position relative to your opponent. Never lose track of the fact that the best overall way to control a human is through their head. Look for it whenever possible and learn when it’s available and when it’s not. You can do it more easily when an opponent is wearing a gi jacket since it functions like a rope around the neck, but there are plenty of great ways to do without a gi also - either way - make it one of the primary goals of your grappling style

Fighting until the last: In Jiu Jitsu it’s natural to get a sense that a battle has been lost and stop fighting. Sometimes it’s tactically smart to think this way - for example, you can recognize that one battle has been lost so stop fighting that battle so that you can reserve your forces for the next one. Other times however, you’ll want to fight to the end and concede nothing. This is often the case with guard retention. Understand that until your opponent has completely cleared your legs and pinned your head and one shoulder down for three seconds - he has not passed your guard. That gives you a LOT of leeway for last minute, last second scramble defense that can prevent a score and keep you in the game. Here, Garry Tonon fights to keep his shoulders off the mat to prevent a score even though his opponent has cleared his legs. This is the kind of spirit you usually want to exhibit in guard retention battles!

Make it a battle of your legs against your opponents upper body and you will prevail even against bigger opponents and make it look effortless against smaller or same size opponents. An opponent might be considerably bigger and stronger than you overall, but his arms are not bigger and stronger than your legs. Learn to fight his arms with your legs and you will put yourself on a winning track. You can’t always do it, but when you can it is a truly fine representation of the ideals of Jiu jitsu

Developing a favorite move: Jiu jitsu is not just a science of levers and fulcrums and centers of gravity; it is a deeply personal art of self expression. In a world of millions of competing choices, you get to choose which moves will become yours and express yourself through them. It is crucial that you learn Jiu jitsu this way. The Japanese in their wisdom recognize the importance of this and term favorite moves “TOKUI-WAZA.” You must develop YOUR tokui-waza. From these favorite moves will come most of your successes. Whenever you’re in trouble they will be your shield. Whenever you struggle to get the breakthrough, they will be your hammer. Here, Georges St Pierre, an athlete whose most famous tokui-waza in MMA was his double leg takedown, works his favorite grappling move - Kimura from bottom half guard. As opponents learn that you have a favorite move, they will learn to counter it - forcing you to evolve and improve your knowledge and performance of the move and to learn new, complimentary moves to supplement it - and thus your overall skill level increases like branches growing from the central trunk of a tree. This is one of the best ways to grow quickly in Jiu jitsu - and it all starts with developing some favorites - what will be yours?

Even the best move applied at the best time can fail due to just a single mistake if the opponent is strong on defense. Aim for perfection in every aspect of execution - you can’t close every door - but the more you do - the more success you will have. Don’t be satisfied with good, aim for great in your areas of specialty in the game!

Sometimes skills carry over directly - sometimes they carry over indirectly: Sometimes you learn a skill that you can see the moment it is taught to you that it will be immediately applicable to your game. So for example, if you specialize in heel hooking and you learn a new and effective way of exposing a heel, you know that you’ll probably be able to apply it very soon and it will fit in very well with what you already do. Other times the skills are applicable, but in a much less direct way. Here, Georges St Pierre works on heel hooking skills in a format applicable to submission grappling - but of course, he is an mma fighter, not a submission grappler, so the skills learned in this rather artificial position won’t translate directly to the fight situations he normally finds himself in. Even more extreme are the many law enforcement and military personal I teach. Sport Jiu jitsu is very removed from the world in which they operate where there are no mats, weapons are normal, they are dressed in body armor with a full kit that greatly restricts movement. Still, the skills are useful - it just requires more thought about modification and appropriate application, if understanding what needs to be changed for the different environment, rule set (or total lack of rules) etc. There is a lot of useful knowledge out there that can benefit your game - just because it’s not immediately and directly applicable to your game doesn’t mean it can’t be beneficial in some less obvious way - keep an open mind and you may well find that an insight you gained can be applied to your situation in ways that increase your performance

Intensity: The sport of Jiu jitsu is ideally a mix of mostly relaxed efficiency mixed with spurts of ultra high intensity at the moments where either a big score or a submission is being attempted. Learning to guard when to be relaxed and when to go hard is a huge part of your development. Remember always to put a cap on your intensity - both in terms of HOW OFTEN you go into maximum intensity level and HOW LONG you stay there. Mistakes with either will quickly get you exhausted and unable to go into overdrive when you really need it. The first skill you learn is to monitor your OPPONENT, but as you go further will find that it is just as important to monitor YOURSELF so that you do not get exhausted before you attain victory

Tunnel vision: One of the most natural and destructive human tendencies we have in the mat is tunnel vision. When we have an objective in our mind there is a powerful tendency to shut our eyes to other possibilities which may well be more promising. One of my tasks as a coach is to call out those other possibilities as they arise. The choice is still in the hands of the athlete - but at least he or she now works with a CHOICE of options rather than only one - and in a world where selection is done in seconds and can impact the outcome - that’s an important thing. When you train there is always a voice there to open your peripheral vision - so train yourself to always have at least two options for every second by second moment of attack - you will immediately double your rate of success

Make sure you’re immune to your own poison: An odd thing about combat sports is that quite often (not always) athletes who excel at a given move are themselves surprisingly vulnerable to that same move. This might be because everyone they train with us so fearful of that move that the athlete in question never gets to practice defending it himself. So for example, when Garry Tonon fought Rousimar Palhares, a man greatly feared for his leg locks, I encouraged him to immediately attack Mr Palhares’s legs. If you have favorite moves - make sure you know both sides of them - attack AND defense. Only when you know both aspects can you rightly be described as a master of the position. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of back attacks, Does his time with the other half of back, mastery - defense

A lesson from a young blue belt: I think it’s fair to see we all enter this sport with a lot of self doubt. Your first few years is just a long story of getting your ass kicked every day at the dojo. As a result it’s natural to wonder if you’ll ever be any good, if you’ll ever be able to match the people currently crushing you, whether as a blue belt you’ll ever be able to take on the upper belts. This weekend talented young Daniel Manasoiu, a nineteen year old blue belt went to The European Open, where Europe’s best get together to battle it out no gi under ADCC rules. Most of the athletes are very experienced brown and black belts. Big Dan won double gold, both his weight division and absolute with his devastating submissions game - specializing of course in leg locks. I have always been impressed by the incredible sporting heritage and success of the Eastern European nations. I believe one day they will be a powerful force in the world of grappling. Big Dan is American but first generation Romanian so he was very proud to go back to his roots and take double gold. It is a great lesson for all of us. That if you train hard, you can overcome higher belts and more experienced opponents who have been in the sport much longer. The only thing that counts on the mat is your skills, and if you work hard and intelligently, you can grow those faster than many people believe, so that your current doubts can be replaced by future triumphs. Well done Dan!

When every round is tough - keep going - there is a deeper skill to learn: The best time to learn nuanced skill is when your mind and body are fresh. Nonetheless there is a skill that you must learn that you will NEVER learn when you’re fresh and rested. This is THE SKILL OF GRAPPLING WHILE YOU’RE EXHAUSTED. This is a truly important skill. Anyone can fight well when they’re fresh - but it takes a special discipline to maintain your composure and decorum when you are close to collapse. You can only learn this through experience. There are subtleties to this aspect of the game. You must learn to pace yourself within whatever reserves you have left - to manage your dwindling resources and still get to your goals - to change your goals to stay within your endurance. All these are learned by putting yourself in duress. So next time your mind is screaming at you to sit out the next round - go back in. You will learn more about yourself in the next few minutes than you did in the previous decades before you learned to grapple. Those lessons will be vital for your development both on and off the mats.

Grips - Imposing and denying: Every thing starts with grip in Jiu jitsu. Most of the gripping initiates with the hands, but given that the feet are an essential part of gripping when playing guard they can sometimes initiate gripping as well. You can’t do much in grappling until some form of grip is established. How that grip is established will usually determine all the next steps of the battle. Both athletes will try to impose their own grips while denying an opponent grips. This initial grip fight is one of the factors most responsible for determining the outcome of the match as a whole - yet is largely ignored as a skill by most students since it is not visually interesting. I can tell within seconds of initiating contact with an athlete what his overall skill level is and what is his tactical plan just based on his gripping and grip sequences. Make sure your gripping game is consistent with your overall game. Make sure also that there is some subtlety in your gripping game. Your grip reveals a LOT about your intentions - so throw some fakery and deceit into your grips as well to make yourself less transparent. This game ends with submission - but it starts with grip

Sometimes when you look at it Jiu jitsu just seems like a hopeless and disorganized tangle of thrashing limbs - but always remember that under that apparent chaos there are TWO THINGS that give Jiu jitsu direction - POSITIONAL DOMINANCE and SUBMISSION. Understand that no matter confusing or complicated it may seem there are only five dominant positions and around fifteen high percentage submissions in the game - as long as you’re constantly searching and working towards those two end points you will be going forward. Keep your mind on the endgame and your Jiu jitsu will always have direction minute by minute however disorganized and disoriented it might appear second by second.

Legends: One of my favorite aspects of Jiu jitsu is meeting legends of the sport. When I first began Jiu jitsu I was always impressed by the work of the Machado brothers. They all lived in California but were cousins of my sensei, Renzo Gracie, so we always thought of them as distant relatives. They exhibited Jiu jitsu of the very highest quality and were an inspiration to the Jiu jitsu world. Jean Jacques Machado was among the most brilliant ADCC champions of all time and Rigan Machado was widely considered as one of the very best athletes of his era and arguably the best. Certainly As a beginner in the sport I learned a lot by observing their movement and match pacing which was very advanced. In fact a move that is often associated with my students today - where from seated guard we trap both our opponents feet from behind and sweep them backwards with a push from open guard position - I learned from Jean Jacques (people always ask me if I learned it from Marcelo Garcia, but no, it was Jean Jacques who I learned it from). Many years later at EBI ADCC and UFC events and where they were coaching or spectators I would see Rigan, Jean Jacques or Carlos Machado from time to time (there were other brothers but I never met them). They were always the coolest guys and we’d talk about Jiu jitsu and crazy old matches they’d had back in the day! Here I am hanging out with one of the coolest and most laid back guys in Jiu jitsu - Rigan! Thanks to the brothers for their great role in the development and expansion of Jiu jitsu over the years - thank you for being legends in our sport.

One day far out in the future you will have to face the biggest Jiu jitsu challenge of your life. You don’t know who it will be and you don’t know when it will be - but one thing you DO know is that your best chance at victory will always be to start here and now with the best PREPARATION you can. In a world of uncertainty that’s something you can be sure of.

Know the strong points of each positional variation: Jiu jitsu gives you a LOT of choice. Any given position has many variations within it - each of those variations has it good points and bad points. Each presents elements that suit your body type in some ways and frustrates it in others. Take guard position for example. There are dozens of different types of guard. Each different configuration offers different connection to an opponent and hence different possibilities for attack. It is important you understand that connection and it’s ramifications for your attack choice. Take closed guard for example. It’s most important feature is that locks your hips on top of your opponents hips so that even though your body as a whole is underneath your opponents body, the most important part of your body, your hips, are on top of the most important part of your opponents body - his hips. This has important ramifications. It means that any sweep or reversal that maintains that hip connection will result in a sweep directly to mounted position rather than merely a sweep to top position as is the case with most guard sweeps - after all, closed guard is essentially just an upside down mount position as far as body connection goes. This insight tells you that almost any form of submission you can employ from mount will be applicable from guard - the set ups will be different given the change from top to bottom - but technique selection will be the same. It means that any form of go behind that gets you around and behind your opponents arms will lead directly to rear mount. Knowing the most important feature of each given position in Jiu jitsu will give you the insights you need to direct your attacks better. Don’t just associate a position with a list of attacks - look for it’s deeper mechanical basis and you will see further than your opponents

Two phase sweeps/reversals from open guard: When we begin the study of Jiu jitsu we are taught a classical paradigm of guard sweeps that utilizes the great power of Gi grips along with a curriculum of traditional sweeps that take us directly from bottom to top position. In competitive no gi matches however, we often have to make use of a messy, scrappy paradigm of guard sweeps that has two distinct phases in the transition from top to bottom. The first is a classic Jiu jitsu sweep that knocks an opponent down to his hands and/or hip. The inherently weaker grips of no gi grappling however, make it very difficult to control a strongly resisting opponent during and after his fall. As the opponent tries to recover from the off balancing, we go into phase two - we tackle the opponent around the legs/hips/waist to secure a much more robust no gi grip and scrimmage up into a takedown reversal. While it is not pretty to look at, this two phase approach is very realistic and effective in competitive situations where your classic sweeps just aren’t getting you the scores you need. Next time you’re sweeping without the gi - don’t complacently relax as the opponent falls - be ready to scrimmage up from bottom and finish what you started!!

Control first or submission threat first? When attacking the back, we are normally always taught to establish position first, strangle second. There is a lot of wisdom to this approach. For most people, most of the time, it is the best option. Why? First, Because position scores, and you being ahead on points means the opponent must now take greater risks to escape and get his own scores. Those risks will make him more vulnerable to subsequent attacks. Second, position allows you to make repeated attacks over time. So if you experience initial failure you get to make second, third or fourth attempts at will until you achieve the breakthrough. Third, punishing positions like rear mount can fatigue an opponent over time and make later strangles easier. For these and other reasons it’s usually a good idea to focus on securing the position first and worry about strangles later. However, one problem with this approach that often appears at championship level is that opponents are mentally and physically tough (won’t fatigue or quit over time), tactically smart (often will prevent a score by denying a hook) and skilled at hand fighting defenses (can hold off many attacks over long stretches of time). In these cases it is often better to attack the strangle in those vital half seconds BEFORE you establish the position as your opponent is primarily concerned with defending the position and will often leave the neck momentarily open. Interestingly, his panicked reaction to a strong initial strangle threat will often make the subsequent battle for position easier. Flicking your wrist under his chin very early on in the attack can be a good alternative strategy to employ in these situations

Started from the bottom, now we’re here: Too often jiu jitsu players work with an odd “gentlemen’s agreement” that one will be the top player passing and the other will be the bottom player working for conventional Jiu jitsu sweeps and submissions. This means that they miss out on myriad opportunities to come up from bottom positions into takedowns based on common wrestling movements and which are extremely effective in no gi grappling. Interestingly, because the entire set up process is very different from standing wrestling you can sometimes even takedown/sweep opponents coming up from bottom that you ordinarily cannot take down in neutral standing position. It requires a sense of distance and a mindset that just because you STARTED in bottom position, you don’t have to STAY in bottom position - that if the opportunity is there, you can change from conventional SEATED or SUPINE positions into KNEELING positions that allow quick shots into the opponents legs. This is a relatively easy mindset and skill to adopt and can get great results in a short time. Here, Georges St Pierre and Nicky Ryan and myself work on getting to the hips out of guard position and multidirectional finishes from there

Why is guard position the most emphasized position in Jiu Jitsu? When you look at all the various grappling arts you will see that the most distinctive facet of Jiu Jitsu is it’s heavy emphasis upon guard position. Many grappling arts such as wrestling do not have it all. Others such as Judo and Sambo have it but it is not heavily emphasized or seen as desirable. So why does Jiu jitsu make it the centerpiece of its game? There are several good answers you could offer. You might argue along the longs of tactical or historical considerations and certainly there are some very interesting possibilities there. I have always favored a more physical argument. Jiu jitsu has an ideal - the ability to control greater size and strength with lesser size and strength. Other grappling styles have the same ideal, but a different way of realizing it. Judo has this ideal and due to it being a predominantly standing art using balance breaking as its primary means of overcoming greater size and strength. Jiu jitsu does it primarily by MATCHING THE STRENGTH OF THE LOWER BODY AGAINST AN OPPONENTS UPPER BODY WHERE EVER POSSIBLE. An opponent may be considerably larger than you, but his arms will not be stronger than your legs. Guard position allows you to match your leg and hip strength against an opponent arms and shoulders - a battle that a smaller, weaker person with skills can realistically win against a bigger stronger person. Among us human beings the difference between the strength and endurance of our lower body compared with our upper body is considerable - match your legs against a bigger opponents arms and you’re matching your stronger half against his weaker half - that’s how smaller people can beat bigger people on the floor - and that’s why I have faith in guard position as the basis of the bottom game.

In the gym you regret every minute of playing defense - it’s uncomfortable, frustrating and unexciting. When the chips are down however, and you’re in the battle of your life against a very dangerous opponent, you will relish the memory of every minute you spent working defense and wish only that you’d spent even more time in those uncomfortable, frustrating and unexciting positions. Don’t skimp on defense - you only learn it’s value when you really need - and by then it’s too late. Know it’s value early on and you will have a real advantage over your peers

The impossible goal of seeking perfection in Jiu jitsu performance is a fine metaphor for our lives in general. We all know we will stumble often and come up short at the end, but just as no matter how fast we ran as children, the rainbow always stayed well ahead of us, that didn’t make it any less alluring or captivating; so to on the mats. Whatever happened in your day, vexations, frustrations and disappointments, every training session is a chance to forget it all for a time and chase that impossible but fascinating goal. Keep yearning and keep learning, you’ll never be perfect but you can perfectly imperfect.

End of an era: It is with great sadness that I have to announce the break up of the squad as a unified training and competition team. A combination of factors revolving around disagreements in physical location of a future school, personality conflicts, conflicting values and an inevitable tension between the team brand and the growing individual brands of members were the main factors. I am immensely proud of the tremendous effect the squad had upon the development and direction of our beloved sport over the years. I am extremely confident that all the various team members have risen in competitive ability, teaching skill and independent creativity that they will be highly successful wherever they choose to go - whatever happens their legacy is assured and their future very bright indeed. As for the future, it is still uncertain. Most of us still get along very well. I expect some will still train together and we will work together in future projects in accordance with our team philosophy, but no longer as a single unified room. I believe the split will have the positive effect of creating a larger footprint for the team as they spread out and develop a wider influence. I always believed that the technical development of the team was best created by a tight, unified room, but at the end of the day human happiness outweighs medals and martial skill and it has become clear that some individual members would be happier in different locations. I would like to thank all the members of the squad for the tremendous effort and myriad sacrifices they made to build a team and legacy that will be remembered, in particular, Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan, Craig Jones, Eddie Cummings, Nicky Ryan and Nick Rodriguez. I would also like to thank the many students who formed the room in which the squad developed and honed their skills; and thank you so much to all our faithful followers for your interest and support over the years - I hope and trust we can keep the project of refining our art going despite the changes - Thank you

Scrimmaging up from bottom position: So often when we practice Jiu jitsu we carry in our heads a strange “gentleman’s agreement” that if you are the bottom player, you will remain in bottom position until you get a submission or a conventional Jiu jitsu sweep. This blinds us to myriad attacking opportunities that arise whenever space develops between you and the top player. This space can very often be used to come up off your back and into reversals based upon wrestling type movements normally associated with standing grappling. These score every bit as effectively as the more conventional sweeps of Jiu jitsu and form an ideal compliment to a traditional Jiu jitsu guard game, particularly when playing without a gi. You don’t have to be the best wrestler in the room to get them to work well for you. Often it is easier to get them to work because your opponent is distracted or caught out of stance due to the submission threat or an initial sweep attempt that breaks his balance. You will often surprise yourself by successfully using reversals from guard on opponents that you really struggle to take down in standing position. Look that sweep/submission/takedown interface in your guard game - the results may impress you!

Be quick to critique your own moves as you perform them. Develop a clear sense of when they will work and when they will not. When you feel them begin to fail you will be able to read failure quickly and move to a second move more quickly than an opponent can follow with his defense and get a breakthrough. At the higher levels it’s often not who moves first fastest that wins but rather who moves second fastest.

How far ahead do you think? We always get told not to focus only on the move we are performing but always to look ahead to the next moves should the current one fail. So if I’m attempting an arm bar from guard then I ought to be ready to switch to a triangle if it should fail, an then on to an omoplata should the triangle fail etc. it’s natural to ask - how far out into the future should i be looking with my moves? Does it indicate that I am a better, more sophisticated Jiu jitsu player if i am thinking twelve moves ahead rather than only two or three moves ahead? I usually encourage students to think three or four moves ahead. Anything more than that becomes a little unrealistic as there are way too many variables that could lead to a totally new situation by the time that many moves have been completed in most cases in a competitive match against someone your own level. Plotting too many moves also has a negative effect. It tends to make us under value and under commit to the moves we are attempting here and now and over emphasize moves that haven’t even occurred yet. This usually leads to unacceptably high failure rates with the submissions we attempt. Limiting yourself to three or four move chains means you put a solid commitment to the move in front of you but have enough depth to continue attacks after initial failure for realistic periods of time. So arrange your favorite moves in three shot combinations and you’ll hit a sweet spot of realism and idealism - enough moves in a combination to break through strong defenses but not so many that you never commit strongly enough to finish any one of them.

Filming in Boston with old friends: I went up to Boston to film a new instructional video for the NEW WAVE series. It was great to see old friends Bernardo Faria and Placido Santos! It’s a beautiful New England summer here. I love the fact that in this great country there is so much variation in geography and tradition that in a week going from Puerto Rico to Texas to Massachusetts was like going to three different countries! Now we’re headed to dinner to talk shop and get ready to film some more. Wishing you all the best from this New England summer to wherever you are

Start well end well: When it comes to getting grip and/connection to an opponent - YOU MUST FACTOR IN EXPECTED RESISTANCE TO THAT GRIP/CONNECTION. Every time you make a grip with your arms or legs you can expect resistance from a knowledgeable opponent. This resistance will loosen and weaken whatever grip or connection you’ve made. If you start with ADEQUATE grip/connection, that will resistance will immediately make it INADEQUATE - which will result in failure. If you start with PLENITUDINOUS grip/connection the expected resistance will lower to to ADEQUATE level - which is enough to get the job done. Keep this in mind when fighting for grip and connection and success will come to you more often when coming to grips with tough opponents

Mats, memories and meetings: I began teaching introduction classes under my sensei Renzo Gracie. As senior instructors left to create their own schools my teaching responsibilities grew. In 2001 MMA was a fringe sport trying to recover from a time when it was banned from television and decried as violent expression of “human cock fighting.” Often we would watch MMA from Japan where it was an accepted sport. One day In early 2001 was teaching private classes when a crew of Japanese athletes came in to train at Renzo’s. They were doing grappling based MMA training rather than Jiu jitsu. I recognized the main athlete as Caol Uno, a highly ranked athlete of that era who always fought with courage and skill and often survived terrible predicaments in his fights to come back to victory. Mr Uno was in America for his bout with early MMA icon, Jens Pulver. He did a long and arduous workout and was suffering thirst. I went to front desk and got him some bottles of water and gave them to him. We didn’t speak each other’s language but his genuine sense of thanks was impressive. Almost twenty years later I was teaching a seminar with the squad in Singapore. After showing a technique i looked for my water bottle when Caol Uno came out of nowhere and offered me a bottle of water!! He was in the gym training for another fight in a few days - history repeating itself after two decades!! Once again lack of language didn’t stop the feeling of heartfelt thanks - this time going in the opposite direction! This sport is amazing. Just a brief connection on the mats can form a bond that lasts far beyond what you’d expect! The best part was trying to explain to Nicky Ryan who Caol Uno was - Nicky was not even born at the time the first meeting happened!!

Victory in Austin!! Nicky Ryan had a great win at The Road to ADCC grappling super fight event tonight here in Austin, Texas! He took on one of the most talented 77kg grapplers in the world - Dante Leon - and won decisively with standing takedowns, scrimmaging up from guard position for wrestling reversals and some fine body lock guard passing. Unfortunately midway through the match he badly hurt his knee entering another takedown - the same injury that prevented him from the Roberto Jimenez match earlier in the year. Well ahead on points, he decided to sit to guard and use his retention skills to hold Mr Leon off until time ran out and took a decisive win. Obviously we will have to get that knee checked out, but still, it was a fine win using his expanding skill set against a top ranked opponent. It was a great night of action hosted by @mojassim80 and @flograppling and great to see the athletes in the ADCC rule set again. Congratulations to Kaynan Duarte, Michael Musimici and Roberto Jimenez who all took very victories tonight - the Jimenez/Ruatolo match was a like a highlight reel! Amazing work from all the athletes tonight. Thank you so much to the many people who came to the Gordon Ryan seminar last night! It was awesome teaching here in Austin and great to show our approach to Jiu jitsu in this great city! Hope you enjoyed the show!

Glamor vs practicality: Everywhere is life we have to make a choice between an exciting, glamorous option vs a pragmatic, practical option. We have to choose between an exciting fast car versus a safe and reliable one, friends who can get you into fancy nightclubs and introduce you to to excitement and fun versus a friend who always has your back no matter what. Jiu jitsu is the same. There are lots of exciting and fun elements that get our attention and there are some that are extremely important but don’t get much attention. Probably the two least glamorous skill areas of Jiu jitsu are pin escapes and guard retention. Neither will result in highlight reels, yet your ability to perform all the more exciting aspects of Jiu jitsu is entirely dependent upon your ability to get out of bad pins and/or prevent them happening in the first place. You simply can’t play an exciting game if you’re being constantly held down and pinned. Make sure you devote a sufficient time in your training for the less glamorous but absolutely crucial aspects of the sport that may not be exciting in themselves, but which make the exciting aspects possible. Spend time getting out of pins and stopping opponents from passing - if you are starting out in Jiu jitsu I would prioritize these skills above all others

When you first take a student into training, you try to make him see what you see, to think as you think, but ultimately the goal is to make him see more than you ever did and know more than you ever knew.

Position and your mindset: The ideal of Jiu jitsu is control leading to submission. The most well known form of control is POSITIONAL CONTROL, where an athlete advances to the major scoring pins of Jiu jitsu which give him a greater ability to control and attack an opponent than the opponent has return fire. Your mindset when you achieve positional control tells you everything you need to know about yourself and your Jiu jitsu. When you get into a dominant pin, do you see that as AN END ITSELF? Or AS A MEANS TO AN END (submission)? If you celebrate the POSITION and see THAT as a victory, you will never express the ideal of Jiu jitsu. If you see the position merely as a step towards submission, then you have the mindset that produces the ideal of Jiu jitsu. Once you get to the position it’s fine to take some time to establish control, tire an opponent, switch to another position etc, but inside your mind you must already be tirelessly searching how to go beyond the positional victory and on to the submission victory and thus to align yourself with the ideal of the sport. Here, Gordon Ryan goes beyond basic positional control from the back into a masterful arm trap that sets up multiple submission opportunities and creates a path from positional control to submission

Looking forward to Texas! This Saturday night in Austin Texas will be one of the biggest grappling events of the year - The Road To ADCC, a grappling super fight event using ADCC world championships rule set featuring the biggest names in the sport! Nicky Ryan will take on one of the toughest men on modern grappling - Dante Leon. Mr Leon shocked the grappling world at the last world championships by defeating one of the greatest grapplers of the modern era - double ADCC silver medalist Lucas Lepri. Now he will face a Nicky Ryan in what is unquestionably the biggest test of the squad youngster so far! The show will use the special rules of ADCC finals matches - twenty minutes with any guard pulling subject to penalty - so there will be a lot of standing grappling alongside the ground work. Craig Jones was expected to headline with a match against ATOS superstar Lucas Barbosa but sadly he broke a bone in his hand during takedown practice and had to withdraw. The event is packed with great athletes. I can’t wait to see main event - the great Kaynan Duarte, unquestionably one of the greatest grapplers on the planet, against Matheus Diniz, a master tactician who fears no one and who has the physicality required for such a huge match up! The brilliant technician Michael Musimici will take on the mentally tough and athletically gifted Geo Martinez in a match up contrasting two polar opposite approaches to Jiu jitsu - this should be a tremendous match! There are other great matches as well! Gordon Ryan, myself and other squad members will teach a big seminar the night before on Friday and show the squad philosophy of Jiu jitsu - can’t wait to see you all there and get back to Austin!! Keep your night open to see all these superstars in action!

The tighter your control at the onset of a submission hold the better you will be able to retain it against strong defensive countermeasures. If you have just enough mechanical tightness at the onset to perform the lock, any defensive movement will take you below the threshold required for completion defensive movement always reduces the mechanical tightness of your submission hold. You need to over budget for the anticipated resistance. If you have twice the amount of mechanical tightness required to break the limb at the onset of the hold, and your opponents defensive movements reduce this by a quarter, you will still be well above the threshold required for success. So right from the start, seek maximum mechanical tightness, so that the inevitable resistance will not be enough to stop you.

The majority of every match will be spent in neutral positions where neither of you has an advantage over the other. This is where most of the really hard physical work is done. It easy to get frustrated by the amount of work required to make even small advances, but have faith that every small advance accumulates as pressure over time that will pay dividends further into the match and turn those neutral positions into dominant ones

Your body will be a big part of what determines your game: Three things determine what your grappling game will be. Your body type, your personality and your coaching lineage. Over the years your game will reflect the average of these three influences. There is no question that your body type is a very important part of your development. No one knows you better than you do, yet surprisingly I often see students try to take on a game that is poorly suited to their physical body. I am always rather reluctant to tell someone not to partake of a certain game because of their body type - history has shown more than a few examples of athletes who defied conventional wisdom and developed a strong game that did not appear to suit their body. I’ve seen some short legged athletes with great triangles. I’ve seen a few tall athletes who were very good at level changing down to quick and snappy double legs. Nonetheless, experience will guide you in certain directions over time. You will find certain moves come more easily to you than others. Be alert to this! Your own body is talking to you - make sure you listen! Here, Gordon Ryan uses his long leg length to clamp on his dreaded figure four top lock - a move in which he excels and one that a short legged person like me would struggle with.

Head control: There is a reason why they classify us as vertebrates - our spines are the center of our body. On top of that spine is our head. The spine is the longest lever in the human body. The head is at the end of that lever. If you control the head you can exert tremendous leverage that can be used to control the whole body. Look for opportunities to control the head - many are pretty obvious but some are more subtle. Understand that you can exert pressure on the head in both linear (eg snap down) and circular (eg crossface) directions - be sure to use both. Understanding Jiu jitsu is to a large degree, understanding the human body and its essential nature. Our spines largely define our physical lives - make sure your Jiu jitsu reflects this fundamental fact

Priorities: It’s a common thing to see a young student attacking enthusiastically from the back and focus too much on the submission rather than positional maintenance. If the attack fails they also lose the position as well as the submission. Remember, as long has you hold the position, you can fail repeatedly and keep trying and again and again until you get the breakthrough. As such, prioritize the position over any given submission attempt. SUBMISSION FAILURE IS ACCEPTABLE IF YOU MAINTAIN POSITIONAL INTEGRITY, BUT IF YOU LOSE POSITION YOU LOSE EVERYTHING. When you go for your submissions from the back, monitor your positional robustness at all times. If you ever feel that being compromised - STOP - and recover positional integrity. As long as you do this you can always go back to try again with your submissions

Leg entanglements allow you to stay a step ahead at all times in guard play: An opponent can hide his upper body from submissions quite well no gi simply by standing up. He can negate whole categories of sweeps by switching between standing and kneeling postures. One thing he can never hide by completely by changing stance is his legs - there is always a way to enter. Once you start threatening the legs your opponent cannot simply ignore it - he has to react. As such you immediately put him in a framework where he is reacting to YOUR game rather than you to his. In combat sports this is a crucial advantage. Here, Garry Tonon ties up the great ADCC champion Vinny Magalhaes in a classic backside 50/50 at the 2015 world championships in Brazil and puts him under strong pressure despite the big size difference. Learning to dictate the pace and get an opponent into a reactive mindset is a crucial part of guard play - learning to attack legs from everywhere is a great way to do it!

I am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video as the third of the NEW WAVE series OPEN GUARD : THE TWO FOUNDATIONS OF GUARD PLAY. My students are well known for their ability to come out from the start of a match, sit to guard position, and immediately impose an attacking game that very often ends in submission. Their ability to do is based on two foundational skills. The first is guard retention. You can’t attack successfully if opponents can just breeze past your legs and pin you. You have to be able to hold the position long enough and comfortably enough that you can attack in combinations over time. My approach to guard play is based on the notion of offensive and defensive cycles. The more time you can spend in offensive cycles and force opponents into defensive cycles, the more exciting and devastating your guard game will be. As such, retention by itself is not enough. You have to be able to launch counter offense at the completion of every retention sequence to throw yourself back into an offensive cycle and take charge of the action. I show our maximizing knowledge/denial method of guard retention with does exactly this. The second great skill is leg lock entry and finish. I favor leg attacks as the foundational attacking skill from guard play because the legs are always available for attack and because the legs are your opponents base - if you threaten his base it’s very hard for him to focus on his passing game. I show how to enter the legs from everywhere and lock on intimidating finishing grips. Once you develop this skill you will be able to keep opponents locked in a defensive cycle for long periods of time and shut down much of their game. If it sounds like something you might be interested in - check it out at BJJ Fanatics - the link is in my Instagram Bio

Even when in defense - train your mind to look for counter offense. If your mind is preoccupied only defending a move you make yourself an annoyance to an opponent - but to excel you must go beyond being an annoyance and become a THREAT - that means carrying the spirit of offense within you at all times - even in defense. When the mind is trained to look, it will see. Seeing offense on a defenseless opponent is easy, but seeing it even on tough, aggressive and attacking opponents is the ideal you must strive for

It’s Fourth of July - put some fireworks in your Jiu jitsu! It’s good to have a Jiu jitsu that has different speeds and approaches so that you can tailor them to different opponents and game plans. Sometimes a slow, controlling game works best, sometimes a fast dynamic game is what’s needed. The problem however, is that some athletes by their very nature are not fast - so how do they increase the pace of the match? Understand that there are different ways to appear fast than just movement. Consider for example the fact that almost every Jiu jitsu match has numerous stoppages in the action when athletes go out of bounds, have to tie their belt, adjust their uniform etc etc. Every time this occurs you have an opportunity hustle back to starting position faster than your opponent and increase the pace of the match without every being faster during the actual match running time. You can be the slowest guy in the whole competition and still be the first back to the start position every time there is a break in the action. This sends a clear message to your opponent - you might outpace me when the the match is on but I’ll out hustle you every other time - just as in life - hustle will outlast speed. As a fast opponent tires and looks to take a longer break every time the action stops, he looks and sees you hustle to center mat and you keep the pace as high as you can between the action sequences, he will start to fade both mentally and physically. Remember, are different ways to be fast - if you’re slow - find one that works for you. Happy Fourth of July!! 🇺🇸🇺🇸

All alone in a crowded room: most of our Jiu jitsu lives are lives in a community of friends and teammates, coaches and mentors. You can have great support behind you to help in preparation, but at the end of the day - you walk out on the mat alone. In your own time, focus on building the inner confidence to let all the work you did with your friends in preparation shine when you’re out there all alone. Managing the separation of communal training with the aloneness of competition is a big part of dealing with your toughest matches

There aren’t many moves that you HAVE to know - but a good Guillotine is probably one of them: Jiu jitsu gives you a lot freedom of choice when it comes to move selection. There is a huge variation among the great champions as to what their main moves where. As you get more fundamental the moves become less optional - it’s hard to imagine a world champion who had no elbow escape for example. Among the submission holds I always encourage my students to develop a strong Guillotine attack. There are few submissions that are as readily available in all aspects of play without a gi than the guillotine. Top or bottom, standing or ground, set position or scramble - it’s pretty much always available at some point after just a few minutes of action. There are many variations - I favor high wrist variations above all others, but great champions have used many variations with great success so find whichever one works best for you. Because you can easily switch sides with your opponents head you only need to be strong on one side with the guillotine. In my case I have a good arm in guillotine on my left and a good high wrist on my right - so I can play both sides, but with different variations; but at a minimum have a really strong variation on one side and you will be ready to go!

There are many ways to win in Jiu jitsu, but the single most high percentage, safest, most effective across weight classes, best against bigger/stronger opponents, gi or no gi, grappling or fighting - is to get behind them and strangle them - end of story

Seminar in Austin Texas Friday 7pm July 16: Gordon Ryan and I will teach a big seminar in conjunction with @flograppling The squad always gets a great reception in Texas so we are really looking forward to this! I have always been proud of the way my senior students have a general shared philosophy of Jiu jitsu that they showcase so brilliantly in competition but at the same time they each are outstanding creative minds who come up with their brilliant variations and innovations so that each has a distinctive style within our team style. A big part of my coaching program is teaching not just skill for competition, but teaching as a skill in itself. As a result all my senior students excel at teaching just as they do at competition. Teaching alongside them is always a pleasure - if you’re in Austin come by and see us! It will be a fun night of technique and squad philosophy! 😜😜contact @flograppling for tickets!!

When you get an opponent off balance he will be open for attack. When you get a GOOD opponent off balance he will throw up his defenses and you will need a second attack feeding off those defenses to break through. When you take a GREAT opponent off balance he will be looking to counter attack the second after he throws up his defenses and you will need to anticipate the few counter attacking options he has from that recovery scenario and base your follow up attacks on that prior knowledge. Your BODY STARTS the attack sequence, but it’s your MIND that KEEPS you ahead against the best.

My first two goals when I teach open guard: Open guard is among the most difficult skills to learn in Jiu jitsu. Part of the problem is that it’s a big, interconnected skill area. If you lack skills in one area the whole project can look and feel weak. Another problem is that as you are trying to enact your guard play, your opponent is trying to enact his guard passing. As a result you have to try to impose your moves whilst simultaneously defending his. This often tends to shut developing students down as they get caught somewhere between their desire for offense and their need for defense. I found over the years most students (above blue belt level - beginners should focus on guard retention first and fundamental sweeps initially) do best when they learn the skills of GUARD RETENTION and LEG LOCKING as their first skills to focus upon. All the other skills of guard play are contingent upon being able to hold a guard for extended periods of time against strong passing pressure. Without that as a foundation I can’t show you anything of value from guard. However, you can’t just get stuck in defensive cycles where you just defend and defend and defend - you have to carry the attack to your opponent. Learning to tie guard retention into counterattacks is a crucial part of your journey into advanced Jiu jitsu. The most readily available for of attack from guard is leg locking. The legs are almost impossible for an opponent to completely hide from you as he engages in passing. As such, I put a very heavy emphasis on guard retention and leg locking as the basis of my guard play coaching program once students have gone beyond beginner level. Learning to synthesize them leads to a powerful amalgamation of DEFENSIVE RESPONSIBILITY with CONTINUOUS OFFENSE - which is the ideal of good guard play.

Increasing strength, endurance, tenacity and all the other attributes of your body and mind will lead to small performance increases that will increase your chance of success at the highest level; but be aware that whatever performance increases you get from improvement in that direction is minuscule compared with the performance increases of five, six, seven or eightfold that you can derive from increases in technical and tactical nuance. Your triangle for example, can be improved a little by making your legs stronger; but it can be improved massively (and immediately) by shifting your leg positioning by just a few inches - This is where the core of performance increases will always come from

Squad gets a wake up call on how they have been living a lie of butt scooting tom foolery and leg locking cowardice courtesy of Master Ken: Master Ken showed up in Puerto Rico to a squad training session and gave some encouraging words of advice and mentorship as he described us as “a bunch of weirdos with a foot fetish and a proclivity to hump each other’s legs,” and advised us to practice a real martial art instead. We will definitely start incorporating the throat punches and cock destructions he demonstrated in future training sessions and possibly the next Who’s Number One competition - looking forward to tomorrow’s training session!

At the end of the day none of us are special. Most of our best achievements in life come from doing the little things well for extended periods of time. Stay grounded in the belief that above all, the ACQUISITION OF SKILLS is the single most reliable avenue to human greatness; and acknowledge that whatever achievements you have so far can be quickly eroded by straying away from this fact. Stay grounded with the little things every day and know that observance of these over time will prepare you for the big things that fate will occasionally place before you and for which you will be remembered.

Over budget: It seems every time we go buy something or invest in some project, the initial price you were given is replaced by a new higher price that leaves you more financially stretched out than you had planned on. Submissions are similar. Whenever you go for a submission hold you will need to control the entire limb that you are attacking. Your opponent will be trying to extract that limb from your control. As a result there will often be cases where your initial clamp on the limb proves seemed adequate for the task, but as your opponent began to resist it proved insufficient and your opponent escaped. My advice is simple - always over budget with limb control. If you are attempting an arm bar - exaggerate the connection of your hips all the way up to the shoulder. If you’re attempting a heel hook, exaggerate your connection all the way up to the opponents hip. This way when the inevitable resistance comes you will have so much of the limb under your control extrication in the time available will be very difficult indeed. If you need a minimum ashi garami connection fifteen centimeters (half a foot) above the knee to be effective, aim for more than thirty centimeters (one foot), on the assumption that your opponents resistance will strip away much of that and leave you with the minimum. If you had settled for the minimum connection length as a starting goal you would have failed after resistance had been factored in. Factor in the effects of expected resistance from the onset and you will do much better in tough matches. Here I focus on an ashi garami connection all the way up at the hip in case an opponent goes to slip his leg free - this will give me a surplus of connection that will reduce the effect of resistance

Georges St Pierre and Gordon Ryan work on their standing grappling skills: Most of the work in Jiu jitsu is done on the floor. The highest scores and submissions are almost always attained on the mat. Nonetheless standing grappling is a truly vital part of the game, particularly when you explore the relationship between sport Jiu jitsu and fighting. Jiu jitsu has always historically had what I call a “bolt on” approach towards standing skills - they simply ask you to study wrestling (no gi) or judo (Gi) and bolt those skills on to your Jiu jitsu skills. That can definitely work, but understand that the unique rule set of Jiu jitsu offers many possibilities and opportunities to score and win that go outside of those sports. I believe that long term, Jiu jitsu must develop its own standing game appropriate for its own rule set, which allows the athletes to scrimmage for points and submissions that are quite unique and very interesting and develop a new set of skills in the fascinating grey zone between standing and ground where scramble and scrimmage for the points and positions of the unique Jiu jitsu rule set is the order of the day.

Running Georges and Gordon through their guard retention/counter offense drills: Remember this always - there are ten thousand possible skills from guard - all of them can be effective in their own way - BUT NONE OF THEM WILL BE EFFECTIVE IF YOU CANNOT EXHIBIT THE FIRST AND MOST IMPORTANT SKILL OF ALL GUARD PLAY - THE ABILITY TO HOLD/RETAIN GUARD LONG ENOUGH TO BE EFFECTIVE. Make retention your first skill in building your guard game and you will create a firm foundation upon which you can build the kind of devastating attacking guard game you see my students employ and which you can learn. Guard retention may not be the most exciting guard skill to learn, but it’s the most important because it’s the one that all the other other skills of guard play depend upon.

One of the great honors of my coaching career was to be involved with the two best ever in their respective arts - Georges St Pierre in MMA and Gordon Ryan in grappling. Watching these two incredible athletes get to the top from quiet and unknown beginnings to be the best of the best was truly an honor. It was amazing them work together on the mat today and learn from each other about technique and tactics in ways that cross over between their respective sports. Jiu jitsu and MMA have always had a close relationship. I still believe that the fundamental appeal of Jiu jitsu is tied directly to fighting, even though they sometimes seem very far apart in some aspects of Jiu jitsu competition. The closer we keep them the healthier for the long term direction of Jiu jitsu. Congratulations to both men for the incredible success they’ve had in their respective disciplines, thank you for the inspiration you have generated and the lessons you have shown; and wonderful to see them both in action again on the mats!

Big Amazon Prime day sale at BJJ Fanatics! All my instructional videos 51% off for today and tomorrow! One of the biggest sales of the year 😜😜 Sale code @bjj.fanatics is PRIMEDAY2021

Getting the band back together! Georges St Pierre is here for grappling training here in Puerto Rico. It’s always great seeing old friends - even when they come to kick your ass! 😂😂 The squad has a big grappling event coming up next month so it’s training time! Tonight we relax before training tomorrow. Great to be back by the ocean after coming back from Texas!

Victory in Austen!! Craig Jones had a fantastic back and forth match tonight with the exceptionally talented Tye Ruotolo at WNO Grappling event tonight here in Austin. Mr Jones was able to show a whole new side to his game that he has been developing with a very fine display of takedowns, takedowns into leg locks, guard passing, submission defense and top pressure to take a unanimous decision over a very game Mr Ruotolo who never gave up and fought well until the end. It was great to see Craig Jones use the aspects of his game that he uses daily in the gym but has not used in matches. Oliver Taza also competed tonight against the young phenom Mica Galvao. It was a tough physical match and Mr Galvao showed his developing brilliance to win a strong decision - he will be a great force in Jiu jitsu in the future. Hope you all enjoyed the show! Now it’s back to Puerto Rico to get ready for the next big challenge! Wishing you all the best from Austin!!

Craig Jones and Oliver Taza getting ready for their big matches tomorrow night in Austin Texas: Another big show in Austin tomorrow for Who’s Number One and @flograppling Craig Jones will take on the extraordinarily talented Tye Ruotolo one of the very best from the outstanding ATOS team. This will be a classic match up of ATOS athletic movement and physical conditioning against the slower more control based squad style. Oliver Taza will take on the brilliant Brazilian prodigy Mica Galvao. Mr Galvao shares a common factor with Mr Ruotolo - he was literally born into Jiu jitsu. Both have practiced at extremely high level since childhood and so bring a level of knowledge and skill to the game far beyond their years. Amazing work again by the promotion to bring such talented athletes out the stage! Craig and Oliver have trained hard as always but they will be very severely tested by such tough and talented opponents! Keep your eyes on this show tomorrow night!

It all begins with push and pull: Open guard is perhaps the most most quintessential modern Jiu jitsu position. It probably offers a wider array of potential attacks than any other position in the sport - but they all begin the same way - get a grip and engage in push and pull to break an opponents stance/balance and create a reaction. If you can reliably initiate the push/pull sequence at the onset of most engagements you will have the foundation of a great open guard. Next time you practice open guard focus first on the preliminary push and pull and your will find that as you improve in this regard, all the other moves you wanted to perform come easier

Position AND submission? Usually we think of positional skills as distinct from submission skills in Jiu jitsu - position comes BEFORE submission after all. However, many of the main submissions blend positional pins with submission. The Japanese are often very wise in the naming of their moves. Their term for the most common form of arm bar is juji gatame. “Juji” means “cross” since the two athletes are generally perpendicular to each other; and importantly “gatame” has a dual meaning of “pin” and “lock.” The idea is that the arm bar has the properties of both a pin AND a submission - that the two cannot be separated. You can immobilize someone with an arm bar as you do with a side of mounted pin; only you use biomechanics like advantage through your legs pinning his head rather than body weight. When you practice your submissions, especially the juji gatame arm bar, really focus on the idea of restraining and pinning an opponent first rather than rushing to the joint lock - you will find that emphasizing the dual nature of submission holds makes them far more effective against tough opponents

If you’ve got a mat - you’ve got a dojo: I’ve travelled the world and seen every kind of gym from the most plush to the most primitive, in the wealthiest countries and the poorest. I’ve seen that the gym doesn’t matter. The only thing that matters is you and the people around you. If you have passion, knowledge and a plan to transform that knowledge into skill, along with the discipline to stay with that plan and the wisdom to modify it when necessary - you can achieve remarkable things. People count - places don’t. Your path to your potential is in you and the people around you, not the building you’re in. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan work out in a dusty old VA warehouse with some mats on the floor in a small town - the next night Gordon Ryan won his third EBI title. You can get a victory building workout anywhere

The value of position: In the context of GRAPPLING, the value of position is fourfold. First, it enables you to attack the upper body with submission holds. If you couldn’t pass guard, you would be limited to lower body submissions, so it enables you to access one hundred percent of the human body. Second, it creates an imbalance between your ability to attack with submission versus your opponents ability. From neutral positions you can both attack each other with equal efficacy, but from dominant position you will be able to attack via submission far more readily than your opponent can. Third, position allows you to attack and re-attack at will until the breakthrough is achieved. If a first attack fails, you still have the position to launch a second, third or fourth attack until you get it done. Fourth, position creates pressure over time that breaks an opponent with fatigue and loss of hope, in extreme cases even outright panic. Once broken mentally, the physical breakthrough comes soon after. Now these are all valuable, the but in FIGHTING, position has a whole new value - striking. You can strike with great power and effect from neutral positions if you have the right skills, but striking from dominant positions is truly devastating. As such, you can never neglect your positional skill development if you think of your Jiu jitsu as part of a program to develop fighting skill. The damage you can inflict with strikes from dominant position can be meted out far faster and easier than any submission technique and the the terrible pressure it can create to an opponent will usually make subsequent submissions much easier.

Triangles - Making two good choices into one great choice: Among the submission holds in Jiu jitsu there is a basic choice between strangles and joint locks - both are great options. In the vast majority of cases it’s an either/or choice; the triangle however, is one of the few options that allows you to attack both at the same time. It is a superb strangle in its own right, match the impressive power of your legs against an opponents neck. However, it also traps, isolates and immobilizes the opponents arm in ways that allow for easy juji gatame armbar attacks, ude gatame arm bar attacks (reverse arm bar), kimura attacks and wrist locks. Defending one of these is not easy. Defending two at the same time of far harder. Defending two at the same used in combination with the others is damn near impossible. Take advantage of the unique properties of the triangle to improve your submission percentages next time you’re on the mats!

When on top, your first responsibility is balance: It seems there is always a thousand things going on second by second in Jiu jitsu. It’s natural to focus on one or two things and get caught out by ignoring a third or fourth. Sometimes it’s good to ignore all the clutter and just focus on most important thing in that position. When it comes to passing guard from top there are a vast number of things that could occupy your attention. You have to avoid getting swept. You have to stay out of submissions. You have to employ some form of guard passing method to improve your position. As your opponent works hard to impose his game from bottom, you can get overwhelmed with all the moment to moment demands of the situation. Understand however that there is one demand that needs to satisfied before all the others - you have to STAY OF TOP. The moment you lose top position you’re down on points and you can forget all the passes you were considering a moment ago - you will have to swap over entire now to bottom game. Whenever you feel you have too many competing demands while playing top passing - just focus on retaining top position as your opponent goes for his best sweeps and submissions. The longer you hold top against his attacks the more tired he will become and the easier the secondary task of passing will become.

Ideal vs reality: When it comes to practicing submission holds we usually practice them in the ideal finishing positions. That certainly makes the practice easier. However, the reality is that against a tough opponent who is trying to escape you will often have to finish in positions that are far from ideal - upside down, next to the perimeter, turning through three hundred sixty degrees, stacked up on head and shoulders. Your training should address this reality. You have to get a feeling for finishing in awkward, unanticipated situations or at least maneuvering from there to a more conventional finishing position. The ability to follow evasive defensive movement through all manner of twists and turns and get to your finish distinguishes the athlete who dabbles in submissions from one who truly specializes in them

Submission holds and failure: Submission requires total focus of bodily energy for a long enough time to make an opponent submit (or if he chooses not submit, to experience the consequences of his choice). That can be a very considerable energy expenditure in a short time. If it works - it was definitely worth it. In many cases however, you will see an athlete try as hard as he can, even for extended periods of time, and fail. This can have devastating effects. Physically it can be exhausting to apply maximum isometric tension for too long. It’s tough to recover from physical exhaustion at the best of time - in the midst of a highly competitive match is even harder. Psychologically it can severely dent your confidence to try submissions again later in the match and make you second guess yourself every time an opportunity arises. As such, it is extremely important that you develop an internal feeling of what a well applied submission feels like so that you know ahead of time whether it will be worth committing all your reserves into the attempt. With all your favorite submissions try to build this self knowledge so that next time you are in the position you will know with great confidence that you can give it your all for the time required and make it all worthwhile

It’s good to chase after perfection with all your moves - that will greatly benefit your long term progress - but don’t let your current lack of perfection hold you back. Remember that with the execution of any move you don’t need perfection to succeed - you only need to execute it better than the athlete in front of you can defend it.

New talent: Most people measure the worth of a training program on the basis of the best people in the room. I prefer to assess it on the time it takes new people in the room to make progress towards the level expressed by the best people in the room. Nick Ortiz is a very talented Puerto Rican grappler who has been working with us in NYC and now in Puerto Rico. Last weekend he competed in a local show in Boston after helping me film a new instructional video there. Look at the relaxed poise of his leg lock game as he expresses the fundamental squad leg lock themes of targeting both legs, switching from form of ashi garami leg control to another to compensate for an opponents defensive movement (switching from one leg to another, from front side to backside back to front side finish and from inside foot position to outside to counter an opponents defensive turn), culminating in a fine 50/50 finish on the inside shoulder. Well done Nick Ortiz!

Many of the ancient masters would describe their style in terms of an animal that expressed the essence of their art. Which animal do you think best expresses the art of Jiu jitsu? Which animal best expresses your personal expression of Jiu jitsu? Are they the same? If not - why?

So often our natural inclination is to turn and run from danger - but in Jiu Jitsu it is very often the case that you do better by moving in towards danger and seek to nullify it rather than fleeing into an even worse predicament.

Athlete safety in training: As a coach one thing I take very seriously is athlete safety in training. The single most common reason for derailed training programs is serious injury. We are all mature enough to realize that a combat sport that focuses primarily upon breaking limbs and strangling people carries a risk of injury. We also accept that as long as the risk is inside acceptable parameters the benefits of Jiu jitsu skills are absolutely worth whatever the risks of injury are. My question as a coach is always to ask how to keep those parameters acceptable. This week I filmed in conjunction with BJJ Fanatics a video on training safety and how to reduce the risk of severe or catastrophic injury in Jiu jitsu. Periodic minor injuries are all part of the fun of the game - we all accept that - but no one wants to go to hospital or worse, send a friend to the hospital with an injury that was entirely avoidable. I am going to release this video for free as a guide to avoiding unnecessary injury that I have observed over the years and which made a concrete difference in my training room. A few simple training protocols can really make a difference. Pareto’s principle applies in so many aspects of life - including Jiu jitsu injuries. A few moves cause the overwhelming majority of severe/catastrophic injuries and removing them and replacing them with safer and more effective alternatives makes a real difference in gym safety. I will announce when editing is done and it is released. We all love training and we all accept that accidents happen - BUT UNNECESSARY ACCIDENTS DON’T HAVE TO HAPPEN - to keep your progress strong you need to be in the gym - and severe injuries will keep you out of the gym - so let’s train hard but also train SAFE to maximize your progress!!

Breaking rules: There are many general rules that we usually observe in Jiu jitsu “don’t turn away from an opponent,” is a common one you hear. Understand always that general rules are usually ABBREVIATIONS of important information - it has to be this way because they are designed to hold as much information in the fewest words. As such, they have exceptions built into them once a little more wordage and information is added. In the case of “don’t turn away from an opponent” what is really being expressed here is “don’t turn away from from an opponent in ways that expose your back.” Once you realize there are ways to turn away from an opponent that DON’T expose your back, then you will immediately see it’s ok to turn away provided you take some precautions. Here, Garry Tonon has turned away, but he has used a posting stiff arm to prevent an opponent getting chest to back contact and lifted his shoulders off the mat so that the back exposure will be momentary rather than prolonged. As such, there is very little danger of dangerous back exposure and thus it is fine to turn away in this case. The general heuristic rules are of immense value because they pack a lot of information into short, easily remembered packages - but realize that every simplification has its limits and exceptions - sometimes those exceptions can be of great value to your performance!

Bottom game is more difficult for most students to learn than top game: When I teach people beginning Jiu jitsu I almost always start them with bottom game first. The first skill they must master is pin escapes, since in their early days they will be fighting out of bad positions for most of their training time. Once they learn to escape to guard from a bad pin, they will need to learn to hold on to their guard so that they don’t get out but then immediately put right back into the pin they just escaped from - so guard retention is the next skill they need to learn. Then they need to learn to fight effectively from their back as they can now get to and hold a guard - now it’s time to attack from there. You can see all these first skills involve fighting from your back. Part of the reason this should be taught first is practical - because as a beginner with no takedown or pinning skills you will almost certainly find yourself underneath opponents. In addition it recognizes that if you are matched against bigger opponents you must be able to survive and fight from underneath. The other big reason is that most people find the act of learning to fight from their back more difficult than from on top. Nothing in life prepares you for the movements and techniques of bottom game. I’ve seen plenty of athletic beginners come in and do pretty well in top position on day one - but never seen that from bottom position. Instinct and natural talent doesn’t help much from bottom - you have to learn everything. As such the learning process is usually longer in bottom position than top for most people - SO START WITH A HEAVIER EMPHASIS ON BOTTOM GAME FIRST - it will give you more development time. You can always play catch up with top skills later.

That one time I cornered a match with Rex Kwon Do...fuggedaboutit!!

Kuzushi: Most Jiu jitsu student know that the act of off balancing an opponent is referred to as “kuzushi” in Japanese. Most also realize the importance of this to set up techniques on the feet and also from bottom position on the ground. That’s all fine as a theory - but what about practice? How do you know you’ve done a good job of off balancing an opponent in the heat of sparring or competition to a degree that it will be useful for your move? When working from bottom guard position the single clearest sign is simple - DID YOU MAKE YOUR OPPONENTS HAND TOUCH THE MAT? If the answer is yes - well done - he is definitely out of balance and you are ready to attack. When working your kuzushi on your opponent just try to involuntarily touch his hand to the mat and then immediately attack. Learn to do it and learn to recognize it as an important sign and your effectiveness from guard will greatly increase

Couldn’t resist 😂😂😂

Victory in Texas!! The squad came out strong tonight in Austin, Texas at the WHO’S NUMBER ONE grappling show tonight - four athletes competed with four decisive victories! Australian grappling super star Craig Jones showed his stellar development with a near perfect submission victory over great Jiu jitsu world champion Luiz Panza at the very start of his match with a beautifully applied heel hook. Mr Jones has deeply impressed all of us with his progress over the last three years and he showed it publicly here tonight with a flawless victory. Nicky Ryan showed his rapidly developing takedown and passing skills with multiple takedowns and passes to rear mount against the formidable world champion Gabriel Almeida despite the considerable size difference. Oliver Taza took on the brilliant AOJ athlete Johnatha Alves and was able to pass and briefly hold mount and then go into several powerful heel hook attacks. Mr Alves showed great courage to hold out despite the pain but Mr Taza took a decisive victory. Demian Anderson took on 10th Planet standout Luis Quinones. He weathered an early storm with impressive calm for a developing athlete and came back to win by a beautiful stranglehold after some nice positional control. Thanks as always to Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan for help preparing and coaching the squad for action. Now it’s back to Boston to film another instructional video and then to Puerto Rico to get everyone ready for the next challenge. Thank you to Joe Rogan for a great podcast chat! Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Good night from Texas!!

Focus is everything in this game. Mentally, focus yourself on the next step on the chain to victory - physically, focus a greater percentage of your strength upon a lesser percentage of an opponents strength at a vulnerable point of his body and you will break him

I’m excited to have another chat with one of my favorite people in martial arts - Joe Rogan - on his podcast show tomorrow afternoon here in Austin, Texas. Mr Rogan has done an incredible job over the years of highlighting the role of Jiu jitsu in MMA to the biggest audiences in the world. He has a been a major factor in the growth of our beloved sport since its earliest days. His show covers every aspect of modern life but our discussion will of course mostly be about Jiu jitsu related themes. Looking forward catching up on @joerogan 🤗🤗

Never forget that ninety percent of the outcome of a bout is determined before the athletes even step on to the mat. Focus most of your energy on PREPARATION rather than the bout itself and the results you seek will generally follow as naturally as night follows day.

The rising star of grappling shows Who’s Number One run by @flograppling in Austin, Texas is on May 28! Australian superstar Craig Jones will replace Gordon Ryan in the main event. Sadly Gordon’s long battle with a protracted stomach illness is not going well and he will have to step out of the competition circuit until it is satisfactorily resolved. Craig Jones stepped in on short notice to replace him. He has a very tough and dangerous opponent - the great world champion Luiz Panza - a master of leg locks who also excels at upper body submissions and has a great positional game as well. This will be a fascinating contrast in leg locking style. Mr Panza has devastating Achilles locks with a more traditional Jiu jitsu style - both straight and cross. Mr Jones has a more modern style focused around twisting locks and a systematic control game based around multiple ashi garami variations. One thing is certain - if either one gets a decisive grip on the leg - it’s over! Squad juniors Nicky Ryan and Oliver Taza take on very impressive opponent. Mr Ryan will face black belt standout Gabriel Almeida, who has world class Jiu jitsu and also excellent wrestling skills along with a big size advantage over Mr Ryan. Mr Taza will take on the brilliant AOJ athlete Johnatha Alves. Mr Alves has a very polished and refined game with beautiful positional transitions. There are many other great matches on the card, including brilliant American world champion Michael Musumici! Two of the toughest grapplers in the game, Vagner Rocha of Fight Sports and Josh Hinger of ATOS will clash in what will be a very hard fought match. Mr Hinger has an exceptionally dangerous guillotine but Mr Rocha has proven extremely resistant to even the best submission hunters and has an incredible ability to endure attacks, wear an opponent down get to victory - this should be a really great match. Talented AOJ athlete Jessa Khan takes on Pati Fontes. Both of these stand out athletes are really committing to the no gi game and this match will help them on their path to the top of the women’s division. I think Mica Galvao vs Andrew Tackett may be the match to watch! Hope you all enjoy the show!

If I asked you what your best grappling attack was I’m sure you could answer in a second - but if I asked you what your best grappling attack will be next year could you answer so quickly? Don’t just focus on where you are now - think ahead to where you want to be in the future

It’s damn hard to hide your legs from someone who is actively looking for them: One of the most obvious features of the leg lock revolution in Jiu jitsu was the prevalence of leg locking from bottom position rather than the more favored top position of earlier generations. When I began Jiu jitsu leg locking was usually seen as an alternative to passing guard from top position - if you couldn’t pass - you tried some leg locks instead. This opened leg locks to the old criticism that if they failed you lost top position. Over time I came to believe that in fact the most profitable entries into leg locks were generally from bottom position where they could be easily combined with a traditional positional sweeping game and take advantage of opponents basing their legs out wide to avoid sweeps and making themselves easy marks for leg attacks. When my students began winning many matches with this method many assumed the reason I favored leg lock attacks as the foundation of our guard attacks is that most opponents of that era did not know much about defending leg locks. This is incorrect. Even when my students spar against each other and know that their opponents have excellent leg lock defense, I STILL advocate using leg locks as the basis of their guard game. Why? BECAUSE THE LEGS ARE IMPOSSIBLE TO HIDE FROM AN OPPONENT WHO KNOWS HOW TO ATTACK THEM. Even if the leg locks are well defended by a knowledgeable opponent, THEY PUT THE OPPONENT IN A REACTIVE MINDSET WHERE HE IS MORE CONCERNED WITH DEFENDING HIS LEGS THAN PASSING YOUR GUARD - and once you get them in a reactive mindset you will dominate the direction of the ensuing action. THAT was the tactical reasoning behind making leg lock attacks the centerpiece of our guard game. There is no stance an opponent can take that will hide his legs from attack - it doesn’t matter whether he is standing, staggered or square, on one knee, kneeling, squatting, feet inside or feet outside - whatever - there is always a path to SOME variation of ashi garami and the resulting attacks. This even in a room full of leg lock experts it still makes sense to make leg locks a foundation of your guard game.

Whatever the uncertain future brings, the past is clear - your achievements are undeniable. Looking forward to the future whichever direction it takes.

You know someone just got f**king smashed when a bunch of grapplers are looking in the same direction and smiling 😂😂😜😜 #weonlysmilewhensomeonesuffers

What’s your mindset here? You’re under attack. A stud opponent has your leg in a vulnerable position and is working intelligently and swiftly towards a finish. How is your mind reacting? The lowest level of reaction is PANIC. The second level of reaction is to scramble into intelligently directed defense and ESCAPE. The third and highest level of reaction is to see the possible of COUNTERATTACK even as you navigate into an escape. TO SEE THE POSSIBILITY OF DEVASTATING COUNTER OFFENSE WHEN EVERYONE ELSE SEES ONLY DEFENSE IS THE MARK OF A SUPERIOR SUBMISSION EXPERT. Train your mind to think this way and you will distinguish yourself from the crowd

Well I guess it’s my fault - they say like attracts like 😂😂😂

Pins are a means not an end: A very distinctive feature of my students approach to Jiu jitsu is to never be happy with an upper body pin. We get taught to value guard passing and pinning so much - indeed, the point system rewards you and enables you to win matches with pins alone - that it’s easy to skip over the extra step of finishing from a pin. Good Jiu jitsu always sees a pin as a means to the end of submission holds. That means you must go behind the act of pinning chest to chest and into the more difficult world of LIMB ISOLATION AND CONTROL. Only an isolated limb can be submitted. Learning to draw a limb away from the torso and into a finishing hold can be a frustrating experience. Limbs by their very nature are more difficult and intricate to control than torsos and now you need to explore the more complex world of levers and fulcrums. You must push yourself past pins and into submissions if you are to satisfy the ideal of Jiu jitsu. Here, Gordon Ryan leaves the security of chest to chest immobilization and isolates an opponents arm as a precursor to submission holds - with a grip like this he has quite a selection of potential finishes to work with here - which would you choose if you were in his place?

Getting out of a bad situation is good - but much is getting out of a bad situation and IMMEDIATELY COUNTER ATTACKING so that you seize the initiative of the match again. For every escape there is always a critical point where you have broken away - THAT is the point where your mind should switch from defense to offense and change your action from escape to attack. Don’t be satisfied with getting out - aim higher and look for counter attacks the moment you pass the threshold of escape.

Dual threats: Quite often when attacking with submission holds you can create a threat with two submissions at the same time. As an opponent goes to defend one - he falls victim to the other. Usually one strong submission is more than enough but when the opportunity to attack simultaneously with two arises - you are wise to take it. Think about a triangle attack - whenever you have it you almost always have a simultaneous opportunity to attack with juji gatame armbar, kimura or wrist lock. Here, Garry Tonon uses a specialized ashi garami variation to create a simultaneous threat of knee bar on one leg and figure four toe hold on the other to take a fine submission win over Ralek Gracie. Every submission hold can be used in SEQUENCE as part of a combination attack - but only a select few can be attacked SIMULTANEOUSLY. Make sure you know them - even though are relatively rare, they can be an extremely valuable addition to your submission arsenal

When you watch Jiu jitsu: Every time you watch Jiu jitsu you get a chance to train your mind in the same way that every time you step on the mat you get a chance to work your body. See it for what it is - an opportunity to train. Don’t watch passively. Most people just watch to see the outcome. The outcome only affects the players. In order to benefit YOU, you must become a PARTICIPANT not an just an OBSERVER. That means putting yourself mentally into the action. You must see yourself as one of the athletes and ask yourself what you would be doing second by second in response to the action unfolding in front of you. Passively watching for the outcome is fun - but improvement will come from actively engaging on a mental level where you become a mental participant. Then watching is transformed from being an enjoyment to a source of progress that you can carry over into your next physical training session

Create a three month challenge for yourself: Getting good at Jiu jitsu is mostly about building strong fundamentals and then developing a few favorite moves (the Japanese call them “Tokui-waza”) and then a collection of other moves that branch off those favorite moves. That is certainly an excellent approach and that should be were most of your focus goes. Nonetheless I’m sure there are some moves out there that you like but you feel you are simply awful at. I’ll give you an example from my life. I was always terrible at knee pick takedowns. I felt good wrestlers use them occasionally on me and they felt really effective but whenever I tried them I would usually get tossed by uchi mata or lateral drop counters against anyone with good standing skills, so I dropped studying them. In 2003 the Freestyle Wrestling World Championships were held in Madison Square Garden New York City. A dear friend of mine got tickets and after training we walked from Renzos and went to watch the worlds best go head to head. It was an amazing event with super star athletes like Buvaisar Satiev, Yandro Quintana, Cael Sanderson, Daniel Cormier and many others. At one point in the early rounds one athlete hit a beautiful knee pick and I remember thinking - man...I have to try again - it’s too good to just ignore. Back at the gym I tried hard to improve my application of it. For three months I tried different methods, entries, sets and finishes. One day I got into a single leg and failed - switched to a knee pick and nailed it!! I never got really strong at it - but I at least got competent at it to a level where I could surprise an opponent with it and score occasionally. Interestingly many years later my students Georges St Pierre and Gordon Ryan were able to use it to win some of their biggest matches - so as a coach learning more about had the double benefit of helping other people to use it successfully even if it was never one of my main moves. I’m sure you have a move like this. One that isn’t your strongest but you’re interested in it. Try studying it for three months and see what you can do. Perhaps it can become one of your back up weapons when your big guns aren’t working

What’s more important - heuristics or details? When it’s time to gain knowledge in Jiu jitsu that improves performance there are two main avenues. The first is HEURISTICS. These are general rules of thumb that guide behavior. So for example, “whenever possible try to pass guard in a direction opposite that which your opponents knees are pointing” is a general piece of advice that guides guard passing behavior in a wide set of circumstances and generally aids guard passing performance. It is easy to remember and gives good guidance in many situations. The second are technical DETAILS. These are situation specific and often difficult to remember under stress. In truth you need both. HEURISTICS WITHOUT DETAILS ARE INEFFECTIVE AND DETAILS WITHOUT HEURISTICS ARE PARALYZING. Make sure your study and general reflections on Jiu jitsu involve both

New instructional video release! I am very happy to announce the release of the latest installment of the NEW WAVE JIU JITSU series SUBMISSION ESCAPES. This video focuses on an area that my students are well known for - escape from seemingly impossible submissions that would finish most people. In EBI Overtime time competition my students would regularly escape from world champion opponents in very little time even when taking on much larger and more experienced opponents. This gives you great confidence and also sets up your ability to immediately counter attack - one of the major themes of this video - so that you greatly improve the interface between your defensive game and your offense. This will enable you to keep the offensive initiative even against dangerous attacking opponents - a key part of my philosophy of Jiu Jitsu. Check it out if it sounds interesting to you 😜😜 Link in Instagram bio

Threats: Our behavior is immediately changed whenever we feel a significant threat. It usually puts us into a defensive mindset where we tend to be more concerned with addressing that threat than we are in attacking the opponent. This tells you something important. Whenever you want to shut down an opponents initiative - put him under some threat that throws him into a reactive/defensive mindset where he is more worried about what you’re doing to him than what he wants to do to you. Nowhere is this principle easier to apply than when you are attacking from the back. Sometimes we get so focused on holding the position or trapping an opponents arms that an opponent feels little threat beyond the position itself. As a result he can focus on his escapes and take liberties with his head and arm positions to facilitate his escapes. All that changes when you create a powerful threat of strangulation every time his hands and chin fall even a little out of defensive position. Now he has to focus so much on the strangle threat that escaping the actual position becomes forgotten as he has to focus entire on protecting his neck. There are many ways this can be applied in Jiu jitsu (and indeed - life). Comfortable opponents are difficult opponents - fearful opponents are subdued opponents - the latter are much easier to control than the former. Here Georges St Pierre does a good job of creating a strangle threat to slow down even a master of escape and counter attack like Gordon Ryan - use this principle when you feel opponents don’t respect your ability to hold a position.

One strong threat will create defensive over reactions - THAT’S the best time to attack! A strong first attack is a wonderful thing - it will get you a lot of wins if you really excel at that attack. The real benefit in the long term won’t come from that strong initial attack however - it will come from exploiting the predictable reactions to that attack with follow up moves you have learned to mate with the initial attack. Ask yourself what your favorite attacks currently are. Then ask yourself what are the most common defensive reactions you encounter in response - and then the big question - what are the logical responses to those reactions? Here, Gordon Ryan launches into a move at which he excels - sumi gaeshi from a shoulder crunch grip. His opponent has to contort himself to prevent the sweep - those contortions make him vulnerable to a cluster of follow ups appropriate to that contorted position. This is the pattern of behavior you want to establish in your game. You don’t need a vast array of attacks but you do need some strong ones that create a genuine threat. It is the threat from which the breakthroughs will come. Organize your game into initial attacks and linked follow ups and watch your submission rate improve massively over just strong attacks in isolation

Visitors: We always love having visitors come by and train - they always provide new perspectives and challenges that help growth in all directions. Today we had the privilege of working with world class wrestlers associated with the Penn State program! @jaimeespinalpr @ant_thechamp_cassar @_joshrodriguez_ They showed how at the end of the day, all grappling styles are related - learning some Jiu jitsu applications of their wrestling skills they had a great workout with the squad! Once we open up our own place with more mat space we look forward to hosting more visitors and growing this sport some more!

I started my career teaching introductory classes to one or two white belts at a time. Then I built up to small beginner classes with five or six people. In time I averaged over a hundred people per class in the lunch hour with some of the greatest combat athletes in the world. Now I’ve come full circle and I’m back to teaching tiny classes. I was able to create a sense of progress and development in all cases regardless of class size, location or talent level. Your rate of progress towards your goals has much more to do with what is inside your head than where you are, who is around you or how many people there are. Know what you want - acquire the skills to make it possible - formulate a plan to get there - have the discipline to stay the course and the wisdom to modify the plan in the face of changing circumstances and you can shock the world regardless of where you are and who or how many you are surrounded by.

Danger zones and safe zones: Any time you pass through dangerous territory you would never stop in an area that appeared even more dangerous than usual, rather, you’d keep moving until you came across an area that appeared less dangerous, only then would you take a break, reorganize and plot your next move. Jiu jitsu is no different. There are some positions relative to your opponent that are just too dangerous to stop and take a break. There are others that are safe enough to take a temporary respite and use some time to make a good next move. How safe these areas really are will vary. Really dominant positions such as rear mount give you great opportunities to really slow things down and consider your options. More often the safety zones are not that safe - they just take away the immediate threat. Here, Brian Glick steps off line to get away from the immediate threat from Gordon Ryan’s very dangerous guard. He has stepped out of a danger zone (directly in front of the legs) to a zone thats offers a very temporary safety - he will have to move quickly from here if he is to advance to greater safety and prevent being put right back into the danger zone. Make your early movements when you first engage away from immediate danger zones and work progressively through the various safety zones and you’ll be able to focus more on offense and get less distractions from having to fend off your opponents attacks.

Lex Fridman podcast: While in Austin I had the opportunity to have a fascinating conversation with the brilliant Artificial Intelligence researcher, Lex Fridman. In addition to his outstanding work in AI, Mr Fridman is an avid practitioner of Jiu jitsu and combat sports. He asked many extremely interesting and insightful questions about Jiu jitsu and life with some of the most important being those that came from his unique perspective in AI research and robotics and how this pertains to training in JiuJitsu. I’m not certain when it will be released but I believe it will be some time early next week - if you’re interested I am sure @lexfridman will notify it’s release. Squad juniors Nicky Ryan and Ethan Crelinsten both had very tough matches against excellent opponents last night. Mr Ryan won a very close victory against PJ Barch in a match that pitted Mr Barch’s excellent D1 wrestling skills vs Mr Ryan’s ability to scrimmage up from guard position to his takedowns. Mr Crelinsten lost to the extremely talented Cade Ruatolo who showed excellent pace control and a beautifully applied Darce strangle to take a fine victory. Now it’s off to Boston to film an upcoming video as part of the NEW WAVE JIU JITSU series and then back to Puerto Rico to get everyone ready for future events - thank you to Mr Fridman for a fascinating conversation!

Counting down in Austin, Texas: Nicky Ryan and Ethan Crelinsten will take on exceptionally tough opponents tomorrow night at the WNO Grappling show on @flograppling Mr Ryan will take on the very formidable PJ Barch who combines a D1 Wrestling pedigree with black belt Jiu jitsu to form a very dangerous hybrid game matched with his impressive physicality. Mr Barch has a been a very tough rival for the squad for a long time with standout performances in the classic EBI shows when the squad began! Ethan Crelinsten will rematch the brilliant ATOS prodigy Cade Ruatolo who forms one half of the powerful Ruatolo brothers - they have also been powerful adversaries of the squad with wins for both sides. They have a brilliant and dynamic game with tremendous endurance and a cracking pace. Everyone has weighed in successfully and now just light workout tonight and all action tomorrow night! Hope you enjoy the show!

Whatever skill level you are today will be 70% a reflection of your training behavior over the previous five years and 30% a reflection of the previous three months. Failure to apply yourself well in either category can have serious ramifications for your performance here and now.

Submission escapes and fear: There are two major categories of escape in Jiu jitsu. The first are POSITIONAL escapes - getting out of bad pins such as the mount, side pins, rear mount etc. These are uncomfortable, tiring and generally unpleasant situations but they aren’t scary unless they are being done in an MMA context with striking permitted - in standard grappling situations they are unpleasant rather than frightening because pins by themselves don’t do any kind of damage. The second category of escapes are SUBMISSION escapes. This is where fear becomes a factor. Submissions can do serious damage if taken to their completion or applied with bad intentions. As such escaping from submission has a mental aspect to it that positional escapes don’t - you have to be able to overcome the natural fear of bodily harm and stay focused on the relevant details of getting out. Once the submission is locked on, things happen quickly and you have to make a quick choice between submission and escape. In the gym it’s prudent to err on the side of caution. Nonetheless nobody likes to lose by submission and so there is a strong motivation to learn submission escapes. Understand that the further you get into the submission the harder it becomes to extricate yourself. Early detection and avoidance usually gets better results than last ditch heroics. But still, it’s good to be able to show the skills of Houdini and get out of seemingly hopeless situations and escape. The biggest factors working against you are TIME, INTENSITY and PANIC. When you start out, make sure you have a partner who can dial back the speed and intensity of his submissions to something pretty mild so that you can think without panic and perform the appropriate escape. Practice light and slow and get a gradual feel for the position and what you can and can’t take. Very slowly start increasing the speed and intensity over time. Like any other skill, practice over time can make what was once a very scary situation and make it quite manageable. Note the relaxed demeanor of Nicky Ryan as he methodically works his way out of a potential heel hook situation.

Defense in depth: Most of you know that I put an extraordinarily high value on defense training for my students. My belief is that only when students have a strong belief in their defense will they take risks - and any offensive move entails risk - so ironically only athletes who believe in their defense will engage with their offense in high level competition. Understand always that defense comes in different forms based upon how far the opponent has entered into their move. Early defense is the most efficient. The old clock that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure is very true with regards Jiu jitsu. If you can anticipate an attack you will defend it easily. Much more challenging is late defense, where an opponent has performed the move almost to completion and you have to dig your way out. This requires knowledge, skill and a steady nerve. Learn all the aspects of defense from early to late and everything in between - but when you care about winning, be sure to prioritize early defense - it will be easier on your body and less scary for your friends observing on the sidelines! Here, Nicky Ryan shuts down the dangerous leg lock game of the great Masakazu Imanari early on to allow himself to focus on his own attacks and victory

Never forget that training is not about winning - it’s about skill development. Don’t worry about winning today - worry about building the skills that will enable you to win somewhere out in the future in a match that counts. The gym is the time for innovation and experimentation and development - save your concern for winning and losing for competition

Peeling hands: Always remember that most grappling techniques begin with grip. The hands and feet are the mechanisms of grip in Jiu jitsu - if you can peel those hands off and deny an opponent his grips it will be very hard for him to initiate grappling techniques. Learning to quickly disarm an opponent by peeling off potentially dangerous grips before they can have effects can save you a lot of trouble down the road. Just make sure you don’t focus only upon peeling away grips - you can’t play a negative game where you only focus on stopping the other guy doing his work - you have to them assert your own positive attacking grips and get to work yourself. The cycle of grip breaking and grip assertion is what allows good athletes to shut down an opponents options while asserting their own - a hallmark of good Jiu jitsu

It all starts with push and pull: once you come to grips with an opponent there will usually be a brief period of push and pull that precedes an attack. This push pull action. Is often overlooked but it is of the greatest importance. In fact, I usually identify the relative expertise level of students by how well that make use of push and pull prior to applying their techniques. The old adage in martial arts is “when pushed, pull, and when pulled, push.” There is a lot of wisdom in this. Learning to create reactions and feed off those is critical to your development. You will need to stay relaxed as you play this game within a game and you will need to develop sensitivity to the opponents reactions to your pushing and pulling. Next time you make grips - start engaging in push and pull and stay loose enough to read your opponents reactions and move in response - in time your ability to break through with attacks will increase as a result

Making strong people weak: The human body is set up in such a way that it can only exert strength upon objects that are placed in front of it. When we have to exert strength upon objects behind us we simply can’t and have to turn ourselves around before we can attempt to do so. When you grapple strong opponents - seek to get behind them. Once you get behind an opponent he simply won’t be able to use raw strength against you - he will have to know exactly what to do if he is to get out of the position - strength alone won’t be enough. Developing the skills of getting behind opponents is arguably the single best response to the challenge of opponents who feel stronger than yourself. It does better than level the playing field - it slants the field distinctly in your favor regardless of strength disparity. Among the many skills of Jiu jitsu - the skill of slipping behind an opponent at every opportunity is the one most likely to benefit you when going against opponents with a strength advantage over you

Pace: The three biggest factors that will determine the outcome of a match will always be technique, tactics and physical/mental attributes. Nonetheless there are other factors going on in a match that play a big role in determining the outcome. One of these is PACE. Every match at a given time has a pace - this can vary throughout a match. Every athlete has a preferred pace - some like it slow, some like it fast. It is very much in your interest to open as close to your preferred pace and as far from your opponents preferred pace as possible. Things get interesting when both of you prefer a similar pace. Then you have to decide whether it’s better to stay in your preferred pace (which is also the opponents preferred pace) or take the risk of going out of your comfort zone pace on the understanding that perhaps your opponent will be even more uncomfortable at that pace then you are. If you can play different paces well this can be a big tactical advantage when you come against an opponent who only plays at one pace. In class learn to experiment with pace. Understand that different paces require different physical demands on your part. In your early experiments you will find immediately that you get out of breath more quickly than usual. When you go slower than normal you will often find considerable lactic acid build up and cramps as you clamp down on an opponent with isometric tension to slow him down. Getting used to this different set of physical demands can be tough at first but it can give you considerable tactical advantage to switch pace during a match against an opponent who can’t follow the change.

The workout isn’t over when your BODY stops moving - it’s over when your MIND stops moving. After every workout there is a time to analyze and recall what you did well, what you did poorly and how you can use those insights to create a better you tomorrow on the mats - use it!

A strange and wonderful thing about this sport is that no matter how bad a position in which you may find yourself, you are never more than two (or at most three) moves away from victory if you can combine escapes with submissions. Let this insight give you confidence and hope in bad positions and make you circumspect and diligent when in good positions

The two greats flaws of ashi garami: No position has had more radical influence and effect on the no gi Jiu jitsu game over the last decade than the many variations of ashi garami (a generic term denoting “entangled legs” of which many varieties can be employed). Most of the effect over this time has come from the leg locking techniques showcased by the squad and those who followed their example. However impressive this development has been to observe, It is important always to consider not just the strengths of every weapon you employ - but also it’s weaknesses. In the case of the various ashi garami variations the two great weakness are mutual foot exposure and back exposure. Every form of leg entanglement to some degree - some more than others - will expose your feet and your back to an opponent. Usually the less they expose your feet - the more they will expose your back - and the less they expose your back - the more they will expose your feet. As such it is a weapon stands in contrast to the strongest attacking positions of Jiu jitsu such as rear mount - where you can attack with near impunity and focus entirely upon your attack with little to no regard for counter offense. Understanding this must make you circumspect when engaging in offense with ashi garami, and optimistic when engaging in defense - since at any moment you can counter attack very strongly at the feet or back if you play intelligently.

Observation: The model of development in Jiu jitsu ought always to be as close as possible to the classical model of development in science - of the interaction of hypothesis, experiment and observation and assessment of results in a never ending rotation that gives provisional but increasingly better answers to the questions you ask. When it comes time to asses the worth of given moves, the merits of your training program, your performance of technique and tactics, nothing beats observation. As an athlete you must keenly observe your performances and make adjustments based in the feedback your eyes give you. Training in itself is is the most important thing in the short term, but for long term progress almost as important is observation and assessment of that training that allows you to bring the results of today’s workout to tomorrow’s workout so that a compounding effect can be attained - only then can you grow over time to the level that you aspire to

Don’t be afraid to take a step back sometimes: Jiu jitsu is a game of pressure. As such it’s natural to want to always pressure forward and let the other fellow feel the heat. However this is also a game where sometimes an opponent can get into a sequence of grips that spell danger and you get the feeling that you can’t break all those grips before the first attacks will come. In these cases it can be a good thing to break out of there completely and briefly disengage and then step back into the fray with renewed focus to get a better start. Generally the athlete who starts better in a given engagement will tend to dominate the rest of that engagement as they have the tactical momentum in their favor. If you feel this is the case - disengage to break the momentum and start again on your terms. Don’t be too quick to use this tactic as it can lead to negative play if overused, but acknowledge that there is a time and place for it when you get off to a bad start and it can definitely save you some grief down the line

Extension: The essential feature of successful submission attempts is always extension of the limb being attacked away from the torso to a degree that renders it vulnerable. The hardest people to submit are those who contract their limbs in tight to the torso (though by doing so they render themselves vulnerable to other methods of attack). When it’s time to lock joints or strangle necks - extension is the ingredient you need. Extended limbs don’t stay extended for long in a competitive match - so once you see it - trap it in place. Here, Nicky Ryan latches on to an extended arm in a way that will make extraction difficult and as a result he has a number of great submission opportunities in front of him. Now it’s time to make a decision as to which option he will take - that of course, is up to you - we all have our favorites - but the one commonality between all those choices will be prior extension of the limb - focus on that first.

The power of kimura: Of all the major submission holds, kimura is in my experience the one which creates the most devastating injuries when opponents fight to the end and refuse to tap. All the major submissions are capable of doing serious damage when taken to their conclusion but the extreme rotation power of kimura creates total separation of the joint that often results in gruesome dislocations and on occasion, even spiral fractures of the bones. It is a move that is often disparaged as a strong mans move, but this is an unfair criticism. If you let an opponent lock his hands in front of his torso and fight his two hands with yours - then yes - strength will be the deciding factor. However, if you get an opponents hand behind his back or use your legs to supply the rotation power against his hands, smaller athletes can definitely use this move against bigger athletes. Understand always that there are many variations of kimura - many of which incorporate the legs and thus avoid the two versus two hands deadlock and use legs against hands to ensure skill, not strength will be the deciding factor. Here, Gordon Ryan works on expanding his formidable submission repertoire with kimura practice. Note how he immediately gets the hand behind the back to take strength out of the equation and take advantage of the devastating rotational power of the move.

Air time: Sweeps in Jiu jitsu all score the same amount regardless of amplitude. Indeed powerful sweeps often result in reduced control after the sweep and allow an opponent to scramble out to avoid conceding the score. Nonetheless there is something to be said for big sweeps - they have a disorienting effect that can sometimes lead into submission attempts after the sweep. In addition they create a definite sense of power that will send a message to opponent and create some fear/respect for the next sweep that may create over reactions that you can exploit. So even though most of the time control is more important than amplitude, every so often you can let fly and make an opponent fly the unfriendly skies 😜😜

Stripping away choice: The essential nature of Jiu jitsu can be explained very easily. At the onset of a match both athletes can move as they please. As a result they each have many thousands of options as to what they may do. The second they come to grips that number of options drops dramatically as now they have to move in ways that account for the grip and control of their opponent. As one athlete gains increasing dominance in position the number of sensible options for the other athletes diminishes further still. As the positions and grips become still more dominant those available options for the defensive athletes fall down to less than a dozen. By the time a real finishing hold has been achieved the options can be counted on one hand. Your goal is always to reduce the infinite number of available options at the onset of the match to two options that signals the end of the match - submission or the physical consequences of refusal to submit. Starting to see the game as a the battle to reduce an opponents options is a big part of your development. This is the mindset that enables you to see an opponents future actions - not because you have some superpower to see the future, but simply because you know the limited options he will have available ahead of time.

Create a strong initial threat and you will own the next move: If you can put your opponent under extreme pressure with a given move it will elicit such a focus on defense that you will have a considerable tactical advantage in any follow up move. An opponent whose entire attention is bound up defending one move will be very vulnerable to any subsequent move. It is up to you however, to develop the sensitivity to know how to keep the pressure on the first attempt but know inside that it’s unlikely to break through the opponents defense and concoct a good follow up. There are two ways you can fail with this. The first is Tunnel vision that keeps you focused only on that first move when it’s becoming clear that it won’t work. The second is not putting enough pressure on the first move so the opponent is not sufficiently distracted and can thus defend the second move as soon as you attempt it. Learning to balance these two demands is a big part of your development towards a strong offense

Training in Puerto Rico with Georges St Pierre: OG squad founding member Georges St Pierre stopped by for training. It’s amazing to see how well he does just in pure grappling against specialists. The squad is getting ready for big upcoming matches in Texas at the end of the month for Whose Number One @flograppling Having Mr St Pierre always adds some electricity to the training room - and of course, his great standing grappling skills and takedowns! Looking forward to more hard work in preparation for Texas! 😜😜

Big BJJ FANATICS anniversary sale on all my instructional videos!!

Hands and head: When you first make contact with an opponent whether it be standing or from seated guard situations, the first points of contact with your opponent will typically be at the hands and forehead. Learning to place them so as to create defensive barriers and then manipulate them to create offensive opportunities is a big part of your opening gambits in Jiu jitsu. Understand always that your head and hands have both defensive and offensive value - but that in most cases it’s tactically smart to take care of your defensive responsibilities before your offensive ones. Your head and hands are both a barrier and a key to your opponents door that can give you access to everything else. Use them wisely from the start of each engagement and you will stop an opponent in his tracks whilst setting up your own attacks

With regards technique - fashions come and go - what is popular today can be replaced by tomorrow - but underneath that surface technique lies something permanent, something deep and unchanging whose weight will give your game gravitas - the bedrock of the art - PRINCIPLES. Focus on those and your game will never go out of style

In a game where control is everything - using frames to prevent an opponent from establishing controlling grips and position is a huge part of your development. The centerpiece of your frames will always be the link between your knees and elbows. The closer your opponent gets to you - the closer your knees and elbows need to be together

Defensive soundness: I’m sure you’ve all been to a boxing match and heard fools in the audience randomly screaming “KEEP YOUR HANDS UP!” every twenty seconds regardless of what is actually happening in the ring. Well, underneath it all there is some wisdom. Boxer keep the hands up in order to cover the chin and make it less accessible to a blow. Observation will quickly reveal good boxers don’t always keep their hands up, but they do whenever they NEED to to. Grapplers too need to protect and cover their chin when they need to - but for different reasons. We don’t need to worry about a blow to the chin, but rather a hand/wrist sliding under the chin to set a stranglehold. As such there is a need for us also to keep our hands up as a block when appropriate to catch not punches to the jaw, but strangles UNDER the jaw. Learn to keep your hand up and ready to block - just like a good boxer you don’t want your hands always in defensive mode - otherwise it can stifle your offense a little - but when it’s needed it BADLY needed - so get those defensive hands up and ready to save you

Priorities: In any given second by second scenario in Jiu jitsu there is a LOT going on. It’s easy to get swamped by all the information coming in and the need for decisions going out. When it all seems too confusing - prioritize the most important things and temporarily ignore the rest. For example, when attacking the back in a scramble there are many things to be concerned about - getting your hooks in to score, sinking the strangle hand to finish, winning the hand fight, tilting your opponent to your preferred side etc etc but always the priority should be maintaining CHEST TO BACK CONNECTION. Without that none of the other things are possible SO THAT TAKES PRECEDENCE OVER EVERYTHING ELSE. For any given situation, no matter how confusing, ask yourself what is the single base requirement needed to fulfill all the other desires you have in that scenario - and put all your focus on that until you’ve got things under control and can start to put your attention elsewhere. Using this simple PRIORITY PRINCIPLE will give you direction and purpose in even the most confusing and complex situations in Jiu jitsu

What opportunities do you see in this moment? Could act upon them in the time available? In any neutral situation in Jiu jitsu both athletes have opportunities for advancement or even outright victory. The first step is visual/mental. You have to SEE and IDENTIFY an opportunity before it becomes possible for you to go to the next step which is physical/skill based, that is to ACT upon that vision with sufficient prowess to get the job done. Every physical action begins as a recognition in the mind. It’s no good recognizing the opportunities but being to slow or unwilling to pull the trigger and take the physical action required to make it happen. Developing both aspects is crucial. Skill without vision will never be utilized. Vision without skill will achieve nothing. Train yourself to see opportunities and act on them and you will be on the way to superior performance.

The not-so-gentle art: Jiu jitsu, like all combat sports, aspires towards maximum efficiency in physical output. It strives to use the least amount of energy to get the job done. This is often misconstrued to mean that everything should appear effortless and flowing in execution. It is certainly true that for the majority of any given match your body ought to be fairly relaxed and loose to allow efficient movement, but there are definitely times when you want to exert near maximal muscular contraction and effort for short bursts. THIS is part of the pathway to true efficiency. If you are too relaxed when applying a submission hold and the opponent escapes - then you have to start all over again - necessitating the repeated expenditure of a large amount of energy and potential risk of losing. There is nothing efficient about that. True efficiency is being relaxed when appropriate (usually the majority of the match) but also tight when appropriate (usually for short bursts when scoring or finishing). This way you don’t waste energy getting to a scoring or finishing situation and fail due to lack of tight connection/power and then have to repeat yourself all over again. One quick burst of near maximal energy output that ends a match is not as fatiguing as twenty minutes of relaxed sparring that requires you to keep going and going due to repeatedly failing to score or finish because you were too loose at the critical moment. So yes, stay relaxed most of the time - but when it’s time to go - GO

Don’t be satisfied with good when great is right there for the taking: Getting into a dominant pin is a good thing but if you want to go the extra distance and progress from position to submission, then you must learn to isolate limbs away from the torso to set up submission entries. Don’t congratulate yourself when you get to your pin - immediately start the task of isolating an arm and head. It will make it tougher for him to escape and easier for you to finish. The earlier you start the task the better your chances of succeeding. Program yourself to WORK from the pin rather than REST from the pin, and you will be a finisher faster than you thought possible

Holy sh*t...I never should have taken that last edible before class...

Starting with a skill set - the example of a Nicky Rod: A situation I often see as a coach is that of a talented athlete from another sport such as wrestling, Judo or Sambo coming into Jiu jitsu. It’s natural to want to use and adapt your skills to the new game. This conversion can be done fairly quickly and easily and usually gets good results. My belief however, is that it will rarely get you GREAT results. You have to go further and learn new skills from the bottom up in your new sport if you really want to become exceptional. A good example is that of Nicky Rod. He was a high school wrestler - he also did a year in D3 college - so he had a solid enough background in wrestling without being anything exceptional. Whenever you’re in this situation it’s natural to just train in Jiu jitsu so as to exploit this initial skill set that you have. So wrestlers will often just work submission defense and look to develop a game that lets them win on their primary skill - takedowns. This will win you matches at local level but will never get you to championship level. To do that you have to immerse yourself in the new game you are studying. It’s not easy to give up a strength and work on a weakness. It’s so much easier just to stay within the safety of your strength. Nicky Rod did a fine job of practicing in new skill areas - guard position, submission holds and guard passing. It showed this weekend when he took on the great Yuri Simoes. Yuri is one of only three people who have won two gold medals in two weight classes in ADCC (Gordon Ryan and Jeff Monson are the other two). Most people thought Nicky Rod’s only path to victory was through wrestling takedowns. Even though Yuri is one of the best takedown artists in Jiu jitsu he intelligently sat to guard to deny what most people thought was the only way Nicky Rod could win. What happened next was shocking for many observers. Nicky Rod went immediately on the offense with a pure Jiu jitsu skill - guard passing. In fact there was almost zero wrestling in this match. It was won with Jiu jitsu skills. It was a fine example of immersion in a new sport winning at high levels - an example many others can learn and profit from

Victory in Texas!! The squad had a great night here in Austin tonight with three athletes competing and three victories at The Who’s Number One grappling show. Gordon Ryan won via submission - a triangle that he selected prior to the match - against the great ADCC medalist and squad rival, Vagner Rocha. Nicky Rod took on the great Yuri Simoes, the two time ADCC gold medalist in two weight categories. Nicky Rod showed his incredible Jiu jitsu development by passing repeatedly against a great champion who is almost never scored on in even the highest level competition. Oliver Taza won a very tightly contested match against outstanding world champion Johnny Tama. Mr Tama played a strong positional game while Mr Taza focused most on submission attacks. It was great being back in Texas and great to see the squad athletes showcase the skills they work so hard to perfect in the gym out on the stage. Now it’s back to Puerto Rico to get Craig Jones, Nicky Ryan and Ethan Crelinsten ready for big challenges next month!! Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Countdown in Texas: The squad is in Austin Texas getting ready for the big WHO’S NUMBER ONE grappling show tomorrow night. Gordon Ryan will take on one the squads biggest rivals, Vagner Rocha. Both athletes have met before but in a lighter weight category and both have changed a lot since their last meeting. Nicky Rod is back on stage. He will take on the great ADCC champion Yuri Simoes. Mr Simoes is one of only three athletes ever to win ADCC gold in two different weight categories. Both have a high energy takedown focus game and neither likes to give an inch of ground - this one should be a great match! Oliver Taza will take on Johnny Tama in another exciting match up. Today was weigh in with all athletes close to each other in weight to make for a great show tomorrow! Now it’s training time and then tomorrow the big show!!

Life isn’t fair - neither should be your Jiu jitsu: Fair play is a wonderful thing but not in Jiu jitsu. Your whole game is to create an uneven playing field using mechanics and tactics that put your opponent at a disadvantage that makes your victory very likely. One of the best ways to begin doing this is to trap opponents arms. One of the quickest ways to render a human helpless is to pin his arms - that’s why the first thing police officers do with unruly suspects is handcuff them. It’s a simple way of making dangerous people harmless. So too when you do it it in Jiu jitsu. If you can trap an arm and pin it down you can render a strong opponent helpless. Our favorite time to do this is when you’re behind someone. It makes the task of strangulation so much easier. Don’t be satisfied with the rear mount - go further and trap an arm whenever possible (and if you know what your doing it usually is possible ). Defending your neck is difficult enough with two hands - with only one (the other one trapped) is VERY difficult indeed. Make a serious study of UNFAIRNESS and you will have advanced your understanding of the true nature of Jiu jitsu

When you’re the more experienced or bigger partner - start in bottom position with disadvantage: We all have a wide variety of training partners. Inevitably there will be big variations in size and skill level among them - so don’t treat them all the same. When you are more experienced or bigger - don’t start neutral as you would for someone your own size or skill level - start with some form of disadvantage so you get more out of the session and work skills you might not otherwise work and at the same time make it more competitive. When you do this you can be in a room full of small white belts and still get a good workout. It’s not about who you beat in the gym - it’s about beating who you were yesterday - and starting with disadvantage is the best way to do this when training with people you already know you can easily beat.

When you’re starting on the path to back control mastery - focus on the upper body first: The back is the most dominant position in a grappling match without striking. Nothing else creates such a mismatch between the control and submission opportunities of the attacker vs the defender. The SCORE comes from the legs - getting your two legs hooked into an opponents hips is what creates the score. However, the real world control comes from maintaining chest to back connection with or without the legs. When you first begin the back game - focus on the upper body connection first and foremost. You can always get the hooks in later to score. Use your arms in seatbelt or double under control to form a tight initial connection and create a strangle threat. As you get more advanced you’ll find there are ways you can get legs in first without conventional upper body connection but they aren’t the best place to start since you’ll be using those far less than conventional methods. Here, Gordon Ryan, a true master of back control, uses a safety first upper body connection to secure himself in a winning position, knowing that once this is done, getting the legs in later will be relatively easy

When the pressure is on: How many moves do you REALLY know? We all think we have a good idea of the size of our skill set. In truth however, the only time you find out is when you play under pressure. ONLY THE MOVES YOU WILL USE WITHOUT HESITATION IN THE BIGGEST MATCH OF YOUR LIFE ARE YOUR TRULY KNOWN BY YOU - everything else can be considered only as moves you are familiar with, but not truly known. Your job is to slowly build upon that small set in two ways. First, refining still further the moves already there. Second, adding a few new ones every year to a level where you would pull the trigger with them without hesitation in a high pressure match against your toughest rivals with everything on the line. In championship training this is the acid test to see how big your skill set really is.

The power of escape: When we think of powerful moves in Jiu jitsu you typically picture a slamming takedown or a bone crunching submission hold, or perhaps an immovable pin or unstoppable pass. We don’t typically think of escapes as demonstration of power - but they are - in a different way. Those typical power moves, hard takedowns, crushing submissions etc are all demonstrations of power over the opponents BODY. Escapes exert their power on an opponents MIND. Imagine working hard to take an opponent down, pass his hard and get to your favorite finishing position and then have an opponent repeatedly escape. Worse still, every time he escapes he immediately counterattacks and almost catches you as you are forced to flee and start all over again. Hard work is tough, but repeated hard work with no forward progress and no prospect of it finishing is hard for the mind to handle. That’s exactly what unstoppable escapes do to an opponents mind in a match. If you can send a clear message to an opponent that he has no means of controlling and finishing you - the longer that match goes the worse he will begin to feel inside. Every escape brings your confidence up and his down. In a long match where points are not a consideration this is a huge factor. There is no lonelier feeling than being fatigued and disheartened by repeated frustration of being close to victory but never able to secure in a match that goes until one of you quits and you now know you have no means of making the other guy quit because he can escape all your best positions without a problem. Here Garry Tonon launches into a strong kipping escape out of mount, about to be followed by a devastating heel hook follow up. There is a reason why he attacks so fearlessly and without abandon in his matches - because he fully believes in his ability to get out of any hold should his attack misfire in any way. The power of Escapes is thus not over the body but over your mind and your opponents mind - now THAT’S real power

I am very happy to announce the release of the first instructional video of the NEW WAVE JIU JITSU series A NEW PHILOSOPHY OF POSITIONAL ESCAPES which focus on the escape skills that enable my students to attack with total confidence - knowing that if their attacks ever compromise their position they can easily escape and get right back into attack. Many people were shocked to see how squad stars like Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan escaped easily from the best attacking positions in Jiu Jitsu to dominate EBI Overtime in competition even against much larger and more experienced opponents. In addition I show my maximizing approach to escape, which strongly emphasizes immediate submission counter attack after escape as one of the best ways to increase your submission percentages and keep the momentum in your favor at all times. Check it out at BJJ Fanatics 🤗🤗 There is a link in my Instagram bio

Getting out of trouble - and putting the other guy into trouble: If there is one skill in Jiu jitsu that NEVER goes out of style it would be getting out of bad position. I don’t care how talented an athlete is - we all make mistakes and at some time we all find ourselves fighting for survival out of pins. My approach to pin escapes is a little different from most. I train my students to work in two phases. First the escape itself - then to develop a sensitivity to when the danger is past and then AN IMMEDIATE AND AGGRESSIVE COUNTERATTACK THAT FEEDS OFF YOUR OPPONENTS DESIRE TO REGAIN THE PIN. This takes the humble art of defense into the devastating art of counterattack. Most athletes are satisfied with just getting. I teach to go the extra distance AND FINISH EVERY ESCAPE WITH SUBMISSION COUNTERATTACK WHENEVER POSSIBLE - and in MANY cases it is possible. Take this approach and you’ll soon find that your submission percentages double. Tomorrow I will release my NEW WAVE JIU JITSU escapes into counterattacks instructional video and showcase this attacking philosophy into your defense.

Tension and relaxation: Jiu jitsu is a game that requires from us great variations in states of muscular tension and relaxation. If you’re too tense too long you will quickly exhaust yourself and your movements will be stiff and inefficient. Too relaxed too long and you won’t be able to hold and control a wildly resisting opponent when pinning him or going for submission attempts. Different scenarios require different physical dispositions in terms of muscular effort. The LESS CONTACT with an opponent the LOWER the tension level. The more you engage in MOVEMENT the LOWER the tension levels. The more you engage in STOPPING movement the HIGHER the tension levels. Use these simple rules to guide your degree of muscular tension so that you can exhibit good endurance and good movement quality while at the same able to lock someone in place with sufficient control to pin opponents and finish them.

Getting pinned is bad - getting pinned AND getting your limbs extended out and away from your torso is even worse: When most people get to a dominant pin they are so happy to score the points that they don’t take the next step and seek to isolate a limb by working it out and away from the torso. Never forget that the ultimate aim of grappling (not fighting) is to submit an opponent. A positional pin is a means to that end - only when you take the extra step of limb isolation will you bridge the gap between position and submission. Next time you get to a dominant pin, don’t be satisfied with the pin - go further and work the limb away from the torso - you will find immediately that you make the pin stronger and suddenly become far more threatening to your opponent. Best of all you will start submitting a lot more opponents

Opening gambits: Jiu jitsu is a game with a lot of chaos built into it that prevents us from ever fully knowing what will happen or what the best options are - nonetheless when you first go to engage with an opponent there are only so many opening moves. This is one area where you can go into a match with a pretty good idea of what will unfold based on initial movements. Make sure you have at least a few favorite options to come out with a plan rather than just come out and see what happens. I’m sure many of you will recognize the opening gambit shown here by a Craig Jones - a squad favorite and perfect for anyone looking to get off to ta strong start via leg locking.

If your back is on the floor - then you know that your opponent can’t get to your back: There are several good ways to defend your back but one of the safest and most effective is to work to get your back to the floor. Part of the problem of defending your back is that it’s tough to SEE what your opponent is doing - he is behind you after all - you have to feel it. The beauty of getting your back to the floor is that vision is unnecessary - it’s simply impossible for an opponent to get behind you if you put the floor on your back first. Like any escape - hit it early - the longer you delay the harder it gets. Bear in mind that ultimate it will lead you back to the safety of guard - so be ready to pull your legs in tight upon completion

When the work is done: One of the clearest signs that you have a sustainable training environment is the clarity of the division between work time and playtime in the training. When it’s go time everyone has to be all in. No bullshit, all focus - you’re there to be the best athlete you can. But when it’s done there has to be some clown time to make it an enjoyable part of your day. If it’s all seriousness and suffering even the most disciplined people will eventual tire of it and find another way to live. If it’s all spring break then nothing gets done. Finding the right compromise between beneficial suffering and delayed gratification versus happiness and play is the key to longevity in the sport. We take a stance of hard work time but very relaxed playtime afterwards with lots of poking fun at each other and off limits humor - the best antidote to the biggest problem of long term development - burnout. Everyone has their own correct balance - somewhere you have to find yours

Don’t give it away for free (unless you’re setting a trap): The grip fighting that precedes engagement is a subtle art. Too often athletes give free access to good grips to their opponents. If he gets a good grip on you from which to begin the process of control to attack then it should be because he EARNED it - not because you gave it to him. When he goes to control your wrist, pull your wrist away or strip his grip and take your own - don’t just leave wrists out there to be taken and controlled. The only exception to this is when you are setting traps for an opponent and you are using a bait to draw him in. If grip is the first step to control and control is what leads to match winning submission - then make sure he never gets easy grips that lead you into a downward spiral. Be ready deny, block and strip grips because the moment they are established a good opponent will be looking to take them further

Gripping from guard is very different from most scenarios: When people talk about gripping skills they usually mean gripping with the HANDS. In fact in Jiu jitsu we can play guard position with four limbs not two. You will be expected to form connection with hand AND feet. All your life you have learned to contour your hand to maximize grip. Now you must learn the same again with your feet. The key is to CONTOUR your feet around the target - just as you do with your hands. If you want to PULL with your feet, we generally use your shoelaces and retract our toes. If you want to PUSH - use the sole of the foot. Learning to grip Qi the tour feet from guard is one of the first skills that pertains to the Jiu jitsu game

Going beyond pinning: The basic theme of Jiu jitsu is of getting to dominant upper body pins to gain positional advantage. To actually SUBMIT someone however, you’ll need to do more than pin them - YOU WILL NEED TO ISOLATE A LIMB. Learning to isolate and control a limb from a dominant pin is the bridge between position and submission. Whenever you get to a pin in training don’t be satisfied with the points you’ve scored. Go further and isolate a limb - that is the only way you will be able to submit opponents.

How good are you at getting out of bad positions? Whenever people ask me to diagnose their skill level one of the first things I observe is their skill at getting out of bad positions. Why? Because that will tell me not only how good they are DEFENSIVELY but also OFFENSIVELY. This might strike you as strange. How can defensive skill reflect your offensive skill? Simple - the more faith you have in your defense the more risks you will take with your offense. Your success will always be determined by the amount of risk you are willing to subject yourself to. As they say - NOTHING RISKED, NOTHING GAINED. If you won’t take the risk associated with offense you’ll never even begin an attack. If you’re afraid that when you try to attack you may be open to positional counters that leave you pinned in holds from which you can’t escape - then you won’t take the risk of attacking. The only thing that will liberate you from those fears that hold you back is the belief that you can escape any hold. The moment you believe that you will attack and hold nothing back.

Breaking balance: People will tell you all the time about the power of body weight to create pressure from top position. What they often overlook is that you can use the opponents body weight against HIM from BOTTOM just as easily as he can use it against YOU from TOP - if you can break his balance. From the top players perspective his weight is both a blessing and curse. If he can maintain his balance he can use his weight to immobilize, crush and fatigue you. If he can’t maintain his balance his weight will make him stumble and extend himself. The whole game then, becomes one of balance. As a bottom player if you regularly make an opponent stumble reach for the floor - half the game is won. The time immediately after a stumble - where an opponent tries desperately to regain his posture and position, is one of the most vulnerable. Attacks that normally seem very difficult suddenly become very easy. The surest sign that an attack on an opponents balance has been successful is his hips or hands involuntarily touching the mat. Practice knocking an opponent down to hips and hands as often as you can. Here, Craig Jones, a young master of off balancing from bottom position, trips an opponent with a variation of a tripod sweep. You can see the immediate defensive reaction of posting a hand to the mat - opening the door for lower body submissions and reversals that are the real goal

Working the sidelines: The best place to train in the room is of course, out on the mat. However, life has a way of taking us off the mat, injury for example. When this happens the next best place is the sideline - training your mind. When most people sit on the sideline and watch it’s for the purpose of ENTERTAINMENT. That’s fine, but you can do much better than that - watch for the purpose of gaining KNOWLEDGE. When you watch, imagine yourself as one of the people on the mat. Try to give better responses to the second by second action than the person you observe. What is he doing? What would you do better? Why is your recommended course of action better than his? Done this way you become an active MENTAL participant in their PHYSICAL struggle. Doing this will make your mental game very sharp and make the task of coming back to the physical game much easier

Priorities: Any time you’re in a bad situation it is imperative that you prioritize the most most serious threats first and address them before the secondary threats. Any time you are in a bad spot in Jiu jitsu you will face multiple threats. Some will be more serious than others - make sure those are the first ones you address. Here, Gordon Ryan is in a critical situation. Because he is addressing the primary threat first (the strangle) he can remain calm and start making decisions as to how to deal with the secondary threat (the rear mount position). Bad position is already bad enough without making it even worse by mistakenly trying to deal with secondary threats before primary threats.

Open guard knees to chest: People talk about posture all the time in Jiu jitsu - understand from the start that different situations will require different postures from you to maximize your efficiency. When it comes to open guard - if you do not have a controlling grip on your opponent - be sure to KEEP YOUR KNEES CLOSE TO YOUR CHEST. This lessens the chance of an opponent explosively clearing your legs and passing before you can react. It also lessens the danger of a quick leg lock entry by the top player. In short - it makes you DEFENSIVELY SOUND at all times until you can get a solid grip upon your opponent that allows you to focus on offense. Here, Australian grappling Star Craig Jones shows near perfect open guard posture, necessary because he does not yet have a controlling grip upon his partner.

Only one position truly merges position and submission - the back: If you look at the pins of Jiu jitsu you will see that as desirable as they are - you still have quite a bit of work to do to go beyond the pin into the submission. Getting side pin or mounted or north south or knee on belly is good, but getting the arm or neck from there requires a significant set of skills. The rear mount on the other hand leaves you VERY close to submission. Unless your opponent has good defensive skills a simple wrapping of your arm around the neck is enough to end it. You can see how closely the position (rear mount) is to the submission (rear strangle) by the fact that the escape from one entails the escape from the other. This is not true for say, a mounted arm bar or Kimura from side or knee on belly. Usually escaping the pin is one thing, the submission from that pin is another. As such rear mount/rear strangle is the single best synthesis of position and submission in the sport. Mastering the art of getting there, staying there and finishing from there is the best way to close the gap between position and submission in your game

Plot your next move: There are times in Jiu jitsu where you have to move quickly and keep moving - there simply isn’t time to think and you have to trust in the habits you gained through training in the gym to prevail. Fortunately there are just as many times where you DO have time to stop, think and plot your next move among competing options. Unfortunately we all have a tendency to ignore the different nature of these two situations and we often just unthinkingly charge ahead to the next move when we actually had plenty of time to think and plot. MAKE SURE YOU USE TIME CONSTRUCTIVELY IF TIME IS AVAILABLE - it often means the difference between moving for the sake of moving versus moving with a purpose. There are many situations in Jiu jitsu where you exert sufficient control where you can take some time to figure out the next move. Here, Gordon Ryan uses the control afforded by a tight back head and arm (seatbelt) grip to plot how he will get hooks in and score

Getting under an opponents center of gravity is the key to any lifting throw or sweep: sweeps come in different forms - some are trips, some are like wrestling takedowns, some involve getting behind the opponent. The biggest and most impressive looking sweeps are those where you get under an opponent and lift - these create amplitude and flip an opponent over straight to his back. It’s important to focus on two things. First, get under your opponent. Second, keep contact with the floor with the other foot and your same side shoulder so that you can create drive off the floor and create power out of your lifting position. When you can do this you can get the kind of amplitude you see Gordon Ryan exhibit here at the World Championships.

Back home in Puerto Rico! It was great to back in the gym today training the juniors for upcoming competitions. As much as I love travel there is a true pleasure in getting back to home ground and into a routine that builds the skills you need to excel. Thank you all so much for the interest you show in the squads development and growth. It was so impressive to see Craig Jones and Gordon Ryan show the skills we work every day on the mat so perfectly in competition. No technique, strategy or set of tactics is a completed project however - so as always it’s back to the mat to refine and improve what you have and discover what you don’t! Here Nicky Ryan and Nick Ortiz work on their back skills in preparation for upcoming matches.

Victory in Texas!! Craig Jones and Gordon Ryan both won brilliant submission victories against very tough opponents tonight here in Austin Texas. Gordon Ryan took on the very talented Roberto Jiménez. He expressed a desire in training to avoid using leg locks and focus on arm bar from mount as the means to victory. He released an early leg lock and focused on passing to mount and juji gatame arm-bars. His first attempt was close but Mr Jiménez escapes brilliantly under pressure. The second attempt however was devastating and secured the win. Craig Jones took on the brilliant ATOS emerging star Ronaldo Jr. Both men went immediately to their strengths, Craig Jones with his extremely dangerous open guard and Ronaldo Jr with his speedy passing skills. After some strong exchanges Mr Jones latched on to an ashi garami and converted to a 50/50 variation. After a brief fight for hand control and heel exposure Mr Jones got into a powerful breaking position and won another great victory. Both athletes showed their incredible mastery of the squad ideal of control that leads to submission. Now it’s time to return to Puerto Rico and get everyone ready for new challenges! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Showdown in Texas tomorrow night: Tomorrow night night In Austin Texas for WNO grappling. Squad seniors Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones will take on two extremely talented opponents. In the co main event Gordon Ryan will take on Jiu jitsu dynamo Roberto Jiménez - one of the most talented of the new generation Jiu jitsu players. They have battled each other in the gym before and it was a war! The stage always adds something to the equation so this should be a fascinating match where they both know what they have to do to beat each other based on past experience and the one who finds their path onstage will take it. In the main event Australian grappling superstar Craig Jones takes on a surging star among the new generation Jiu jitsu athletes - Ronaldo Jr - who has been tearing up the competition scene recently. He is one of the fastest men in Jiu jitsu, very difficult to control. He is a star member of team ATOS, so you know he will be very well prepared and in tremendous shape. They always do a good job of sending their athletes out in peak condition and with a well worked out strategy. Both are fascinating match ups. I have always said that there are two main ways to excel in Jiu jitsu. You can either make yourself a master of movement and make movement your weapon; or you can make yourself a master of preventing movement and make control your weapon. Mr Ryan and Mr Jones are both true masters of CONTROLLING movement - but both of their opponents are masters of CREATING movement - so this will be a fascinating clash of styles! Weigh in is tonight here in Austin and then tomorrow night @flograppling will broadcast the action - i hope you enjoy the show!!

Overheard in a restaurant recently in Puerto Rico as the squad ordered dinner after a good days training. The waitress asks Nicky Rod how he would like his steak cooked. His reply? “Large...” 😂😂😂

The ultimate submission: We all have our favorite submission holds - in time I hope you develop at least five to six submissions that you can attack from anywhere on anyone - but never lose sight of a fundamental truth in grappling - the ultimate submission is not a hold per se - it is FATIGUE. If you can PHYSICALLY AND MENTALLY BREAK an opponent with fatigue he will submit with his MIND first and then with his BODY second. A big part of your skill set has to be the skill of WEARING DOWN AND EXHAUSTING AN OPPONENT SO THAT ALL THE SUBMISSION HOLDS ARE EASY TO APPLY AND TO WHICH AN OPPONENT WILL GLADLY SURRENDER. There are ways to control and manipulate grips, stance and pace that are heavily in your favor so that an opponent is working at two or three times the rate you are. If you can maintain this the result is inevitable - an opponent who is looking for an excuse to quit - your submission hold provides that excuse. When you put hands on an opponent your constant underlying goal should be to create a disparity in work rate skewed in your favor that opens the door to submission later in the match.

Your legs vs his head: One of the basic features of Jiu jitsu is the notion of controlling greater strength and aggression with lesser strength and aggression via mechanical and tactical advantage. One of the surest ways to do this is to use the strongest parts of the human body (legs and hips) against the weaker parts (head and shoulders for example). Two excellent examples of this would be the triangle and juji gatame arm bar - both of which directly match your legs against an opponents head and arm. Whenever possible look for this kind of match up in your favor. IF YOU ARE TO DEFEAT BIGGER AND STRONGER OPPONENTS THEN YOU MUST SEEK TO FIGHT YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY WITH YOUR LOWER BODY AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE. If you make it a battle of your upper body against a similarly skilled and bigger opponents upper body it is unlikely you will win. MAKE IT A FIGHT BETWEEN YOUR LOWER BODY AND HIS UPPER BODY AND VICTORY WILL FIND A PATH TO YOUR DOOR OFTEN.

Taking yourself to a new level - front headlocks and the example of Craig Jones: At any given time our game is certain level. This can change a little week by week depending upon training conditions and the state of our body, but there is a rough level that can be roughly measured by your skill set/knowledge and how you stack up against other athletes in sparring/competition. Once you can to a level that you find satisfactory it’s natural to take stock of yourself and see yourself as having a certain type of game. Both you and Your classmates have a good idea of what your strengths and weaknesses are. You see yourself as being good at moves A,B and C but not very interested in E and F. You take that skill set of yours and refine it a little and that’s you. You can do pretty well with this approach - but you will never reach your potential. You have to periodically set projects to add whole new aspects to your game. This is the only way to avoid stagnation over time. Take the example of Craig Jones. Early in his career he was known primarily for his triangle attacks. When he came to America to compete in EBI events he realized he had to excel in the leg lock game. He took that project on with such gusto that he became known as one of the best in the world. Not satisfied, he went on to develop a very powerful back attack in response to opponents who ran from the pressure of his leg game. Watching his development a few years ago i talked with him about the need to develop a powerful front headlock/Guillotine game as a counter to opponents who did not want to engage his dangerous submissions game or who were faster than him in a scramble. Immediately he took the project on. Within a short time he was developing lethal variations of Guillotines, anacondas and Darce strangles. Then tying these back to his already formidable back game and leg game. Now he has one of the best front headlock games I’ve ever seen! THIS is how you keep developing. NEVER SEE YOURSELF AS A COMPLETED PROJECT. Rather than cover up and hide your weaknesses - train them to become your new strengths and ally them to your old strengths.

Control the hips: The only scoring position from the back in Jiu Jitsu is rear mount. This involves hooking your two legs into your opponents hips. There are many other back controls that don’t involve the legs at all. They don’t score but are nonetheless very useful methods of control that can win matches. My favorite involve the use of tight waist grips that offer direct control of an opponents hip with an arm. It does a fine job of giving you hip to hip connection along with a great ability to off balance an opponent and leaves you with a free arm that can be put anywhere in response to rapid changes as the match unfolds. When you don’t have hooks in - throw in a tight waist grip as an excellent means of dynamic control

The more dominant your grips and position - the more you take your time when moving: Sometimes Jiu jitsu rewards us for moving quickly - usually when we don’t have any form of advantage over our opponent. In these cases an advantage in speed may be the only advantage you have and if you can get to the next position ahead of your opponent you can profit. Sometimes Jiu jitsu rewards use for being slow. This is usually when you have a dominant grip and (usually top) position. In these cases time is your friend. Time spent in these positions is tiring and frustrating for an opponent. As he works harder and harder to get out, the more risks he will have to take to escape and the more likely he will leave a limb behind to be taken. So next time you take a dominating position/grip - take your time! Don’t be in such a rush for your next move. Remember that WHEN YOU HAVE NO CONTROL TIME IS YOUR ENEMY - BUT WHEN YOU HAVE CONTROL - TIME IS YOUR FRIEND

The interplay of push and pull: When playing bottom position in JiuJitsu there is a continual battle for DISTANCE CONTROL that leads to a never ending interplay between PUSHING and PULLING. From guard we always seek an optimum distance that keeps an opponent at a range that gives us SUFFICIENT ROOM TO ATTACK (space creation) and yet at the same time SUFFICIENT PROXIMITY TO ATTACK (space restriction). In short, if the opponent is too close you won’t have room to move into your attacks. If he is too far away you won’t be able to get and main connection to attack. We need to seek a middle distance we’re the opponent is close enough to attack yet not so close that we our attacks get stifled. As such you must be able to PUSH BACK WITH FRAMES if he gets too close, and PULL HIM CLOSE WITH GRIPS if he is far away. Because things happen very quickly you must be able to switch from pull to push and back again at a moments notice. As a general rule DEFENSE IS BUILT AROUND PUSHING and OFFENSE IS BUILT AROUND PULLING although there are some important exceptions to this general rule. Best of all are grips and positions that enable enable you to do both - such as ashi garami. Next time you play guard pay more attention to push and pull dynamics. When opponents threaten to pass - FOCUS ON STRONG PUSHING FRAMES. When opponents hand back FOCUS ON PULLING THEM INTO YOUR ATTACKS. It will make your developing guard game progress rapidly

Identify the problem: Every submission hold has an escape. Every escape involves a set of movements - but invariably there is ONE movement that does the majority of the work of escape. For example in upper body submission holds from guard involving your legs such as triangle, juji gatame arm bar, omoplata etc - most of the early escapes are postural escapes involving your opponents HEAD rising away from you to create distance and this is the core of the escape/defense overall. Once you understand this as the athlete trying to perform the submission it’s all a matter of building increasingly powerful HEAD CONTROL as the basis of your submission game from guard. Focus upon the most pressing problem pays big dividends in Jiu jitsu. In a word of ten thousand problems learning to focus on the biggest ones first makes a big difference to your performance. Under stress it’s much easier to solve one bigger problem than a dozen smaller ones simultaneously. Develop a clear idea of what the biggest threat to your success is and attack that threat relentlessly - you will soon notice the difference in your performance

Escapes - testing yourself: Here is a moment when my students and I were teaching a seminar in Singapore. Much of what we went over was concerned with escapes from bad position. When it comes time to escape the mount no gi, I strongly favor the kipping escape. This is an escape that superficially looks like a push, but really it is based upon the kipping action of the legs (kipping is a movement of the legs designed to create momentum in a given direction - most commonly used when people want to cheat doing pull ups to make it easier to get up to the bar but also very useful when you want to make it easier to escape certain pins), along with misdirection of your opponents lines of resistance. All of my students excel at this move, in fact there were times early in their careers i had to tell them to stop using it so much because they were going into competitions and deliberately putting themselves in the bottom mount position so they could simply escape and heel hook unwitting opponents! Here Gordon Ryan demonstrates during the seminar. Note the ease of execution and the changes in direction as the move unfolds. In my upcoming NEW WAVE JIU JITSU - ESCAPES video I will cover this fascinating method and show its link to counter offense where you can escape directly into strong leg lock attacks so that you don’t only get out - you finish the opponent as you do so. When you get really good you can get fancy and perform the escape with one arm as Gordon Ryan does here 😜😜 All of my students training begins with defense. Having the confidence that comes from knowing that you can escape the worst positions and counter attack is worth its weight in gold.

Class is never really over: Its natural when you’ve just finished a tough class to want to get the hell out of the dojo and head somewhere less strenuous. Note however, that the time immediately after class is probably the time when you have the most honest and realistic assessments of your ability and flaws as you still have the feelings of exasperation and frustration at failed moves and the memory of exactly what they were. There is no better time therefore to puzzle out the problems fighter there after class. Often my students come to me with problems right after a rough day of sparring. Sometimes I have answers based on my similar experiences from years ago - sometimes i don’t - that’s fine - then it’s time to experiment and figure it out. The feeling of finishing a tough workout is good, but the feeling of finishing a tough workout AND knowing what you need to do to perform better tomorrow is even better. Use that time immediately after class - it’s a great time for improvement.

First contact - hands or feet? Grappling is all about connection. No connection to an opponent means no grappling. At some you have to come to grips to make the action start. When you first come to make grips from open guard you have a choice between feet and hands. In truth, much of that choice will be determined by your opponent. If he positions himself in certain ways - hands will make more sense - in others - feet will make more sense. When ever he denies you one, the other will be available. Generally in no gi you will initially use your feet to establish contact at the ankles and knees. Hands at the wrists, elbows and collar. Here, Nicky Ryan uses feet first due to distance and stance - use that first contact to read the opponent and move into establish more contact for greater control. Just as you test water with a single hand or foot before jumping in, so too, test an opponent with a single hand or foot before jumping in to full connection.

Are you ready for the next move? If there is one certainty in Jiu jitsu it is that the majority of your attempted moves will fail. This is a simple reflection of the fact that your opponents know the same moves you do and also the counters. Given the prevalence of failure it is crucial that you have mapped out what to do the moment you feel that the move has failed and recovery is not possible. We all spend our Jiu jitsu lives seeking to achieve success, but in reality the smart way to approach things is to seek to recover and exploit failure since this is far more common than success. Here Nicky Ryan has lost control of his opponents knee - a clear sign that this heel hook/knee bar attempt has failed beyond recovery - the only question now is where to go from here. If you are asking the question now - it’s already too late. You must train yourself to ask it before that critical moment.

Joint locks - don’t be in a hurry to extend the limb: There are two ways to submit an opponent in Jiu jitsu - strangles and joint locks. Overall I believe strangles are the more effective of the two but joint locks are still a truly vital part of the game. You must make a deep study of the skill of attacking the arms and legs of an opponent. Probably the single most common problem I see in developing students who have gotten into a position to joint lock an opponent is AN UNNECESSARY RUSH TO COMPLETION that sacrifices control and allows an opponent to escape. When it comes to joint locks CONTROL BEATS SPEED. There are exceptions to this. There are times when a fast entry and finish can get you a win before an opponent can get into a defensive reaction - but for every time you see this happen you will see twenty cases where too much concern with speed weakens your control and you end up with nothing. Focus on a tight connection to the joint above the joint that you are attacking. If you are attacking the knee - get a good connection to the hip. If your attacking the elbow, get a good connection to the shoulder. Don’t be afraid to move with your opponent to maintain that connection. When you feel the connection is strong and you can control your opponents movement - THEN go to attack the joint. Victory will go to the athlete who exhibits great control more often than the athlete who exhibits great speed.

It can’t all be hard work and suffering: Sometimes visitors to our gym are rather surprised by the amount of banter and wisecracking there is before and after class. I’m very much in favor of this. When it’s time to work - work hard - but when it’s over it’s important to have some fun (usually at each other’s expense 😜😜). Overly formal atmospheres always felt a little uncomfortable to me. I always disliked titles like “Professor” or even worse “master.” I always felt that an informal and relaxed atmosphere that nonetheless had a clear sense of when it was time to knuckle down and get the hard work done and when it was ok to joke around got the right balance of industry and relaxation that made training in a tough sport enjoyable. Some of my favorite memories in Jiu jitsu came from times AFTER class and that’s a healthy thing as laughter and fun have probably brought more students back for tomorrow’s workout than workouts ever did. Just make sure it doesn’t degenerate into comedy when you’re supposed to be doing the hard work - but once the final round is done there is as much benefit in laughter as there is in technique

Loneliness in a crowded room: Jiu jitsu is at the same time both a deeply personal and a very group oriented journey. You train and develop in a group - but you experience everything, every small daily triumph and failure, as an individual. In truth there will be many more failures than there will be triumphs. It’s natural to feel that everyone else is stronger, faster and more talented than you. That everyone else learns and progresses faster than you do. Don’t get too caught up in comparisons with those around you. Focus more on comparisons with earlier renditions of yourself. As long as you continue to improve a little at a time you will get to the level you want. You will get there faster than some and slower than others. It does not really matter WHEN you get there so much as it matters THAT you get there. It’s good to be ambitious and want to get to goals quickly and efficiently but temper this sentiment with a healthy dose of reality. If everyone else in the room is progressing at roughly the same rate as you then you will never suddenly feel as though the game suddenly became easy. Remember also that the only common characteristic that everyone who got to a high level in the sport exhibited as PERSISTENCE. When it gets lonely and disheartening take a step back and reflect on the virtue of persistence. Understand that everyone else who entered that room felt the same way many many times. Most quit and so never realized their potential in this domain. The few that didn’t are the one who are so good they make you feel as you do know. Stay in the game. The feeling of frustration that is so strong in you today can be replaced by elation tomorrow with just one small and unexpected success.

Teaching: Most of what I write about is about your goal of LEARNING Jiu jitsu. However, a big part of my approach to learning is getting my students involved in TEACHING. There is a great relationship between the acts of learning and teaching and as you progress in one you will inevitably improve at the other. I often get my students to teach moves back to me in class or to teach some innovation they have figured out. The act of teaching forces you to figure out the most important details and features of a technique. Asking yourself how to present the information makes you understand the technique more clearly. Presenting it in a way that is understandable for all levels makes you prioritize the most pertinent details. Obviously it’s easier to teach to others when you’ve reached a higher level in the sport, but start early. Start by teaching friends at the same level as you some aspect of the game you have researched and try it out together. Make adjustments in accordance with the problems you encounter. Just the act of asking the important questions and understanding the central problems involved around the technique can enhance your understanding. It works wonders for my students both as athletes and as teachers themselves. Teaching is a skill like any other, and, like any skill, the best people are usually those who start early and do it often. I started teaching when I was a blue belt in the late 1990’s. Nothing makes me happier as a teacher than seeing my students breakdown complex material and improve the understanding and knowledge of those who train around them. It makes everyone in the room part of a project and gives a whole new meaning to their training. Try it. Start small with friends and see how it can benefit your game.

Young masters: One of the great cliches of martial arts is that old masters have vast reservoirs of knowledge that younger athletes don’t and therefore that younger athletes may be very good in competition but won’t be very good as teachers until presumably they become much older and then they become great teachers. This is complete hogwash. What counts in Jiu jitsu wisdom is not your physical age but rather your accumulated time on the mat and the quality of that time. For example, I would much rather be instructed by a twenty year old who had trained every day from an early age and who was totally immersed in the sport and studied everything from fundamentals to cutting edge material and logged an impressive fifteen thousand hours on the mats than a fifty five year old who trained once a week and who had only logged around four thousand hours of mat time. When it comes to knowledge accumulated mat time is a far more reliable indicator of knowledge than physical age. Add to that the quality of mat time - depth of study, ability to articulate that knowledge to others, degree to which experimentation and research was performed over that mat time etc - and this is what will tell you is the degree of expertise they possess, not their age. I am constantly amazed at the teaching prowess of my young students, Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan, Craig Jones and Nicky Ryan have a depth of knowledge that would deeply impress the older generations in the sport. Remember that Sir Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein revolutionized the world with their knowledge in their early twenties - no one tried to dismiss their ideas because they were young. Martial arts are no different. There are young masters out there who have built incredible stores of knowledge that can change your game

Back up buddy: There are many ways to get hurt in combat sports but one of the most unnecessary comes in situations where two athletes are sparring in a crowded room and crash into another couple of athletes sparring next to them. This kind of incident is usually dismissed as part of the game and laughed off. I never took this approach. In the heyday of the blue basement when Georges St Pierre was getting ready for a big MMA show or the squad was getting ready for ADCC we would often have well over a hundred people working out in a class. In this type of situation it is absolutely crucial that everyone in the room have a good sense of where they are on the mat relative to the people around them. Nothing is more frustrating than an athlete getting ready for a show and getting injured with a cut from a elbow or a joint injury from someone rolling into their arm or leg at an inopportune time - I have myself been knocked out cold twice from heel kicks to the back of the head while sparring next to athletes whose enthusiasm exceeded their sense of distancing. When you start getting close to other people - make a point of quickly and fluidly rolling away from them and start where you left off. Keep a sense of your surroundings. I teach this in terms of self defense training - just as tunnel vision can be a very dangerous thing in self defense scenarios, so too it can be dangerous in a crowded training room. Train yourself to pay attention as you grapple in training and it will help you pay attention to your surroundings if you have to defend yourself outside the dojo. There are more than enough ways in Jiu jitsu to get injured without adding this easily avoided method to the list. Students - be the one who keeps awareness of your surroundings and does not injure or annoy those around you. Teachers - run a tight ship. Make students aware of the potential danger of collision and build a culture in your dojo that takes pride in being professional and courteous and I promise you your injury rate will drop and class camaraderie will increase.

Watching Jiu jitsu: Whenever my students are injured I usually encourage them to come in periodically and watch classes from the sideline. Why? When you can’t train your body - train your MIND. Remember always that the mind governs our actions. You want a faster game in JiuJitsu? That will require a mind that can process options faster just as much as a faster body. The problem is that when most people watch Jiu jitsu they FOLLOW the action rather than try to JUDGE and ANTICIPATE the action. They look only at the RESULT rather than the PROCESSES that brought about the results. When you watch, picture yourself out there and ask yourself second by second what you would be doing in their stead. How you would respond to other fellows attacks and defenses. Get engaged when you watch. The mental workout is every bit as useful and productive as the physical one the athletes on the mat are having.

How much are you using your head when you grapple? Usually when we say “use your head” we mean you ought to use your brain more - but in grappling it very often is used literally. The head is one of the most effective tools you have in grappling, particularly when you hands are preoccupied (which is almost always the case). The must important function of the head is as a pushing implement - though it can other functions as well. Whenever you hands are busy and you need to push, block or trap a part of an opponents body - USE YOUR HEAD. It will often mean the difference between a move working or failing. Look how Gordon Ryan uses his head to flatten and align an opponent as his hands are preoccupied by a bodylock pass grip. Keep a straight spine to minimize neck strain as you do it - you will be delighted at how often and how effectively you can use your head to supplement the pushing, blocking and wedging of your arms.

You can do it! One of the most common questions I am asked is whether you can come back from injury and perform well in Jiu jitsu. It’s natural to doubt your ability to come back from a major setback. Around February 2nd 2019 Gordon Ryan fought a tough match against the great João Gabriel Rocha. About halfway through the match he completely tore his LCL off the bone He was able to hold on and win a very close match but the damage was done. He was scheduled for reconstructive surgery and told that it would probably be a year until he was back to normal. This was tragic news as 2019 was a n ADCC World Championship year - missing the worlds would be a terrible blow to any elite grappler. Initially he could not train at all. The only form of training was mental knowledge training. He would come to class and simply watch from the sidelines to keep his mind in the game. This went in for months. Early tests showed he was regaining linear mobility quite well, but the kind of inward and outward joint mobility required for Jiu jitsu just wasn’t there. Finally he got cleared for light training. The early sessions were not very encouraging. He was a late to every move and often I could see him struggling to perform even basic moves. There are few things more frustrating to a Jiu Jitsu player than knowing what you are supposed to do, but being physically incapable of doing it. Eight weeks out from ADCC I fully assumed he would not be going to the World Championships - he just wasn’t at that level. I was planning the team performance around the other athletes and was assuming Gordon would be a useful training partner for the competitors but not competing himself. One day Mr Ryan came in and had a very good workout. He performed several of his favorite moves very well. Next day he looked even better. By the end of the week he was beating everyone in the gym. At four weeks he repeatedly and easily finished a famous visiting athlete - it was obvious - he was back in the game. Four weeks later he went to give one of the greatest performances in ADCC history - there will never be a shortage of people counting you out - just make sure you yourself are never one of them.

The spine/head is the longest lever in the human body - use it from bottom position: The first guard you learn in Jiu jitsu is usually closed guard. Often i think this common practice is an error - Closed guard probably should not be the first guard you learn - it’s actually a very specialized position that does not always come smoothly from the pin escapes that students learn first in jitsu. I often think half guard and variations of open guard may be better guards for beginning students to learn first. Nonetheless closed guard is an extremely important guard to learn whether you learn it first or last or somewhere in between. Understand immediately that there is going to be a contest between you and your opponent for posture. You want to break him forward - he wants to stay upright and away. It will come down to the pull of your legs and stomach versus the pull up and away of his back and head. Who wins? As always - THE ONE WHO USES THE LEVER TO ADVANTAGE. Your opponents spine is a long lever. If the lock of your closed guard is low - at the base of the lever - your pull will be weak and unlikely to break a good opponents posture. If you shift the lock of your feet higher - up to the head and shoulders - you are operating at the end of the lever and your pulling force will be considerable. When you want to pull - get your feet and legs up high on the back. Much of your success with arm bars, triangles and omoplatas will come out of your ability to switch to a high lock from closed guard - practice it constantly until it is natural and easy for you.

Guard position -The cycle of push and pull: In most cases the basic cycle of guard position is PUSH FIR DEFENSE - PULL FOR OFFENSE. In the majority of cases ( there are obvious exceptions) this holds true. Whenever some is close to passing our guard our first reaction is to PUSH and create space to recover our feet and knees. Whenever we want to bring an opponent forward into submissions or sweeps in a forward direction we PULL (pushing sweeps to the rear are the exception). Learning to cycle between pushing and pulling - offense and defense - is one of the fundamental skills of the sport. Your feet and knees, hands and elbows will be your primary pushers and pullers. Learning to use them in a team in opposing directions based upon what is unfolding second by second in a match will be one of your greatest areas of study. The switch from defense to offense back to defense happens very quickly and the better you and your opponents get, the faster it will have to be.

The undisputed king of positions - the back: As much as I love leg locks and arm locks, if I could only have one submission for the rest of my life I would choose strangles from the back without hesitation. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to see you could build an EXTREMELY effective style of Jiu jitsu that had absolutely no leg locks, no arm locks, no guillotine, Darce strangles etc only a rear strangles. It would be equally effective gi and no gi, grappling and fighting, standing or ground, sport and self defense. You can get the back from anywhere. You can use scrambles to the back when guard passing, as a counter to most leg locks, at the completion of any sweep or takedown, as a follow on from any pin. You could become a dominant world champion with the rear strangle as your only submission hold provided your positional game was up to the task of reliably getting you to the back. Thankfully we don’t have to make the choice of a single submission and so we can learn a bunch of them to make the game easier, but still, lesson learned - study your pathways to the back and your finishes from there - it will never let you down in any scenario in which you may find yourself. Here, Craig Jones shows his back mastery as he locks in on a much bigger opponent to build pressure to a finish. Note the use of closed wedges around hip line and shoulder line via seatbelt and body triangle to create extraordinary levels of control, along with a punishing level of discomfort for the opponent and give him time to assess the hand fight leading to the strangle

Knowing what success feels like and what failure feels like - minimum requirements for submission holds: Submission holds are an all or nothing affair. Typically They either work completely and end the match or don’t work at all and the action continues (occasionally there are cases where they work but the opponent just keeps fighting on with a broken limb and in these cases they have worked to some degree insofar as the rest of the match will be easier fighting against a partially crippled opponent). They take up a considerable amount of energy when applied full force against a tough opponent. You definitely don’t want to hang on grimly to a failed submission hold that has little or no chance of working and needlessly expend vast sums of precious energy fruitlessly. On the other hand, you don’t want to quit early at the first sign of resistance and lose a great chance to win. How do you distinguish scenarios where we should cut our losses and release to go on to something else versus holding on to get the win? The key is to recognize the minimum essential features to the success of the move - for example every heel hook requires that at a minimum your opponents knee should be trapped within your knee line. Every juji gatame requires at the minimum that your hips should be locked to an opponents shoulder/armpit. Every Kimura has the minimum requirement that your figure four lock should be above your opponents elbow. That minimum requirement(s) is your basic guide. If you satisfy it - it is probably a good idea to persist with the lock. If you can’t satisfy it - it’s probably a good idea to abandon it and move on to another attack. Know your minimum requirements and you will know ahead of time whether success or failure with the hold in imminent and save yourself a lot frustration

It’s not so much a game of making yourself faster and stronger than the other guy, so much as it’s a game of using restraints and broken posture to make the other guy weaker and slower than yourself. Strong men can be made weak by forcing them into unnatural and broken postures. Fast men can be rendered slow by restraints and obstacles. In Jiu jitsu, as much as we extol gaining strength for ourselves, we venerate robbing an opponent of strength even more.

Details and direction: Jiu jitsu is absolutely a detail oriented sport. Moves that are performed 90% correctly will fail when used against someone your own level. Adherence to Small details is very often the difference between gold medal and empty hands at the end of a competition. Nonetheless, you must recognize that progress is not only about accumulating details on moves. You must have those details ENCASED IN A GENERAL SENSE OF DIRECTION. You must always have a sense of purpose when you play Jiu jitsu - the details are the means of exhibiting that sense of purpose/direction. In truth you can only remember so many details under stress. Better to have a smaller number of highly relevant details shrouded in a strong sense of direction than endless numbers of details that you can barely remember. For example, in guard passing. A general sense of purpose is conveyed by a principle “seek to create pressure by moving side to side and favor passing to the side opposite the direction your opponents knees are pointing” and this can give you a broad sense of purpose. Then you can fill in the details of exactly how best to do this with details of grip, body positioning, stance etc etc. So yes - accumulate details over time and do your best to remember them all, but remember that they will serve you much better when they are subsumed under broad guidelines that give you the big picture of what you ought to on the macro level while the details guide you on the micro level

Breaking stance and posture: Most Jiu jitsu students are made aware of the critical importance of stance and posture early in their training. You soon learn that breaking an opponents stance and posture pays big dividends in sparring. Perhaps the most impressive example of this is the one used the least - breaking an opponents stance and posture while attacking him with a submission hold. It’s bad enough to get caught in a tight submission hold - it’s TWICE as bad to get caught in a tight submission and then get your stance and posture broken down so that you cannot even defend yourself properly. Remember that submission defense almost always requires some kind of defensive posture - if you lose that then the hold becomes practically indefensible. Next time you are attacking a submission hold - GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND LOOK TO BREAK THE OPPONENTS STANCE AND POSTURE AS WELL - you will soon find far fewer opponents are escaping your favorite holds

Less contact - less effectiveness: Jiu jitsu is the art and science of establishing physical connection with an opponent that enables you to control their movement more than they can control yours and use that control to steer them towards submission. The more contact and connection they can establish on you when they are in good position, the more trouble they can create for you. Accordingly a big part of the game is that of denying connection and contact when it does not suit you. When you are working in a talented opponents guard, try to deny him useful connection whilst establishing your own. His primary connectors are his feet and lower legs. If you control and monitor those you make his game quite difficult. Learning to distinguish between contact and connection that is beneficial and that which is hazardous is a big part of your development. Look how Nicky Ryan controls feet to deny an opponents guard connection whilst simultaneously closing distance to get into a position to establish his own connections i

There is a direct correlation between how long you can stay on the back and the number of strangles you can score on the back: Submissions takes take time. Strangles from the back take even more time than usual. If you can’t maintain back position for a respectable amount of time it’s going to be very difficult to reliably finish from there. As such you have to develop your back riding ability as a skill in itself. Only when you can MAINTAIN the back position can you FINISH from the back position. Begin by seeing how long you can stay on a tough training partners back. Try to improve your times with every attempt. Train your eyes to SEE submission opportunities but don’t act on them until you’ve held the position as long as you aimed to do. Time spent training this way will pay big dividends when you have to go against an opponent with good defensive skills and where the finishes don’t come easy.

Four vs two: One of the primary motivations to use open guard positions is that you can fight with four of your limbs while your opponent can only use two against you. He gets two (weaker) limbs along with the mobility advantage of being on his feet and the weight/pressure of gravity as his weapons. You as the guard player get four limbs (including the two strongest). This is the essential nature of the battle. You have different weapons but both are excellent - you have to learn how to use those different weapons to advantage. Learning to see the difference and use it to your advantage is a key part of winning the eternal battle between guard vs guard passer.

When riding the back - prioritize the upper body connection first: In Jiu jitsu you get rewarded for the back only when you sink your hooks into your opponent - no hooks - no points. It’s natural to think therefore, that the hooks are the thing to focus on. While the hooks are certainly an important part of the position, it is your arms connecting your chest to your opponents back that really enable to stay locked to a resisting opponent for extended periods of time. ONCE YOUR UPPER BODY CONNECTION IS SET, YOU CAN ALWAYS WORK YOUR WAY INTO LOWER BODY HOOKS. Ultimately you will need both upper and lower body connection to succeed from the back - but if circumstances means that for a period of time you can only have one - choose upper body

Be careful who you train with - set basic safety protocols in class and you will greatly reduce time away from the mat caused by unnecessary injuries.

What the f**k!!! I’m filming a new instructional video at BJJ Fanatics when they show me an old painting from an art gallery in downtown Boston that they saw and bought 😂😂 It features British General Richard Savage 4th Earl Rivers. I don’t know who that guy was in history but I’m pretty damn sure he banged one of my Great great great great Grand mothers that’s for sure!! 😂😂😂 I must admit his fashion sense greatly exceeds my own 😂😂 Initially I thought these jokers were pranking me but apparently he really existed!! I’m thinking of showing up at his ancestors estate in England and demanding a big room 😂😂😂

Every Jiu jitsu athlete try’s to create problems for their opponent. That’s good. If you can CREATE problems faster and more imaginatively than your opponent can SOLVE them you will eventually win. But better yet is to go beyond creating PROBLEMS and create DILEMMAS. These have no solution - only a choice between two bad outcomes. When you can put opponents into dilemmas your opponent will avoid one option and will win on the other horn of the dilemma. Here Gordon Ryan demonstrates it perfectly with a front triangle combined with armbar. If his opponent stacks forward to avoid the armbar he will be strangled by the triangle. If he postures up and away from the strangle he will expose his arm to the arm bar. Whichever choice makes he will be submitted. That is the highest kind of Jiu jitsu.

The journey from beginner to expert - physical and psychological development: We all begin as white belts. Our common desire is to gain expertise. In physical terms it’s easy to identify what changes - it is skill. When we first begin we enter as klutzes who can bare shrimp across the mat, but by the time you’re a black belt you will spin effortlessly into a beautiful armbar from underneath a tough opponent without a second thought. But what about the psychological angle? What changes most from beginner to expert? Is it confidence? Do we become more confident? Not always. I know quite a few world champions who are nervous wreaks before competition or even before a hard training session. I know others who fervently believe they have inadequate skills despite winning world titles and having great renown as competitors. Is it knowledge? Not always. Some champions have vast amounts of knowledge, but others have a sparse number of moves and no interest in adding more and they are very successful at the highest levels. In my experience the single most dominant psychological trait among experts that emerged as they went from white belt to black is A CALM MIND THAT ENABLES THEM TO PROBLEM SOLVE UNDER STRESS. Almost every champion and Jiu jitsu expert I knew had this characteristic. As white belts we quickly become FRANTIC when sparring begins. Watch any beginners class and the dominant characteristic you’ll see is PANIC LEADING TO ERROR AND EXHAUSTION. when you watch the black belt class you will observe extreme examples calm under stress that enables students to get out of seemingly hopeless situations and recover. Learning to develop that essential MENTAL CALM is every bit as important as developing your physical skills. Indeed, i would go so far as to say that the physical skills will prove to be of rather limited value if they are not accompanied by a mental calm that judiciously guides their use. When training don’t just pay attention to the physical skills, pay attention to your state of mind.

Being told two dozen details about a given move will not prove as useful to you under the pressure of sparring or competition as the three most important details ranked in order of importance. Better to remember a few items of the most important information than forget two dozen items from a forgettable and unranked list. Remember this always when both teaching and learning

Consistently Winning the little battles usually means you’ll win the war: A Jiu jitsu match is a series of little battles leading to progressively better situations until a point is reached where the opponent does not want to or cannot continue - then the war is over. This simple fact should be reflected in your training. If you want to mimic match conditions seek to win all the little battles along the way - the initial hand fights, the transition to the ground and subsequent grip fights, the battle to off balance an opponent if you’re on bottom or nullify the legs if you’re on top. In a competitive match these battles will go back and forth - focus on winning bad many as you can and generally the final result will go your way. Most Jiu jitsu matches are won CUMULATIVELY. Onlookers only remember the RESULT, but in truth, most of the time it was taking the majority of all those little battles for grip, angle and position that determined the outcome before the finish. Fight in the light of this truth. Don’t get complacent over small battles - they all count toward the final result. Stay focused and be greedy - the more little battles you take the easier and quicker you win the overall war.

Grip with four appendages - not two: When people ask me about gripping skills in Jiu jitsu they almost invariably want to talk about grip STRENGTH. Even when they talk about this they invariably refer to strength of the HANDS. Never forget that from guard position you must learn to grip with both hands AND feet. It is crucial that you develop dexterity in your feet so that they can grip and pull and push just like your hands do. The great advantage of guard position is that it UNWEIGHTS YOUR FEET so that they can be used as two extra gripping limbs. You get to fight an opponent with four of your limbs - he only gets to fight with two. Look how uber talented Australian grappler Craig Jones expertly uses all four limbs simultaneously to grip up his opponent as he closes distance. Your hands are only half the story of gripping in Jiu jitsu - only when you use all four appendages in concert will you maximize your gripping potential

Big congratulations to Garry Tonon and Gordon for winning the Flograppling fan vote competition for most exciting match of the year (Garry Tonon) and submission of the year (Gordon Ryan). I’ve always believed that good Jiu jitsu is directed at control that leads to submission and that this style is always an exciting style to watch and learn. These two athletes do an amazing job of representing that philosophy. This is the third year in a row that Mr Tonon has won this award - an incredible achievement and testimony to his attacking style. Both athletes continuously hunt for submissions - just as you should. They have different means of getting there - one is movement based and the other is control based but the goal is the same. Congratulations Garry and Gordon!

The example of Georges St Pierre: I have had the honor of coaching many truly outstanding athletes of more than two decades. None surpassed the incredible achievements of Mr St Pierre. Everyone knows his achievements - far fewer know what it was like to train with him in the gym - yet a brief discussion of this could be very beneficial to your own progress. The first thing to note was that Mr St Pierre was fully capable of beating the crap out of any of us any time he felt like it, but he came in to the gym only to play our game of grappling rather than fighting. He knew that grappling expertise was an important part of fighting expertise and would not try to use any of his great advantages in standing grappling and striking (or even mention them) but instead play our submission game. He would almost always pull guard and start of positions of disadvantage to remove his advantages and work on his weaknesses. His only goal was improvement in the area we were best suited to help it. If he wanted to he could have simply disengaged and stalled to avoid our strengths. He never did. He went directly into our strengths and tried to improve his performance in those areas. He did the same thing in every boxing, Muay Thai and wrestling workout i ever saw him do. Every workout must have seemed a nightmare as it was him playing against the best people in the world in their strongest area, on their terms. If someone followed him around for a year and watched his workouts they might see him struggling the whole time - until it was fight night. Then they would see the result of all that work against specialists in their domain. Now it was time to put it all together in HIS domain - the cage - under MMA rules - and you all know how that went! DON’T FOCUS IN WINNING IN THE GYM - FOCUS ON IMPROVEMENT AND SKILL ACQUISITION - worry about WINNING when it counts - when you learn to divide those two concerns your progress will be astounding

It’s hard for an opponent to attack you from guard if you don’t allow his feet to make effective connections to your legs and arms: Effective attacks in Jiu jitsu are predicated upon effective grips that form connection between you and an opponent. You can use that connection to control and attack. If you can’t grip and connect - you can’t attack. Now guard position has two major forms of grip. The first is the more obvious one - your hands to your opponents body. The second is your FEET to your opponents body (usually the legs). Your feet do almost as much grilling as your hands in Jiu jitsu. When passing, if you can shut down your opponents ability to grip you with his feet, then you will have gone a long way towards shutting down his offense, and with his offense shut down, now you can focus on the fun stuff - passing his guard - without the distraction of being attacked as you try to pass. Seek to control his feet and prevent them making effective connections to your legs - your passing game will thank you

Undermining athleticism: One of the central features of Jiu jitsu is the constant drive to UNDERMINE WHATEVER ATHLETIC POTENTIAL YOUR OPPONENT HAS. The human body is constructed in such a way that for every athletic task it is capable of performing, there is an optimal stance or bodily disposition that facilitates that task. Your goal in Jiu jitsu is to interfere with that as much as possible in order to reduce an opponent to a klutzy, tied up and useless, unathletic specimen waiting to be submitted. There are many ways to do this depending upon the situation you are in. When it comes to leg locking, arguably the most controlling means of shackling an opponent up in a manner that severely undermines his athleticism is to lace his ankles whilst holding him in cross ashi garami. That immediately prevents an opponent standing up, coming forward or scooting back and also makes turning difficult. ONCE YOU CONTROL MOVEMENT - YOU CONTROL THE GAME. Research how to restrain people and undermine their athleticism in your favorite finishing holds and watch your finishes skyrocket

Looking back at yourself: As much as I encourage students to focus on their future goals and skill development, an important part of that future focus is to periodically look back upon yourself to check for signs of progress. It can be quite a shocking experience to look back at old video of yourself in training. You can learn a lot by looking at old footage and COACHING YOUR OLD SELF. You will of course see a thousand mistakes - you know so much more now than you did then. This simple exercise will reinforce many lessons you learned and crystallize them in a memorable way to help you recall and emphasize them for future training and development. Here, a teenage Gordon Ryan goes through early leg lock training - rough and untutored compared with his current self - but the basic outlines are there. You can see potential and directions for the future. Learn to see the same potential in yourself - take a look back sometimes to help you steer the way forward

I am very happy to announce the release today of the third and final instructional video of the FEET TO FLOOR series. This series focuses on the standing game of Jiu Jitsu in gi. This third volume focuses on aspects of the Jiu jitsu game that are of particular importance to the unique rules and demands of Jiu jitsu and which are either absent or downplayed in most grappling arts. Skills such as standing submission entries (pull to submission rather than pull to guard), a new approach to guard pulling where is it used to aggressively score rather than passively used to avoid being scored upon. How to counter guard pulls and pass in response to an opponent pulling guard. Takedown counters that put you in position to score on the ground. Remember that takedowns are only part of the standing game - there are other skills that can get better outcomes with much less risk and which can be learned very quickly - skills that can give you an effective standing game for Jiu jitsu in a short time. Check it out if you’re interested 😜😜

There’s a lot more to the standing game of Jiu jitsu than takedowns: When most people think of standing skills in Jiu jitsu they understandably think automatically in terms of takedowns. However, there are many other skills of great importance. Let’s consider takedown defense for example. In Jiu jitsu a successful takedown scores two points. A strong counter to takedown that exposes an opponents back and enables you to secure rear mount will score double that - four points. So clearly takedown defense is a potentially very profitable skill that gets widely overlooked in Jiu jitsu. Let’s look at pulling guard. This is typically seen as a defeatist strategy which intent is to prevent an opponent scoring on you (usually because you believe he has superior takedown skills to you). What if we changed our thinking a little and instead of passively pulling guard, we pulled directly to a SWEEP from guard? Pulling directly to a guard sweep is no more difficult than pulling guard. Now you can use guard pulling as a MEANS TO SCORE rather than a way to avoid being scored on. Interestingly you will score the same amount (two points) as you would have scored with a takedown. What if an opponent pulls guard on you? Most people just see this as an invitation to play the ground game. What if you saw it as an opportunity to score a quick guard passing off the pull? Now your up three points (more than a takedown) and putting your opponent under real pressure from the start. What about instead of pulling guard you pulled directly to a submission hold? An arm lock, leg lock or strangle? Then the whole damn match would be over! You can see that there are many very potentially lucrative standing skills that get far less attention than they ought to. Perhaps you can among the first to develop these and make them a feature of your game and reap the benefits!

Push and pull: If you wish to excel in Jiu jitsu there is one seemingly simple edict upon which much of your future success or failure depends - when an opponent pulls - push - and when he pushes - pull. It’s a simple and well known idea that people TALK about all the time and then forget as soon as they start sparring. Don’t just SAY it - LIVE AND BREATH IT every time you’re on the mat and I promise you that your performance will increase overnight. When you have a strongly resisting opponent this fundamental maxim will help your performance more than anyone technique will. Learn to take advantage of the power of your opponents force and you will make a strong man fight HIS OWN STRENGTH as well as yours!

When the workouts done: My students are renown for their work ethic and I am known to push people to their maximum in training. Less well known is that I am also a big advocate of a very informal and relaxed approach to post workout dialogue as a very important counterbalance to the grind of physical training. One of the best ways to create longevity in the sport is to match the toughness of training with relaxed banter and chatting about subjects that have no relation to Jiu jitsu. I am sure all of you do the same thing. It can’t all be about pressure and productivity - we all need pressure release and dialogue among friends and comrades after class is the single best way to make this part of your Jiu jitsu journey. Remember always that the path of Jiu jitsu is a long and frustrating one and the single biggest determinant of realizing you’re potential is STAYING POWER. Anything you can do that keeps you going longer is a blessing and nothing does that better than the venerable Jiu jitsu tradition of after class hijinks and banter. Interestingly when the Covid crises hit students all told me how much they missed classes, but the single most common sentiment I got from them was that more than anything else they missed the post class camaraderie. Here I am with one of my most brilliant students and best friends, Brian Glick, talking shop and probably a few other topics well outside the shop as well 😉😜😉 What are some of the craziest conversations and antics you get up to when the arm locks strangles are over? (Besides leg locks) 😂😜

Give a little to gain a lot: Most of the time when you have top position you will be looking to restrict space between you and your opponent and keep a tight chest to chest connection to main your pin. When it’s time to submit opponents however, you can often profit handsomely by giving some space for an opponent to move into. As long as you control which space is made available this will enable you to funnel your opponents movement into whatever trap you have set. The idea of pinning is to PREVENT movement - but the idea of pinning into submission is to DIRECT movement in directions that favor you. Look how Gordon Ryan gives space for an opponent to move into at the chest, whilst ensuring that the area that really counts - underhook - exhibits no space at all. As such he allows the opponent to maneuver into his own defeat.

Who is this tiny terror?? It’s BABY NICKY RYAN!! His Mom is in Puerto Rico and was proudly showing baby photos of her sons to the squad when this one came up!! Looks to me like that little demon is getting ready to slide into ashi garami from standing and break some poor souls leg!! Garry Tonon thinks he practicing toddler single legs in the play pen. Was this little maniac practicing the dark arts of leg locking at age 1? Damn! No wonder he got so good so quickly!! One thing i know for sure - if baby Nicky meets baby Yoda it’s going to be a bad day for the little green guys leg!! Even the force won’t be enough to save him from this maniacs heel hooks! 😂😂😂

Defensive soundness before submission: The great cliche of Jiu jitsu is “position before submission” However, in some situations such as ashi garami, conventional approaches to position don’t really apply, since both athletes are in a situation where they can attack each other at the same time. I’m these types of scenarios “position before submission “ gets replaced by “defensive soundness before submission.” The idea is to set your feet, knees and other relevant body parts in locations where they are defensively sound (not open to obvious attacks) prior to launching your own attacks. In this way you avoid the undesirable situation of both athletes attacking simultaneously, in which case victory will go to the faster athlete or the one who is prepared to lose a limb to break his opponents limb. The best way is always that of first making yourself defensively sound so that when you do attack you can do so without the distraction of simultaneous counter attacks. Don’t get into submission shoot outs if you can avoid them. Rather, create situations where you can fire at will without return fire. Focus on defensive soundness first, attacks second

Why stay in front of opponents when you can get behind them: To a large degree Jiu jitsu is the skill of maneuvering behind opponents. Sure, you can finish people from frontal positions, but nothing will match the relative ease and certainty of getting behind people and working from there. Try to make this PROGRESSION TO THE BACK an IMMEDIATE REFLEX in your part. Opportunities don’t last long in competitive matches so the earlier you make your move the better in most cases. Just as you wouldn’t accept being in front of an opponents legs when playing against an opponents guard, but rather always seeking to get around his legs to the side, so to from turtle position always seek to get past your opponents arms and get to the back. Of course there will be times when you may favor frontal attacks such as Guillotines or other strangles from the front, but your default option should always be to go behind your opponent

HAPPY NEW YEAR FROM THE SQUAD!! Wishing you all the best for 2021!! Thank you all for your interest in the incredible work of my students and our philosophy of Jiu jitsu. We hope to show much more of our work around the Jiu jitsu world in the coming year - hopefully fate proves kinder to Jiu Jitsu this year than last, but whatever happens, dedication and determination will always prevail over hard times - wishing you all a great night and an even better year!

Carry your opponents weight easily through posture: When you work in bottom position you will have to carry your opponents weight on top of you for extended periods. This can be tiring and fruitless if done with poor posture. IF YOU WANT TO EASILY CARRY AND MOVE HEAVY OPPONENTS FROM BOTTOM KEEP YOUR KNEES TO CHEST AND SPINE CURVED LIKE THE BOTTOM OF A ROCKING CHAIR - just as a rocking chair can easily carry and move heavy bodies, so too will you. Look how Nicky Ryan uses the banana curve in his spine to topple an opponent forward and easily move him into a position where he can lift himself into a cross ashi garami entry. If your spine is flat on the floor you will feel every ounce of your opponents weight and won’t be able to move him an inch. Put a healthy curve in your spine and you will bounce him around from one attack to another.

Sharpening your skills is a little like sharpening a knife: When a good blade smith has to sharpen a dull knife he takes it through stages. The first stage involves removing steel from the edge to restore the original geometry. He will use a rough stone that removes a considerable amount of steel. This is the roughest part of the process and the one where lack of expertise can immediately create detrimental results. The toughness of the first stone makes it ideal for removing large amounts of steel but comes at the price of of a jagged, toothy edge that does not cut smoothly. This necessitates the second step, where a smoother stone is used. It won’t have such a dramatic effect on the edge geometry since it removes far less steel, but it smoothes out the roughness of the first stone’s work. This process can be repeated several times using progressively smoother stones. Finally the last step is to gently polish the edge with a leather strop. This does not remove any steel and does not make the edge any sharper, just smoother for perfect cutting. Your training cycles should follow a similar pattern. When you begin a training cycle you want to change your game, just as the blade smith wants to change the geometry of a very dull knife. You will have to add new skills, new tactics. This is a rough time, as the new skills will look clumsy initially. Some will prove workable, others will have to be abandoned. Once you’ve decided which new elements you want to keep and you have a basic working knowledge of the moves, you go to the next stage where you have to refine those new moves and smooth them out and make them more efficient. This is done in stages. Working first against easier opponents and building up to more difficult ones. Finally when the moves are at a satisfactory level, you enter the stropping stage, where periodically you practice the moves, not so much to add anything to them, but just to keep them sharp and smooth for future use - particularly when competitions are approaching. Working in cycles like this will keep your game developing and progressing over the years and give you a lifetime of growth in the sport

Constantly assess your work rate relative to that of your opponent. If you can consistently make him work harder than you then you will have made a weapon out of TIME and many victories will be yours

A fundamental dilemma between positional attacks and submission attacks: Question 1: What is the most difficult type of body posture to sweep? Answer: extended/spread limbs that create wide base with lowered center of gravity. Question 2: What is the most difficult body posture to attack with submissions? Answer: retracted limbs held close to the torso. As soon as you see the truth of these two answers to our two questions you will understand that the sequence of a positional attack from guard (sweep) will create a reaction (extended limbs) that makes an opponent much easier to submit; whilst a submission attack creates a reaction (retracted limbs/narrow base) that makes them easier to sweep. ALWAYS TRY TO CREATE AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS FUNDAMENTAL POSITION/SUBMISSION DILEMMA AS IT APPLIES TO POSTURE. Your opponent can defend the first only at the cost of making himself more vulnerable to the second. Whenever you play the game, particularly from guard position, keep this in mind and you will get more breakthroughs than previously

You always start directly in front of opponents - but your goal is always to move from there to an advantageous angle in order to attack: Every match starts with the two athletes squared off in front of each other, but the easiest attacks are those where you have an angle out to the side, or best of all, behind your opponent. As such, the general pattern of all your training ought to be an initial square off followed by constant jousting for angle. If you can’t get angle you will have to find another form of advantage (eg level). Try not to settle for attacking straight through the front door (unless it’s a distraction or ruse for a second attack). You can get away with it when you are bigger,stronger, faster or in better shape - but when you face athlete of equal prowess to yourself, that will be an unsuccessful strategy in the vast majority of cases. Start asking yourself what your favorite means of gaining angle out of frontal positions are. Try to find other methods that compliment your favorites. Be sure to be able to get angles on BOTH SIDES as the more an opponent resists on one side, the easier it will be to get to the other. Remember always that just because you START in front of your opponent, that doesn’t mean you want to STAY in front - constantly joust for angles and if you get them, your attacks will double their effectiveness. If you don’t, your opponent will have to work so hard to main square positioning he will be easier to attack by other means

What have you gained today and what do you need tomorrow? Whenever the workout ends it natural to just relax and joke around and talk about your favorite topics (sex and violence). That’s fine - that kind of behavior builds class camaraderie that is crucial to long term development. But occasionally it’s good to delay the after class shenanigans a little and get a clear sense of what you learned about your game today and what you need to work on tomorrow. There are many factors that go into making a good workout, but perhaps the most important is the most over looked - A SENSE OF PURPOSE. When you go into a workout with a clear sense of WHAT YOU WANT TO ACCOMPLISH - not necessarily today but in the future - you will invariably get more done and make greater progress than if you just show up and follow whatever happens in class. Take a proactive approach to workouts and enter with the expectation of trying to achieve something rather than a reactive approach of just following the tide and see what happens. Substantive Talk with team mates after class is a a great way to start this - then you can get back to the sex and violence afterwards 😜😂

From guard almost everything begins with an attack on the opponents balance: Here I am demonstrating a double leg entry into cross ashi garami. Note how it begins, as almost all attacks from guard so, as an attack on the opponents balance that forces hands to floor in reaction and then going from there. Your opponent can’t ignore such an attack, his reaction and your preferences will determine the direction and choice of your response - but it all begins with balance.

A day to say goodbye: Today was the funeral for Big Gord. It was a day to remember the father who raised two strong grapplers, who gave what he had to see his sons pursue their dreams; who took greater pleasure in their successes than anything in his own life. He was a character who quietly suffered through great physical pains from more than twenty surgeries over his life and some private demons in his soul, but who nonetheless faced every dawn with resolve to help his family and friends any way he could. He was taken peacefully in his sleep secure in the knowledge that he was loved by those around him and that his sons had climbed to the top of their profession despite many disadvantages early in their lives. Tonight we will talk old stories and laugh and cry and then get set for a new day and a chance to give him more reason to be proud out into the future.

Pressure passing - the power of half guard: There are many ways to create pressure whilst passing an opponents guard, but in my opinion half guard passing is the best for pressure for the simple reason that it offers direct control of the opponents HEAD, which creates the strongest forms of pressure. The ability to exert pressure over time is perhaps the single biggest determinant of success or failure at championship level. Working your way to half guard and getting control of the head gives you what I consider the best pressure passing method in the game. It works equally well in all three areas of sport Jiu jitsu, gi, no gi and MMA. Here, Georges St Pierre, who uses half guard passing brilliantly throughout his MMA career, trades pressure with Gordon Ryan, who used it brilliantly in his double gold medal performance at the ADCC Grappling World Championships.

Demarcation point - the elbow: It sounds so obvious as to be foolish, but It’s important to know where you are in grappling, because knowledge of where you are determines how you ought to act. In most cases it’s pretty obvious where you are - inside a closed guard, side control, knee on belly, north south etc etc Most white belts can tell you immediately where they are at any given point in a match. Things can get more tricky in some situations however. The most commonly occurring situation is where you are still ostensibly in front of your opponent BUT YOU HAVE GOTTEN BEHIND HIS ELBOW. If you look at this picture of Gordon Ryan from last years ADCC world championships you will probably think that he is in the mounted position - and by standard criteria you would be correct. However, he has gotten behind his opponents elbow. Even though they are still chest to chest, once you’ve beaten your opponents elbow you are 90% of the way to the back - at this point you should already be switching mentally to the idea that you are BEHIND your opponent and adjusting your targets accordingly. Remember that the elbow is the single most important demarcation point in upper body back attacks - once you’ve passed that point it’s time to start thinking in terms of a new position and change your focus.

Get a good start through grip: Projects that begin well are generally easier to keep doing well. In Jiu jitsu everything begins with grip. Getting a superior grip at the outset whilst denying your opponent an effective grip is among the best predictors of who will dominate the exchange overall in the sport. At world championship level everyone is a good grip fighter - anyone who isn’t has been eliminated long ago. Because grip skills are not sexy and exciting to look at, most people ignore them. Then when you go with a talented opponent and you realize that you can’t even begin to get your moves to work because he easily out grips you at the onset of every exchange you realize your mistake. Most of the signature skills of world champions are optional - you can be a champion without them - but I’ve never met a champion who wasn’t an outstanding gripper. Make sure you study grip set ups for all your favorite moves - the better the opponents you have to face, the more you’ll need them. Here I work some basic grip concepts with Nicky Ryan prior to a bout.

Pinning is a weapon: We normally think of the submission holds of Jiu Jitsu - strangles and joint locks - as the weapons of the sport. This is because they are what do the serious damage to an opponent. There is a sense however, in which high pressure pinning can be a weapon also. They may not break joints or render anyone unconscious but done well, they certainly can create so much discomfort and claustrophobia that they can make inexperienced opponents submit and even experienced opponents so miserable that they will expose themselves to submissions just to escape that misery. Just as you put a lot of study into your favorite submissions, so to must you out study into your favorite pins. In particular learn how to control an opponent through his or her HEAD. Even though most of the heavy pins feature chest to chest positions, it’s not so much weight on the chest that makes opponents miserable as it is the use of their jaw as a lever to control their head. Next time you’re pinning your training partners take your time and let them simmer and cook for a while rather than rushing to the submission - you may well find that submission comes a lot easier when you finally decide to go for it

Modern Jiu jitsu lost one of its true characters today - “Big Gord” father of Gordon Ryan and Nicky Ryan passed away in his sleep last night. Mr Ryan Sr was a stalwart supporter of his two sons Gordon and Nicky from the earliest days of their commitment to Jiu jitsu. He would come to many of their training sessions, almost all of their matches from white belt to world championships. He had unshakable confidence in the abilities of his sons and stood by them unfailingly through thick and thin, wins and losses. There is a sense in which Big Gord was a metaphor for the squad itself, he didn’t always say the polite or correct thing, was rough around the edges and unconventional in his approach, but underneath it all he had a heart of gold and stood by his friends and judged everyone by their merits. He was one of the unexpected stars of the 2019 ADCC World Championships as he strode from mat to mat to proudly watch his sons take center stage. He was a real character at these events. Normally the squad is known for their very analytical coaching style - Big Gord came from the opposite direction with his surprisingly insightful psychological pre match advice and humorous call outs that had us all laughing and smiling between and after matches. In the end, that’s what it’s all about - showing love and support for those around you and creating warm smiles and memories for your family and friends. Thank you Gordon, Nicky, Trish and Nathalia for helping Big Gord through this health issues these last few years - i know it was often a difficult and lonely task - you all showed exceptional generosity and kindness to your dear father on a level the world will never know. Wishing you all strength and recovery.

Learn to take a break: If you look at the standard of our lives you will see that typically it follows a consistent pattern of periods of work followed by shorter periods of rest where we recharge and renew, and then back to work. So for example, on an average day we work for a period of hours and then have an hour break for lunch where re relax and recharge and then return to work in the afternoon, followed by rest and dinner at home to prepare for the next day. Our week is similarly planned. We work five days in the expectation that we get two days of rest to recharge and renew and then return on Monday. Even the year is set up this way, with regular holidays set up throughout the year to create this sense of time off to recharge and get ready for a new effort upon return. This the pattern of our lives is periods of work and accomplishment followed by rest and renewal which itself is followed by a new period of effort. YOUR GRAPPLING MUST FOLLOW THE SAME PATTERN. You cannot maintain great exertion forever. Learn to work in a pattern of short bursts of hard work followed by longer periods of lower work rate and short periods of active rest. You will be surprised how many opportunities there are to take a break even during a hard fought match. This will give you a chance to recharge and start anew in your battle. When you learn to cycle your work rate between extreme effort, moderate effort and active rest you will suddenly find you can grapple for much longer periods than you could previously. Learning to mask your rest periods is a skill in itself - but one which will give you match winning endurance. You do it in every other aspect of your life - start doing it in Jiu jitsu.

Control of the head and arm is real control: You will often hear people say that he who controls the head controls the whole body. It’s absolutely true. Arguably the best form of head control is HEAD AND ARM control. In JiuJitsu you get two great ways to do this. The first is through the ARMS via FRONT HEADLOCK when you’re in front of people and SEAT BELT when you’re behind people. The second is through the LEGS via TRIANGLE (sankaku) variations. Both are incredibly effective and opponent up a large number of really high percentage submission holds while simultaneously offering unusually high degree of control over movement. Train your mind to see not just a head in front of you - but a HEAD AND ARM and use either your arms or legs to lock it up. Very soon you will notice that you are controlling and finishing people that used to be impervious to your attacks.

Whatever the other fellow wants - do the opposite: Jiu jitsu can seem like a very complex game at times, but in some ways it is very simple. It is a classic zero-sum game; what ever is good for one player is by definition bad for the other. If you know what the other guy need in order to perform a given move, you can do pretty damn well by doing the opposite of what he needs. That’s why learning how to attack with a given move often educates you very well in how to defend it, and learning to defend it often makes you better at attacking with it. Whenever you drill a given move, get a feel of what the three main mechanical requirements for its success are - that will give a good insight into what you must do to stop it being used successfully against you in the future.

Observations - women sparring men in Jiu Jitsu: Probably one of the toughest assignments in all of Jiu jitsu is for a woman to submit a male who has the same amount of training time and the size and strength disadvantage that is typically found in this scenario. Over many years of observing mixed classes with men and women grappling each other I came to the conclusion that BY FAR the most successful submission hold for women when they take on trained men is the HEEL HOOK - nothing else is even close in my experience. Let me explain this. The strength discrepancy between men and women is much more pronounced in the upper body than lower body. It is particularly pronounced in hand and arm strength. The discrepancy between men and women in lower body strength is far less pronounced. When two men of different size and strength clash I usually favor strangles from the back as the best submission hold for the smaller and weaker fellow - but in the case of women versus men I frequently observe that the big difference in hand/arm strength means that women struggle to win the hand fight that precedes strangulation (the rear triangle works much better for women in this scenario and it is my belief that rear triangle is second best submission for women against men after heel hook). Most of the other classic upper body submissions such as arm bars, Kimura, front triangles run afoul of the arm/upper body strength discrepancy and as such appear to be quite problematic for many females to use against similarly skilled males. Even most leg locks are problematic - knee bars and toe holds require considerable arm and hand strength in application and so have proven difficult to apply in mixed sparring - but the heel hook lets women use their considerable leg strength and dexterity to great effect with relatively little interference from males advantages in hand/arm and upper torso strength - as such I have seen more mixed grappling scenarios in the gym over the years won by heel hooks (especially inside heel hooks) than any other by a very considerable margin. Let both women and men take note - when there is a big strength difference heel hooks are among your best friends!

The real artfulness of Jiu jitsu is in the ability to grapple an opponent with your legs: For the overwhelming majority of people on this planet, they will go through their whole lives using their feet and legs only walking and running. This shows immediately when you ask them to perform other tasks with their legs - they have no experience with using their feet and legs for fine motor skills and they usually fail hopelessly in that activity. This is sad because the human body is vastly stronger and with far greater endurance in the lower body than the upper body. The most efficient use of our body in most activities that require some horsepower is to use the tremendous strength and endurance potential of our legs and hips whenever possible rather than our weak hands and arms. This is especially true in combat sports where you have to take on larger opponents. The day you begin Jiu jitsu training you must make a concerted effort to improve the dexterity and coordination of your feet and legs so that you can incorporate them as much as possible and as early as possible in your grappling training and development. Your Jiu jitsu game will only begin to improve when you switch from being upper body centric as most people are when performing skill tasks - to lower body centric. This fundamental shift is the basis of early development in the Jiu jitsu journey.

Sparring tired: It’s common to feel utterly exhausted some days in the middle of your sparring rounds. Sometimes you come in feeling fine and have a couple of very tough rounds and feel very fatigued. It’s natural to feel like stopping, maybe taking off a round a two and then starting again. You think this way because you are thinking in terms of WINNING OR LOSING rounds. If you’re exhausted it’s going to be very difficult to win and quite likely you’ll lose to your next partner. So you take some rounds off and start again when you’ve recovered a little. This not good if you want to play at a competitive level. Doing this means you will never get the experience of performing through exhaustion. Change your mindset. Tell yourself - I’m exhausted - but I will keep going with a lowered set of expectations. Let’s imagine I’m ahead in a tough match and have to protect my lead and not get submitted. This will simulate the skill of operating under great fatigue and duress - a common thing in tough matches. You don’t want the finals of a tough competition to be the first time you do this - your own mind will start to fight against you - learn to tame it in the gym first and it will be much better than trying to learn it in the middle of a big match. Obviously if you are more recreational, older, perhaps not in competition shape, this will not apply as much, but you can still experiment with it to some degree. Remember, you don’t have to stop completely, just lower your goals and keep going - you will learn a lot about yourself in those rounds.

Self assessment: Every time train in Jiu jitsu we get a very clear idea of how we performed because of the unambiguous nature of sparring. If your partner is better than you they will usually submit you. If your partner is roughly the same level and size it will typically be an exhausting dogfight without clear result. It’s natural to leave every workout strongly doubting whether you are making any tangible progress. This is because as you rise in skill level EVERYONE AROUND YOU IS RISING AT ROUGHLY THE SAME SPEED AND THEY ARE LEARNING SIMILAR TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS SO THEY KNOW MOST OF YOUR ATTACKS. As such you never really feel like you’re making forward progress. It’s natural that you should feel discouraged by this - no one likes to expend large amounts of time and effort without result. Every so often the Jiu jitsu gods will throw a morsel your way. You may be matched against a visitor who doesn’t know your moves and immediately everything feels easier. You might be matched against someone who used to be much better than you but who took time off or moved away and now in the rematch you suddenly do much better than ever before. You might learn a new move or gain a new insight that allows you to break through against partners you could not do anything to previously. It’s then that you suddenly realize that despite all your nights of despair and doubt - you HAVE been making progress after all. Don’t just have faith in Jiu Jitsu - have faith in YOURSELF too. It’s almost impossible to train hard and long without making decent progress. Be aware that the very nature of communal training will often hide this progress from you - so stay the course and learn to check that part of your mind that tells you that you will be permanently static - you won’t be. Understand that the path of Jiu jitsu is one of hard work over time where you will often doubt your progress, but where occasional joyful triumphs among a few big failures and a great many average or forgettable sessions will give you hope and direction for the future

Remember - in Jiu jitsu it’s not how much you’ve learned that counts - it’s HOW MUCH CAN YOU RECALL AND PERFORM UNDER STRESS that counts. As such don’t put your emphasis on AMOUNT of information but rather upon SUMMARY of information. Better to know the two most pertinent details for a given scenario than twenty of lesser importance. Constantly look for ways to filter all the information you receive into summaries that work for you as an individual to recall under pressure. As a teacher I can give a mountain of details but you must actively seek to focus on the ones that are most important for improving your individual performance.

Those critical last few minutes of class: Most people associate the most important part of the class is the sparring section. There is a lot of truth to that - sparring is the single best way to translate knowledge into skill by a landslide. Others will say it’s the drilling section - that is a definitely a fair assertion - drills impart knowledge and provide a valuable first step in converting that knowledge into skill in ways that can make a vast difference in your performance. A few will say it’s the warm up because this provides some level of conditioning and helps reduce injuries that can disrupt progress. There is definitely truth to all those claims. One part of the class that gets no attention but which I strongly emphasize is the post workout review/discussion. This is where we sit down and puzzle out the problems we ran into during the main sparring session. The immense value of this is that IT SETS UP TOMORROWS WORKOUT. Remember that real progress never comes from any one workout - BUT ONLY FROM LONG STRINGS OF WORKOUTS WOVEN TOGETHER THAT BUILD UPON EACH OTHER INCREMENTALLY OVER TIME. By finishing with a resolution of outstanding problems today you set yourself up for improved performance tomorrow - and that’s what it’s all about. So take a few minutes at the end of class every now and then to problem solve in ways that make today’s frustration into tomorrow’s breakthrough - and watch your progress quicken

Inside control and outside control: All physical control over another human being is based on the idea of grip. When it comes to gripping an opponent you have two main choices. The first is to grip inside your opponents limbs with your limbs. This is allows you to separate his limbs away from his torso and often makes it difficult for the opponent to get a solid controlling grip on you. The second is grip his limbs from the outside. This allows you to push arms and legs across the centerline and expose an opponents back and gives a great ability to clinch around an opponent in beneficial ways. Both are superb methods when used well and both can be countered when used poorly. EXCELLENCE IN JIU JITSU WILL REQUIRE YOU TO BECOME HIGHLY PROFICIENT IN BOTH. You can have a preference - that’s fine - but you can’t simply ignore one in favor of the other. There are so many ways to use both to advance your game and win that it would be a great disservice to yourself to only focus on one. Here, Nicky Ryan does some work from closed guard - an excellent example of controlling the opponents body from outside and around with the legs. If he wanted - he could play a hybrid game with outside control with lower body and with inside control at the upper body; or, play outside control with both arms and legs - it’s up to you - but make sure you learn to use both to maximize your development!

Placido!! Did you hit your training partner in the nuts AGAIN?! #yournutsarenotmyproblem
#itsalwaystheoneswhotrytolookinnocent

Learn to see both perspectives of the situation: When you learn offense in Jiu jitsu most people focus only on the the attackers perspective. Understand that you can learn a LOT about the offensive side of a given move my looking at it from the DEFENSIVE perspective. Once you begin to learn what it takes to get OUT of a move - this will give you a clearer understanding of what you need to do to get INTO and CONTROL that move. It’s like looking at offense in reverse and that new perspective creates different emphases that add to your knowledge of offense. So learn both angles to deepen your knowledge of your favorite attacks

In Jiu Jitsu you can know the future: The whole method of Jiu jitsu is TO GAIN EVER INCREASING CONTROL OVER YOUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT AND PUSH HIM INTO A MOVEMENT FUNNEL WHERE HE HAS FEWER AND FEWER OPTIONS OVER TIME UNTIL A POINT IS REACHED WHERE YOU KNOW WHAT HIS NEXT MOVES MUST BE TO ESCAPE - WHEN YOU KNOW HIS NEXT MOVE BEFORE HE PERFORMS IT - ITS VERY EASY TO APPLY YOUR CHECKMATE MOVE. This is the way of good Jiu jitsu. Take all your favorite submissions and start to research how options become limited as certain restrictions are enforced on an opponents movement. Learn to funnel everything down to one or two options. When you can see the future move before it happens and impose your restrictions and counters upon it early, Victory will be yours

Victory in Singapore!! Garry Tonon took a unanimous decision victory over a very game and dangerous title contender Koyomi Matsushima in Singapore. It has been more than a year since Mr Tonon fought due to circumstances and COVID-19. He was able to his extensive half guard bottom training done in this camp to advantage and take his opponents back to threaten strangles and take first round. Round 2 he showed his growing skill in integrating striking with takedowns to take the wrestler down and hold him down to again take the back. In the third round he landed a nice rear hand followed by knee to rock his opponent to take the bout very comfortably and get his MMA path back on track after the long layoff. Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Now Mr Tonon will join us in Puerto Rico and get back into training for the next challenge!! 😜😜

Attacking through 360 degrees: When we practice most of our favorite submissions we typically do so in the standard, most comfortable and controlling positions and orientations. Then in sparring and competitions we find that opponents defend by twisting and turning in ways you never anticipated and you have to try to finish in orientations you rarely, if ever, practice in. Unsurprisingly the lack of familiarity with these contorted position means the submissions fail. YOU MUST BE ABLE TO SUSTAIN AN ATTACK COMFORTABLY AND EFFECTIVELY THROUGH 360 DEGREES OF ROTATION AND IN ALL THE RESULTING UNCOMFORTABLE AND UNFAMILIAR ORIENTATIONS THAN CAN ARISE. Only then can you hope to use your favorite submissions against strong resistance. Practice having training partners rotate out of your holds and rotate with them whilst holding the lock tight enough that you could apply the lock at any point in the rotation if you wanted. Go through multiple rotations and be tight enough at the end to apply a finishing hold. Here, Nicky Ryan has an opponent turn through a triangle and is ready to either follow the movement or switch to another form of triangle - this is the kind of skill that enables you to get the breakthrough against serious resistance

Garry Tonon ready for action! Garry Tonon is set to resume his MMA journey in OneChampionship MMA tomorrow as he takes on the very formidable title contender from Japan Koyomi Matsushima, an extremely accomplished fighter specializing in blending his wrestling, judo and karate skills into a very impressive package. It has been more than a year since Mr Tonon was in the cage, but he has shown his usual professionalism and training dedication despite all the difficulties of 2020 and is anxious to show his growing MMA skill set! Hope you all enjoy the show!

First workout in Puerto Rico: It was great to be back on the mats in a new land here today. We drove into San Juan with friends to work out with Nicky Ryan, Ethan Crelinsten, Oliver Taza and teenage standout Big Dan Manasoiu to work out with our Puerto Rican friends and get things started. It’s great to get acclimated and active early and show people our Jiu jitsu philosophy and technique. Soon the rest of the squad will arrive and we will get to work opening a training facility and getting everyone to their Jiu Jitsu potential. Adelante y hacia arriba!!

Driving: An odd thing about my life is that I have not driven a car in thirty years! When I moved to NYC in 1991 I opted never to buy a car since they are not only unnecessary but a real burden in Manhattan. When I traveled For events I was driven everywhere, in Manhattan I mostly used subway and taxis for special occasions. My old Californian license expired more than two decades ago 😂😂 Not only have I not driven in thirty years, but cars themselves have changed enormously since that time. I learned to drive in a pathetic old British car in New Zealand with an anemic 47 horsepower engine! 😂😂 When I drove in California it was in my brothers Chevy Camaro which had an engine with slightly more than 200 horsepower - impressive for that time - to me it seemed like a rocket ship compared to what I was used to 😂😂 Nowadays it seems just about every car has more than 200 horsepower and weighs half what that old Camaro weighed. And many have three times that horsepower!! Re- learning to drive is going to be interesting!! 😂😜 Here I am playing around with an electric Moke - popular here in the Caribbean Islands. Looking forward to my Puerto Rican drivers license test!! Wish me luck - I think I’m going to need it!! 😂😂 Especially with Gordon Ryan as my driving coach!!

Thank you: Over twenty five years I have taught out of the dojo of my teacher Renzo Gracie. I have been blessed to have so many extraordinary students. I began teaching introduction classes as a blue belt, never dreaming that it would one day be my livelihood. In time I began teaching full time and was fascinated by the overlap of Jiu jitsu with MMA. As fate would have it, a young Georges St Pierre became my student and this began a decade of study in that area culminating in Mr St Pierre as one of the most dominant champions in history and Chris Weidman defeating the other great champion of that era, Anderson Silva. When Georges retired I shifted focus to no gi Jiu jitsu. Once again fate blessed me with outstanding students as Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and the Ryan brothers, Gordon and Nicky formed a core of grapplers that changed the game. Through all of that development were my daily students - the core of my classes - far too many to name but you all know who you are. You were my rock and my foundation. Without you all neither myself nor my more well known students could have done what they did. Thank you all so much for your dedication and sacrifices over a quarter of a century. Thank you for tolerating my shortcomings as a person and a teacher. Thank you for making a room in which ideas could be tested, theories spawned and champions made. We all remember training days before Georges fights or ADCC camps averaging over a hundred people on the mats in morning and afternoon class - today it’s an empty room that i look but my memories will last as long as I do. Thank you for those memories - without you they never would have happened.

Hmmm...I wonder what the next move will be? When you slap hands with your training partner at the onset of a match in Jiu jitsu you both have an almost limitless number of possible options as far as technique and tactics are concerned. The goal is to take your opponent down a path where his options are rapid taken from unlimited to two or three easily identifiable options. WHEN YOU CAN STRONGLY LIMIT YOUR OPPONENTS AVAILABLE OPTIONS HE BECOMES PREDICTABLE - AND A PREDICTABLE OPPONENT IS MUCH EASIER TO DEFEAT. This is done by locking your opponent into a grip and position from there are only a couple of ways to extricate himself. Experience will tell you what these options are. When you can quickly impose a grip or hold upon an opponent that leaves him with a decision tree with only two three branches - you are on the short cut to victory.

Expressing who you are through Jiu jitsu: Jiu Jitsu offers a veritable ocean of moves to its practitioners. You could live ten lifetimes and not master them all. It’s important then, that you focus on those which best suit your body type and personality. When you first begin study you need to simply learn the basic moves as best you can, but in time you will begin to notice that certain moves come more natural you than others. By the time you are a black belt your distinctive game will reflect who you are as clearly as your finger prints. Don’t try to force this process. Don’t start off with a statement that this or that move will be your favorite - it will happen organically over time as naturally as your features change with age. Though I teach a program that has a distinctive look among all my students - beginning with cast iron defense and submission offense around the whole body with a heavy emphasis on legs and back - I make sure I teach a large number of moves and tactics and leave lots of room for individual experimentation so that within the commonalities of my students there are many different interpretations to suit their individual body types and personalities. In the early stages the moves of Jiu jitsu must be given out under the control of the teacher, but as you develop over time they must be offered as a smorgasbord that allows the students to pick and choose those which best suit what they want and need. I always tell my students - i am a dictator on the fundamentals of Jiu jitsu - there is no choice on those, they have to be learned - but I am a libertarian on the rest of the game. As you practice keep a note of those moves that seem to come more naturally to you than others. Research how successful/high percentage they are in top level competition. Perhaps one day they will become the defining feature of your game

Garry Tonon getting ready: Garry Tonon is counting down the days to his next MMA fight in Singapore for @onechampionship where he takes on the very talented Japanese title contender Koyomi Matsushima, who brings a very dangerous mix of Karate and Wrestling into the fight mixed with great experience in high level organizations at championship level. Mr Tonon has trained very thoroughly despite all the inherent problems due to covid restrictions and is ready for action. Sadly i will not be able to go with him this time due to covid restrictions in Singapore that only allow one person to accompany him so we agreed to send a sparring partner for preparation as he has to arrive very early for quarantine purposes and will need to train over there. Mr Tonon continues to expand his MMA repertoire but still we out a heavy emphasis on our style of Jiu jitsu as the core of his preparation. He goes onstage December 4th - hope you all enjoy the show!

Obstacles: Sometimes when you run into a skilled guard player and it seems nothing will get you around their legs it gets frustrating. How you react to that frustration will determine your success or failure as a guard passer. We all have a natural tendency when frustrated to get the mentality of a ram and just go on butting heads until one drops. Don’t get into this mindset. Remember always that it’s always better to go AROUND obstacles rather than THROUGH them - guard passing is no different. No matter how tired and frustrated you get, focus on moving from one side to another - as feel strong resistance on the left, move to the right and renew the attack and keep working aide to side until you get the breakthrough you seek. Don’t just kept hammering away on one side against a good guard player - that’s a ticket to frustration and eventual failure. If you feel yourself getting frustrated it’s ok to back off a little and start again. The main thing is to stay on top and work side to side - that alone will usually result in the bottom player working harder than you over time and thus become less effective as fatigue becomes a factor.

It’s that time! Black Friday sale at BJJ Fanatics - the biggest sale of the year!! 50% off all my instructional videos! Get ready to show off that new knowledge after Thanksgiving 😜😜

Should I take notes after class? A question I am often asked is whether it is beneficial to take notes after Jiu jitsu training sessions. My experience is that there is one common goal for all students - the ability to retain and access learned information under the stress of sparring/competition - however different people have different ways of accomplishing that common goal and no one method appears to outperform the others. For example, Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan have never taken a note in their lives. Myself and Eddie Cummings were prolific note takers. All of us were able to retain information successfully despite the polar opposite approach with regards notes. What I generally find is that people from an academic background are used to the idea of note taking already and adapt it well to Jiu Jitsu study. Those who are not don’t. Just do what you’re comfortable with. Experiment with both and see if there is a difference in your retention performance, but don’t feel you HAVE to take notes. If you do choose to take notes, focus on writing down what was new and interesting in that session rather than every detail. Remember that our memory has very finite limits so don’t overstock on non essentials. So if you’ve never taken notes, give it a try, but if you don’t feel any retention benefits don’t feel you have to do it or that you are at a disadvantage - you are in good company because most champions don’t take notes either. But if you feel like it does help (as it probably did when you were in college) - then stick with it with a focus on what was new and important for that day rather than a record of everything that happened.

New York: My life is probably a lot like yours. It’s been filled with moments of success followed by failure, of joy following sadness. Cycles of up and down, good and bad. Through all of that there was one constant in my life - New York City. Whenever I traveled around the country and the globe there was always a special feeling of happiness when I returned and saw that unmistakable skyline. Washington may be America’s capital, but New York is the WORLD’S capital. It attracts the best and most driven people from around the globe into a concentrated mess of industry, innovation, eclecticism and evolution. It either builds you up or smashes you down. This was reflected in the many incredible teachers and students I had here in New York over quarter of a century. I had many great teachers and many great friends, but in the end, New York was the greatest teacher and friend of them all. It taught me the power of motivation allied with diversity of inputs funneled into a common purpose toughened and refined by open competition. The city has changed a lot in my time here - I’ve changed a lot too - but my changes aren’t complete yet - there are some projects ahead - and they won’t be done in New York City. No change is permanent, the future is always uncertain, plans can change in the face of changing circumstances and you can always come back from where you’re going, but for now it’s time to move on in order to move forward. I will soon be moving with some of my students to Puerto Rico to try a new philosophy of teaching and refining our beloved art that I hope can widen our reach and contribute something significant to the continued growth of Jiu jitsu.

Every attack from bottom is first an attack on your opponents stance and balance: There are a thousand ways to attack from bottom position in Jiu Jitsu, but they are have a common start. Your opponent can only withstand your attacks and go on to pass your guard when he establishes good posture and balance. It’s stands to reason then, that every time you go to attack from bottom position your first target should be his posture and balance - regardless of what attack you’ve chosen. When you can snap an opponents hand down to the floor, knock his butt back to the mat, get his head lower than his hips and all those other signs of successful breaking of balance and posture, then you will suddenly find whatever attacks you favor are suddenly working much better. In a world of huge numbers of possible alternatives - LOOK FOR THE SMALL NUMBER OF COMMONALITIES THAT THEY ALL SHARE - focus your attention on those essential commonalities and watch as all those myriad possibilities become realistic probabilities.

Articulate a broad vision first and then a sound means of getting there: When I teach my first job is to give people a sense of direction - what are we trying to accomplish? What is it’s purpose? Why is this important? Then I try to fill in the myriad details of tactics and technique along with a training method that can actually allow a student to actually perform that vision in a competitive situation. In this sense I preach a teaching method based around PURPOSE and PATHWAY. Give students a sense a purpose and a pathway to get there. When you have a general sense of purpose it is so much easier to remember all the many techniques and tactics because you know what direction they are supposed to take you. Techniques that are not used regularly are soon forgotten. Details taught in isolation often seem frivolous and unnecessary. But when they are out in in the context of purpose they make a lot more sense and are retained a lot longer

First negate - then attack: Some of the most exhausting and frustrating sessions we have are those where you go against an evenly matched opponent and you both relentlessly attack each other move for move. This is certainly exciting and fun, but often does not get us the kind of replicable results we are looking for. ATTACKING WHILE BEING ATTACKED is not really the ideal - it’s not wrong and it can work on occasion, but in the majority of cases you will better exemplify the spirit of Jiu Jitsu - control leading to submission - by first NEGATING YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO ATTACK YOU and only then ATTACKING YOUR OPPONENT. When you have first shut down the other fellows offense - you can focus much better own your own offense. Here, Nicky Rod first gets defensively sound limb positioning and stance inside the dangerous guard of Keenan Cornelius so that he can shut down the immediate danger and then can better focus on his own offensive passing game

Hard work becomes easier when it’s done from a good stance: Jiu jitsu is a game played out in various scenarios. Sometimes you are standing in neutral, sometimes in various kinds of tie up, sometimes you’re in bottom half guard, seated butterfly guard - the list is quite long with many variation (but don’t worry it’s not impossibly long). For each one of those scenarios there is an appropriate stance that maximizes your efficiency and reduces your workload. The faster you get to that stance, maintain it as long as appropriate and change to a new appropriate stance in the face of changing circumstances - the less work you will have to do. At first these stances will seem tiring and frustrating; you won’t be able to hold them very long and sometimes forget to hold them at all - but your long term success is completely bound up with your ability to know them and hold them. Initial failures in stance almost always lead to later failures in technique and endurance. When you practice scenarios in Jiu jitsu; make a habit of start in good stance. Focus on the stance first and the techniques second. If you aren’t sure what the appropriate stance is, your instructor will know. If there is time and it’s appropriate ask him or her the REASONING behind that stance - when you know WHY to stand or sit or kneel or lie down a certain way it’s usually easier to recall next time.

I am very happy to announce the launch today of my latest instructional video series FEET TO FLOOR Volume 2. The emphasis of Volume 1 was on getting students with little standing experience to a level where they could takedown opponents their own size and skill level in the shortest possible time frame. This was done by focusing on the crucial preliminary skills that make all the other standing skills possible - stance, motion, grip, off balancing and position. Then we looked at the takedowns that most people find the fastest to acquire skills in - the hand dominant takedowns suck as collar drags, ankle picks, single legs, double legs etc along with a section on takedowns for self defense. This time we look at the longer term skill of takedowns that are foot/leg dominant along with the takedowns that I believe are the best suited overall for most Jiu jitsu purposes - the sacrifice takedowns (sutemi waza) such as Tomoe nage, sumi gaeshi and uki waza. These combine extreme effectiveness with great tactical safety and have a lot of cross over with skills that Jiu jitsu athletes are already very familiar with in ground training - so they are relatively easy for most students to learn. The big theme of the video is to get you all thinking like a boxer - just as a good boxer sees the jab as his most important punch - not because of its hitting effect, but because of its ability to harass, distract, confuse an opponent in ways that set up the powerful following punches - so too, a good grappler uses his feet to sweep, trip and off balance an opponent to harass, stumble and confuse an opponent to set up the big follow up throws - in this case, Tomoe nage, sumi gaeshi and uki waza (bit also any other throws you favor) If you want to make your feet your jab and set up power throws perfectly suited to JiuJitsu and get some highlight reel scores - take a look 😜 There is a link in my Instagram bio

Using your feet for takedowns: Most Jiu jitsu players spend the vast majority of their training time on the floor - that makes perfect sense since that is where most matches are won and lost and you always have the option of sitting to the floor without using takedowns. So when Jiu jitsu players do use and learn takedowns they tend to focus on HAND DOMINANT takedowns (te waza) since most people are more naturally coordinated with their hands than than feet and legs. This is fine for short term development, but long term you must begin to use FOOT/LEG DOMINANT takedowns (ashi waza) to utilize the greater power and reach of the lower body over the upper body. The learning time is longer but the potential rewards are greater. One of the best ashi waza for Jiu Jitsu purposes are the various foot sweeps. In particular DE ASHI HARAI (BARAI). This move works very well along side the rules of guard pulling in Jiu Jitsu and can send an opponent tumbling to the mat before he can get a grip on you to pull guard. It’s a low risk move - you don’t have to turn your back on your opponent and is fairly easy to learn the variations most applicable to Jiu jitsu. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a no gi variation to take an opponents legs out from under him and get off to a great start from standing position.

You can always come back to Jiu jitsu: Life is complicated and often it creates times when you have to leave Jiu Jitsu for a time to engage in other priorities. It’s natural to think that the time off will be disastrous and then if you ever tried to return you would have lost all your skills and have to start off at the bottom again. My experience is that this is not the case. That in fact, the skills of Jiu jitsu are difficult to learn - so difficult in fact, that they are hard to forget!! What I find is that you quickly lose that fine sense of timing and pace that comes with constant training, but the deep underlying core of your game remains for a long time just waiting to be reactivated. Your first sessions back you feel slow and out of breath, but the timing and pace control that was lost easily also comes back easily - and then you are right back in the saddle!!Look at the example of one of my early black belts, Steve Williams, from a time long before the squad - he took many years off to engage in other life projects, moved around the country and came back recently to the basement - here he is competing in F2W this weekend in high level competition and looking like he never took a day off! So don’t worry about the pressures of life interrupting your training - that hard won knowledge and skill of yours is buried deep inside - it’s not going anywhere - just look at the example of Mr Williams

Pressure before submission: One of the great maxims of Jiu jitsu is “position before submission.” There is a lot of wisdom in that phrase. Understand however, that if you add pressure to position you will double the effect and create situations where opponents MENTALLY accept submission BEFORE you PHYSICALLY apply it. Remember that submission is a CHOICE. Many more people will make that choice when subjected to unrelenting pressure prior to the application of the finishing hold. When you get position, go the extra step and start applying physical pressure from there and you will be surprised to see opponents looking forward to the submission hold as it gives them an acceptable out from the unpleasant experience of PRESSURE OVER TIME.

Mind: Calm but alert
Body: Relaxed but ready for short bursts of near maximum effort
Spirit: Walking the line between never underestimating your opponent or yourself and never overestimating your opponent or yourself
That is your state in good Jiu jitsu

The parable of the banker: Back in the late 1990’s when I was working as a bouncer in NYC I strangled a couple of thugs unconscious one night during a brawl. When things quietened down an older gentleman with a thick Russian accent approached me and asked if I would be willing to work in his club. Bouncers are always looking for extra gigs in case they get fired or have to lay low for a while at their main gig so A few nights later I went to check it out. It was a strip club way downtown in the financial district by the old World Trade Center. The financial district is a hive of activity in the day time but a ghost town at night, bringing in an odd assortment of powerful suits alongside derelicts. It was a small club of mostly Russian strippers catering to boozy traders and dealers - a very easy gig compared with my normal work. One night I had to toss a fellow out who had gotten a little too touchy feely with one of the ladies and caused a commotion. He went without a fight and I stayed at the door as he lingered in the street outside. We struck up a conversation as he seemed a decent dude and he talked about his work which if his story was true, he was very good at. He said to me, “There is only one skill I need to win in my game - I need to be able to look at a stock and see its true value, as opposed to its publicly agreed upon value. If I can see that most people undervalue it I will buy and I win, since it’s true value is much higher and will be revealed in time.” As he walked off i wondered if a similar line of thought would apply to Jiu jitsu. Are there moves out there that are undervalued by most and whose true value would later be revealed so that anyone who invested in them early would profit? A few years later I started my study of leg locks for exactly this reason - they were priced at that time far below their true value. As you learn you might ask yourself, are there OTHER such moves out there waiting for someone to reveal their true value? Are the reasons why we currently consider some moves unworthy of study sound, or just a reflection of our limited thinking? The banker did very well with this approach - perhaps you can too.

Night shift: When I first came to live in America in 1991 and settled in to study and teach at Columbia University in NYC I began working nights as a nightclub/bar bouncer. I lived in two very different worlds. By day the academic life of books and research and by night sex, drugs and rock and roll. It seemed there were two populations to the city - the day shift comprised of responsible, hard working and industrious people who made the city the economic powerhouse of the nation; and the night shift comprised of pleasure seekers, drifters, scam artists and thugs. I remember the words of Travis Bickle often running through my head as I worked the front doors and dance floors of the Apple, “all the animals come out at night...” As time passed I came to see that the city did not have two populations. Rather, it had one population that had two sides to them - the day and the night - and that hard working doctor, lawyer, city employee by day could be a very different person at night. We all have that duality of light and dark inside us and one side needs the other. The night was in a sense a release valve for the pressures of the day. Interestingly, Those people who got consumed by the night life and spent most of their time there used the day as their release valve, since too much time among that crowd created its own pressures. Here I am in my tiny Harlem apartment room in the early nineties...day shift over...night shift about to begin...

Patience: They say that patience is a virtue. Normally we apply this wisdom in everyday life, but it applies in combat sports also. Experts in Jiu jitsu seem to be able to take their time whilst getting to their goals, while beginners are always in a rush. Interestingly those who take their time usually get to their destination, while those who rush to get there usually don’t. What’s the difference? Why can some people take their time and get to a destination while other race to get there and fail? The answer is CONTROL. When you can exert control over an opponents movement you can take your time doing want you want. When you can take your time you can problem solve, switch plans, see emerging opportunities - all the things that make you more successful. When you’re training next, consciously slow yourself down and focus on CONTROLLING the path to your goal rather than RACING there - in time you will be delighted at the results.

BJJ Fanatics is having an early bird Black Friday sale today and tomorrow! All my instructional videos 50% off!!

People often ask me which techniques they should focus on in training. My answer is simple. Ask yourself one question - IF YOU WERE IN THE FINALS OF THE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS, IN THE TOUGHEST MATCH OF YOUR LIFE, WHICH TECHNIQUES FROM YOUR REPERTOIRE WOULD YOU BE USING? In all honesty it would be a rather small set of trusted moves wedded together in mutual support to get the win. Focus on THOSE moves if you want to maximize the effectiveness of your training time.

Nothing good happens when you’re inside a closed guard: In a grappling match, as long as you are locked inside a closed guard there is an undesirable asymmetry insofar you don’t have any form of offense while your opponent has many attacks that he can employ against you (obviously fighting is a very different story as there are many effective strikes that the top athlete inside the closed guard can employ). As such, you want to spend as little time as possible inside the closed guards of your opponents as possible so that you are not caught on the wrong side of this asymmetry any longer than necessary. As such you MUST develop reliable ways of opening a closed guard in a timely manner so that you don’t waste long periods of match time in a position from which you cannot advance and score and where he can submit you with many of the best moves in the sport but you have only a few long percentage attacks on him. I strongly prefer standing methods of opening a closed guard and believe that these work best for most people in most situations (though some athletes have specialized methods of opening closed guards on their knees). Learning to stand inside a dangerous closed guard can be rather discouraging at first as you will often be knocked down - don’t get discouraged - getting knocked down a few times before you succeed is perfectly normal even at world championship level - it’s not as bad as sitting passively inside a closed guard letting time waste and defending yourself from submissions. Opening a closed guard is one of the first skills you must master if you are to make progress in the sport since without it you couldn’t even get started in top position. Find a method that suites you and get to work!

Where there is danger there is sometimes opportunity: The game of Jiu jitsu is essentially a game of risk management. You want certain outcomes - getting those outcomes will entail a degree of risk. You try always to lower the risk as much as possible but always there is the understanding that nothing risked, nothing gained. While it’s in our best interests to general seek to lower risk to the greatest degree we can, there is no denying that sometimes we can get excellent results by INCREASING risk - provided we do so in a way that we can control to an acceptable degree. Probably the riskiest thing you can do in Jiu jitsu is expose your back to your opponent. However, there are things you can do to mitigate the risk to some degree, and as a reckless opponent over extends himself going for your back some interesting counter attacks become available - some of which can lead directly to victory. Here I am demonstrating how leaving an open door to your back via elbow position can bring an opponent on to some very strong leg locking positions. When your usual attacks aren’t getting the breakthroughs you need there can be times when upping the risk can turn a match in your favor. Learn to make risk assessments and marry these to specialized techniques and you can start drawing overzealous opponents into traps that can get breakthroughs that direct attacks could not

The best takedown for Jiu jitsu: Jiu jitsu is a grappling style mostly interested in ground work, since they is the best place to exhibit its central interest - control that leads to submission. Nonetheless there is a need to be able to get things down to the floor and takedowns are one of the most desirable ways to do this. It is natural to ask which takedowns are best suited to the unique rules and demands of Jiu jitsu. No one takedown is ever enough by itself - even if you had only one favorite takedown you would still need others to support its application. I have always believed that two takedowns in particular have a peculiarly strong appeal to Jiu jitsu athletes and could even be described as the most appropriate for the sport of Jiu jitsu when practiced in the gi (no gi i believe wrestling based takedowns are more effective. These are TOMOE NAGE and SUMI GAESHI. These takedowns do not expose you to submission counters, back attacks, getting caught under a heavy sprawl or counter throws. In a worse case scenario where they totally fail, you end up in open guard - not a bad outcome at all. They come naturally to most Jiu jitsu athletes since they are very similar to sweeps from open guard that we use every day - all that is required is some standing gripping skills and some motion and balance breaking skills and you are ready to start your throwing journey. In addition, these takedowns are extremely suitable for the awkward bent over, defensive stances that so many Jiu jitsu athletes favor and which can make many forms of takedown feel difficult to apply. I believe that if Jiu jitsu players started investing time in standing Tomoe nage and sumi gaeshi skills, they would greatly improve their effectiveness in standing position - if you were going to pull guard - why not try these takedowns? Worst case you end up in open guard. Best case you send your opponent flying with a beautiful and acrobatic throw that ends with you two points up on top of a disoriented opponent ready to be attacked on the floor. Make a serious study of these two beautiful and effective takedowns and you will soon have a different standing game!

Climbing rope: The goal of grappling is control over your opponents body - and the two best areas of an opponents body to control are the head and hips - if you control either of those you are in command of his body. The problem is, no one will just let you get a hold of their head or hips, and so you must WORK your way there. The general pattern in the vast majority of grappling exchanges is to BEGIN AT THE EXTREMITIES OF THE BODY - THE HANDS OR FEET - AND WORK YOUR WAY PROGRESSIVELY UP THE ARMS OR LEGS TO GET TO YOUR GOAL OF THE HEAD OR HIPS. It’s like climbing a rope - you start at the bottom and work your way to the top from grip to grip until your get to your destination. In grappling your destination is the head or hips and you must climb your way grip to grip to get there. In all neutral positions whether standing or on the ground you will see this pattern of extremities to core emerging. Working in this way will keep you defensively sound until you control the head or hips - and then you can focus on your offense without hinderance.

Control time: Time is a huge factor in combat sports in many different ways. In grappling one of the most important facets of time is what we might call CONTROL TIME - this is the amount of time you can maintain control over the movement of a resisting opponent in a position that leads directly into submission. THE LONGER YOU CAN MAINTAIN CONTROL TIME UNDER STRESS, THE MORE LIKELY YOU WILL GO ON TO SUBMIT YOUR OPPONENT, particularly if you can make multiple attempts at submissions from that control position. There is a direct relationship between the amount of time you can consistently control opponents in positions that lead directly to submission and your submission rate. Take your favorite positions from which you can transition directly to submission - ashi garami, Kimura, front headlock, juji gatame - whatever you want - AND PRACTICE HOLDING OPPONENTS IN THISE POSITIONS UNDER CONTROL FOR EXTENDED PERIODS - if you get a submission- release and keep going. When you can hold and control these winning positions for minutes at a time there will be very few people who will be able to stop your submission offense.

Symbols: I am often asked why I sometimes present students with a knife or sword after a significant achievement. I believe strongly in the value of symbols in our lives as a means of clarifying, representing and reminding us of ideas that are important, and I believe blades have a good deal of symbolic meaning in martial arts. Bladed tools and weapons were one of the first great instances of technology taking mankind from our primitive beginnings at the bottom of the animal kingdom and taking us out of the common food chain as dominant over other animal species. Naked, we humans are among the most feeble of animals, but with spear in hand, we among the most formidable. Just as Jiu jitsu is a technology that takes us from feeble helplessness in the face of confrontation to a formidable adversary for even much stronger and more aggressive tormentors. Knives, like Jiu Jitsu, are morally neutral. They can be used to perform good deeds, save lives - and they can be used for murder. Like Jiu jitsu they are only as good or bad as the person using them. Steel, the basis of blades, goes through a metamorphosis from clumps of iron ore and through knowledge, refinement and extreme pressure, is forged into beautiful shining steel, just as we begin as unpromising, clumsy white belts and are subjected to pressure and knowledge that transforms us into black belts. Steel requires maintenance, just like the skills of Jiu jitsu. Even the finest steel will lose its edge and rust if poorly cared for, just as your skills will soon deteriorate without continual training and care. Blade steel must seek to satisfy inherently conflicting demands between toughness and hardness - this is the true riddle of steel. Softer steel is tough and won’t chip or break with rough use, but because it is soft it won’t hold a sharp edge for long. Hard steel holds an edge well but chips or even breaks due to its brittleness. So too with our training. We seek hard training for realism, but softer training for longevity and technical development - finding the right compromise between those two is our riddle. And so every time you see a beautiful blade you are reminded of these Jiu Jitsu themes

Maximum effort: Making progress in Jiu jitsu is no easy feat. There are a thousand obstacles that you will run into daily, weekly, monthly and yearly. There will be days you swear you’re getting worse rather than better, times when you feel everyone is progressing faster than you, moves that seem to work well on you but which you can’t seem to perform on anyone. Understand that maximum effort is not just about how hard you can push your body - it’s about how long you can push your mind. As long as the mind leads - the body will follow. No matter how tired your body may be if you can keep your mind active you will never stop. Keep your mind in the game by constantly setting new goals, asking yourself what you can change to improve progress and studying the great athletes of past and present and researching how their knowledge can translate into your progress. Physical exhaustion is normal and, within common sense limits, a good thing in so far as it indicates the kind of effort required for excellence - it will pass with a good meal and a sound nights sleep - but mental exhaustion is fatal as the body won’t follow a despondent, unmotivated mind. Look for ways to stay mentally engaged and motivated and physical fatigue will never stop you.

First contact: Grappling sports are all about making contact and keeping contact in order to control opponents. Nonetheless there are many times when the two athletes will break contact and then have to re-establish contact and begin anew. These times of ESTABLISHING CONTACT that occur multiple times per match are times of great opportunity and great danger. It is very important you have a plan as to want your want PRIOR to making contact, so that you act with a sense of direction. You need two things: first, defensive soundness. You can establish contact in a way that makes you vulnerable to a quick attack that leaves you struggling to catch up. Second, an offensive plan that lets you gain the initiative from the onset of the action. So work from behind a sound stance and positioning that doesn’t leave you exposed to easy attacks and have an idea of what you want to do as soon as contact is made - if you can do these two things the rest of the action that ensues is much more likely to go in your favor

Early days in NYC - Mom and Dad visit: When I first came to NYC from New Zealand in 1991 (I had visited in 1988 but less than a month) it was to study Philosophy at Columbia University. New York is of course, an expensive town and the small financial stipend I got from Columbia as part of my scholarship needed supplementation, so I began working in bars and nightclubs as a bouncer. A few years later my dear Mom and Dad came all the way from New Zealand to see me - I had told them I did some extra work around town but did not tell them what it entailed 😂😂 I had arranged to see them and visit the Statue of Liberty and the old World Trade Center - I lived in Harlem at the time and arranged to come downtown and meet them to be the guide. I canceled work the night before because I was worried there would be a night of fighting and I would have to show up to see them with black eyes, cuts or broken nose! 😂😂All went to plan until at 11pm I got a phone call from a bouncer friend imploring me to replace him for a family emergency at the last minute and take his spot - he had helped me in the past so I had to do it - but the promotion he was working for was legendarily violent even by early 90’s NYC standards! I showed up in the middle of a giant brawl and we fought continuously until beyond closing time at 4am! 😂😂 The whole time all I thought about was not getting hit in The face 😂😂 Finally the night came to closing time and I started to relax and say “I made it!” When a last scuffle broke out trying to get people to leave - I got hit in the back of the head with a thrown bottle and cut 😂😂 Luckily in those days I had hair!! 😂😂 When I woke up the next day I had a big lump, bruise and cut - but hidden underneath my hair so all was well!! 😂😂 Here I am with Mom (Mum for my NZ and Aussie readers) and Dad admiring old New York with a clean face and telling them about how safe i was in NYC studying at University 😂😂

How you end today’s training session will determine tomorrow’s: When most people end a Jiu jitsu training session they are typically rather exhausted. Understandably they usually either show and go home to rest or hang out on the mats and take a mental break with small talk and banter with their buddies. In most cases this is fine, but very often I find that this time immediately after class is one of the most productive to teach a quick lesson in response to a problem i saw students experience in that session. Problems irk us. When we experience a problem on the mat that irritates us, a good solution will be much more memorable and likely to “stick” in our minds precisely because the initial irritation creates a demand for knowledge, and that demand will make the lesson memorable. Here we all get together for a post class discussion of a problem students ran into - typically I will state the problem and offer initial solutions and bounce ideas around as we experiment with solutions. Some work well for some students, others for other students. These last thoughts often provide a good lead in to tomorrow’s class - and this is the important thing - for ONLY WHEN CLASSES BUILD UPON THE LESSONS OF PREVIOUS CLASSES IN A CONTINUOUS LINE OF PROGRESS CAN YOU BUILD TOWARDS YOUR LONG TERM GOALS IN THE SPORT

Let the position do the work for you: It’s natural in combat sports to feel like you have to work and hustle the whole time to beat tough opponents. There certainly will be many times in a tough match where you indeed need to work very hard and hustle to stay ahead - but there will be just as many times where you ought to slow down your work rate and relax a little. This will enable you to recharge after a physically demanding period of action and add greatly to your endurance. One of the best time to do this is after you have scored in a dominant position - the two best are mount and rear mount with side pins also very good (I would not recommend this from knee on belly pins however). In these cases - let the pin do the work for you for a while. The onus is on the OTHER guy to work hard to escape - not you. As you relax and recharge, he is under great stress - if you can Maintain this state of affairs for a minute or two you will have a big energy advantage over the opponent. Watch how Nicky Ryan rewards himself first the hard work of taking an opponent down and passing his guard to mount with a little siesta time that will soon create a situation where is recharged and the opponent exhausted - and then the job of finishing will be so much easier.

Regulating tension: When you first began Jiu jitsu you probably had the same problem everyone else does - you got very tense and tight and as a result quickly exhausted yourself. As you improved, you learned to relax and then you could spar fore much longer periods without fatigue being such an issue. Then a new problem emerged. In this relaxed state, sometimes the submissions you attempted were not tight enough and opponents escaped. Learning to regulate the muscular tension in your body during sparring is a huge part of your development from beginner to expert. In general the body moves fastest and longest in a state of athletic relaxation, so this is the state you want to be in for most of the match when MOVEMENT into winning positions is your primary focus. The body best exhibits control over another body in a state of ISOMETRIC TENSION. This will you need to find a balance between the athletic relaxation that allows you to move fluidly and efficiently into good positions and the isometric tension that enables you to lock on tight to a submission hold, stay locked on despite the strongest resistance and exhibit sufficient strength to force a submission. You can see the kind of tension required for a breaking submission against a tough opponent as Garry Tonon shows his isometric strength with a punishing heel hook on his way to another EBI title.

The power of learning: It is always impressive to watch a student take on new ideas and information and then apply it to get to their goals. So often I get messages of students from around the world who watch the instructional videos of myself and my students at @bjj.fanatics and get results in the gym and in competition. One of the most impressive examples of this is the student who actually made many of the videos with me as the demonstration partner (Uke) - @placisantos Placido Santos. Placido got to feel and perform the moves and concepts first hand. It’s amazing to see how well he has adopted them into his game. This weekend the 150 pound blue belt entered the advanced open weight division of grappling industries and won first place! Using many of the lessons we worked and showed in the videos he was able to take every match by submission! Never underestimate the power of knowledge made into skill through hard training! Hope you enjoy this highlight reel of Placido tearing it up this weekend as I did!

Don’t just attack the joint - attack his balance at the same time: I’m sure that many times you have had the frustrating experience of locking on a nice submission hold and having your opponent hold a strong defensive posture and then work his way free of the hold. Most submission defense against submission holds applied from bottom position begin with POSTURE and BASE. It is for that reason that whenever possible, go beyond just attacking with the submission hold - ATTACK YOUR OPPONENTS BALANCE/POSTURE/BASE AT THE SAME TIME. This will greatly hamper his defense. Here, Garry Tonon has locked on a very tight cross ashi garami hold and is clamping it in place with a well applied inside sankaku (triangle) leg entanglement. Note how he goes the extra distance against tough opposition and breaks his opponents balance as well - immediately making escape more difficult and with the additional benefit of heel exposure as a bonus. Next time you are locked into an arm bar, triangle, leg lock or whatever from bottom position, make a simultaneous attack on your opponents balance and you will soon find that the balance attack makes the submission attacks much more successful

Reflections on a truly great athlete and career: The great Khabib Nurmagomedov fought another brilliant fight last night to take another dominant victory over the very dangerous Justin Gaethje. As he has so many many times, Mr Nurmagomedov was able to neutralize his opponent with superb takedowns and ground control. As with all great athletes, opponents know what to expect but are simply unable to stop it. Many people describe Mr Nurmagomedov as just a wrestler but he showed last night that he has a truly superb MMA skill set. Mr Gaethje is himself a fine wrestler, but as Georges St Pierre showed so many times, wrestling/takedowns in an MMA fight is a very different skill than wrestling/takedowns in a pure wrestling match. He integrated his striking into takedowns superbly and was able to make the takedowns look easy against an excellent wrestler. Not only that, he showed he has excellent submissions skills and the control skills to set them up with beautiful mount control leading into a superb mounted triangle (when was the last time you saw a mounted triangle used to finish an MMA fight? Forget about a UFC title fight!) The application was flawless and resulted in a quick strangle to unconsciousness (I have no idea what the referee was doing as Mr Gaethje clearly tapped twice and Mr Nurmagomedov did what he is supposed to do - hold on until the referee stops the action). Even more impressive is the fact that Mr Nurmagomedov essentially won the fight twice that night - he had total control from the mount at the end of round one and only the bell saved his opponent. Then he went out in round two and repeated the action and got back into mount and finished in spectacular style. To do this twice - once per round against such a dangerous opponent is truly admirable. Through his career this remarkable man has always conducted himself with honor and a straight forward no-nonsense attitude . He stood up for his team mates and what he believed was right and never let himself be swayed by what others wanted or demanded. What a privilege to watch such an athlete in action and see him finish an unbeaten career and forge the path he wanted on his terms.

Scare the hell out of your opponents with terrifying submission technique - all my instructional videos on Halloween sale at @bjj.fanatics Now until November! 😜😜💀☠️☠️💀

There are an infinite number of possibilities in a scramble - but there should be only one goal - the opponents back: It can be hard to know what to do in the fleeting time and motion of a scrambles. The single most useful thing you can have under these circumstances is A SENSE OF DIRECTION. You can actually go in several good directions in a scramble, but in my opinion the best direction will always be towards your opponents back. The back is a big target, a huge percentage of our body’s surface area, so it will always be available at some point as you move through a prolonged scramble. Once you get there it enables you to control and finish the toughest opponents. When your world is a confusing tangle of limbs flying around the mat - keep your thought process simple and clear - AIM FOR THE BACK. Here, Gordon Ryan does exactly that at the ADCC world championships. He is a fine example showing you don’t need to the fastest athlete to be a superb scrambler - just an athlete with a good sense of direction. Remember, in a race between a speedster with no sense of direction versus a plodder who knows exactly where he wants to go - the plodder will beat the speedster every time

Two ways of studying Jiu jitsu: One of the beauties of Jiu jitsu is that you can approach it in two very different ways - both of which are very profitable to your development. The first is to study Jiu jitsu as a martial art/combat sport in itself. If you study Jiu jitsu as a stand alone art by itself you can make fast progress and really focus on pure grappling. I still believe after all these years that just Jiu jitsu by itself makes for an extremely effective fighting style. Even a very highly ranked fighter would have to be very wary of a very good Jiu jitsu player who had no MMA training and stay away from certain positions and play a smart tactical game to win. The other approach is to see Jiu Jitsu as a component of a complete fighting style that borrowed from various combat sports to produce a well rounded MMA style that covered everything. This is generally the best approach for fighting but is often not suitable to part timers or older athletes or professionals who simply can’t risk daily injuries while working a full time job. Here is a nice photo of two great athletes training with the squad who represent well this split. Keenan Cornelius is of course, the specialist who dedicates his time to single discipline Jiu jitsu grappling. Georges St Pierre is the all rounder who uses Jiu jitsu training as a vital component of an overall program as a professional MMA athlete. Both are wonderful ways to approach the art. I’ve always loved the fact that Jiu Jitsu can adapt to the needs of its followers like this and it has created some amazing memories for me as a coach to see different athletes with different goals working together in their own directions.

The remarkable story of Brian Glick: I am mostly known through the exploits of my incredible students and their success in MMA and grappling over the years. What is less known is that I have many students who never competed who are every bit as good as the competitors. A true legend and hidden gem of the blue basement is the inestimable Brian Glick, one of my senior black belts. I am often asked by people - can I get good at Jiu jitsu if I start late? If I am small and unathletic? If I’m not a competitive/aggressive person? If I have no background in martial arts whatsoever? If I have a family/career? I always smile and say “look at Brian Glick. When Mr Glick first began Jiu jitsu in the late 1990’s classes were very rough with frequent dojo challenge matches and high injury rates. Most of my students in the afternoon class were an odd assortment of cops, criminals, bouncers, unemployable thugs, fitness professionals, wannabe fighters and the occasional dominatrix. Brian was so delicate and shy I actually took him aside on a couple of occasions and gave him a speech that he really wasn’t cut out for this kind of activity and he should find another sport. Yet in time he showed the greatest human attribute of them all - stoic persistence that allows for the incredible forces of adaption over time to work their magic. Despite all my doubts he became the small guy that could twist monsters into pretzels. He went through the MMA phase training with Georges St Pierre and Chris Weidman, the squad grappling phase where he is still a formidable training partner for even the best squad members. He is arguably the single greatest example of the transformative powers of Jiu jitsu training to take anybody from helpless to hardcore. There was scarcely a day in the last two decades where I did not see this remarkable fellow exhibit effortless control over monsters twice his size and strength and then have us all laughing with his New York Jewish humor. They call it the gentle art and Mr Glick was indeed a gentleman and an artist in that domain - he is living proof that you can be too

Jiu Jitsu mindset: A question I am often asked is what are mental aspects of Jiu jitsu that play a role in the outcome of competition? It’s a fascinating and deep question that deserves a truly involved discussion, nonetheless we can make a few preliminary points with regards a highly successful athlete whose mindset definitely plays a role in his competitive success - Gordon Ryan. First, let’s distinguish between two elements of the mental game. The first is TRAINING/LIFESTYLE mentality. The second is STAGE PERFORMANCE mentality. Most people only talk about the mental aspects of going onstage in competition. That’s certainly important, but the greatest determinant of the outcome of your matches over time by a landslide is your training/lifestyle mentality. This is the mindset you carry every day as you train and progress. This is what determines your skill acquisition over time. Mr Ryan always operates with the spirit of incremental improvement over time via discipline in training schedule, extreme attention to detail in technique, endless experimentation in response to emerging problems in training, refusal to get distracted by other demands on his attention and interestingly, a constant need to initiate and sustain light hearted conflict with opponents/rivals/“haters” as a means to sustain motivation levels over time throughout an exhausting training program. This need to prove haters wrong is a powerful motivational tool that he uses throughout the year to stay focused year round and sustain progress through multi year training cycles. With regards stage performance mentality, his most obvious feature is high levels of self confidence that enable him to perform on stage at a level very close to his gym performance level. Interestingly the focus of his confidence training is never himself, but his technique/tactics. He does not try to build confidence as an attribute in itself, but as a by product of technical training program and the success he has with it in the gym. This creates a strong link between the two main areas of the mental game - the training/lifestyle mindset and the stage mindset.

Reading your opponent: In daily life we all learn to read the body language of people around us and make conjectures about what kind of person they are, what their intentions are and what they really think (often this can directly oppose what they are saying verbally). You have to learn to do the same thing in Jiu jitsu. The primary means of reading an opponents intentions is through their STANCE and MOTION, and by THEIR REACTIONS TO FEINTS AND FAKES that we threaten them with. Use the time you have as you stand or kneel in front of an opponent to read them - the more accurate information you have about their intentions the easier the task of countering their intentions and asserting your own. Here, Garry Tonon approaches Renato Canuto - both athletes are firebrands with dangerous standing attacks, so reading what traps and attacks they had for each other was very important. Any time you are in neutral positions with distance between you, you have a chance to read the other fellows intentions - you got very good at it in daily life - you can get good at it in Jiu jitsu too!

Most times you have a juji gatame arm bar you also have a triangle available: The positioning for arm bars and triangles is such that WHENEVER YOU HAVE ONE, YOU ALMOST ALWAYS HAVE THE OTHER AVAILABLE. Triangles have the inherent advantage that they a locked around your opponents head and shoulder and hence much tighter. Also, triangles offer the dual benefits of a strangle as well as an arm lock and also, you can attack the joints from a triangle as well or even better than you can from a conventional juji gatame position. For these reasons it is often worth your time to switch your legs from the classic arm bar to a triangle when working for your submission. At little cost you will soon find yourself exerting considerably more control and with more finishing options. Here, Gordon Ryan takes an Ollie to from a brutal arm bar into a still more brutal triangle variation that makes escape very unlikely and allows him to choose his next attack in a leisurely fashion. Next time you are in arm bar position, play around with transitions to triangle variations - front, side, rear and reverse - and see what kind of havoc you can create 😜

Lessons: It was a great pleasure for the squad to train with the great UFC champion Rose Namajunes and her fiancé Pat Barry. On the surface we taught her leg locks, but on a deeper level she taught us all a much deeper lesson years ago. I was at UFC 217 with Georges St Pierre for his fight with Michael Bisping at Madison Square Garden in NYC. At the ceremonial weigh ins all the fighters came out to square off - it was a packed arena even for the weigh ins. I was sitting there when Ms Namajunas came out to square off against the extremely formidable Joanna Jedrzejczyk. There was a collective gasp around the arena when they squared off as it looked like a child being matched against a powerful adult. I heard someone whisper, “I hope that poor girl doesn’t get hurt too badly.” That pretty much summed up what everyone was thinking. The next night we were all in the group locker room warming up. As Ms Namajunas went out for her match, there was the same collective feeling of dread for what seemed like a lamb being taken out to slaughter. Then something interesting happened. The whole locker room, filled with athletes who had fought already and the few remaining to fight, stopped what they were doing and started to watch the terrible mismatch. You could feel an electric tension building in the room as Thug Rose started taking the fight to her powerful opponent. Everyone, even Georges St Pierre, who never gets distracted by anything, stopped their workout and watched this battle of David and Goliath. Suddenly Thug Rose landed a blow that dropped Joanna!! The entire locker room erupted!! As the fight resumed everyone was on their feet and screaming! Then another blow and Thug Rose followed Joanna to the floor and won! The room went crazy!! Fighters who normally don’t even talk to each other were slapping high fives and hugging, Freddy Roach, who didn’t even know who Thug Rose was was smiling and nodding, Firas was punching the air and jumping up and down! In all my years of coaching I never l saw anything like it! NEVER count out a trained and motivated individual who has courage in their heart no matter what appearances may say - that was her great lesson to us

The second you make contact with the leg - attack your opponents balance: A very common problem you will see in Jiu jitsu athletes is a tendency to simply pick the leg up when going into their high single legs. As a result their opponents can easily maintain balance on one leg and because they are in good balance, they can immediately go into strong counters - Guillotines, Kimura, leg lock entries - all kinds of problems. It is very important that the second you get two hands to the leg, you immediately exert strong downward pressure with shoulder/chest whilst pushing with your head so that your opponent is out of balance with weight in his heels. Often this will force him to use his arms to help regain balance - this precludes him from using this arms to lock up his guillotine, Kimura and leg lock counters. All his attention will be momentarily taken up with staying up rather than attacking you. Then you can focus on the task of completing the takedown without the distraction of defending yourself from his counters. Make a habit doing more than picking the leg up - make sure you go further disturb his balance at the same time and keep him hopping and reaching so they he never gets settled enough to counterattack so you can make a smoother completion to your takedown

Uke and tori: Almost all drilling in Jiu jitsu is done with one athlete who is PERFORMING the move being practiced (Tori - the executor of the technique), and the other athlete who is BEING PERFORMED UPON (Uke - the receiver of the technique). One of the best ways to learn in Jiu jitsu is to be the Uke to a more advanced Tori. When I started Jiu jitsu I was just another face in the room, but in time I became Uke to my sensei, Renzo Gracie, and my seniors Matt Serra, Ricardo Almeida and Rodrigo Gracie. At first I was dreadful. Clumsy, out of place and poorly positioned. But as time passed I benefitted immensely as first, I felt what perfectly executed technique should feel like first hand, and in time I got closer and closer to replicating that in my own training. Second, I gained insight on technique that can only come from FEELING it rather than just watching it. Third, I learned about the correct reactions to the technique as they were taught in chains and combinations. When you are the Uke in training - see it for what it is - a grand opportunity to boost your skill level indirectly. Don’t turn your mind off when you’re the Uke and then turn it back on when you’re the Tori. Be an active and alert Uke who learns to balance just the right amount of light resistance with cooperation and good reaction and I promise YOU WILL LEARN ALMOST AS MUCH BEING THE UKE DURING DRILLS AS BEING THE TORI. Soon the best people in the dojo will want to drill with you and you will accelerate your learning even faster. If you are the guy that when it’s time to get a partner for drills and everyone walks away from you and no one makes eye contact or says they’re injured - that’s a pretty good sign that you are a lousy Uke and need to improve 😂😜 (I know because I was that guy when I started 😂😂). Over the years my students were all outstanding ukes and daily work in this capacity helped their progress as much as it helped mine. You can almost always make an accurate assessment of a students overall technical level by their proficiency in playing Uke - so when you’re training, work hard to be the best Uke you can to maximize every means of making development.

Heel hooks in IBJJF competition: The IBJJF made an important decision recently to allow the use of heel hooks and associated knee reaping in no gi competition starting next year. It is a reflection of the continued evolution of Jiu jitsu as a sport with the greatly increased prevalence of leg locking and heel hooks in particular and of the ever widening split between gi and no gi aspects of the sport. I believe the IBJJF were wise to limit the rule change to no gi competition. Heel hooks in a gi would be too easy due to the friction of pants and the power of gripping the pants to enter ashi garami holds. It would rapidly devolve into a game of whoever gets to the legs first would probably win and much of the classical upper body skill set could be lost. By splitting the game you have one part of Jiu jitsu representing the classical ideal of positional advancement to the upper body pins and submissions that is safe for all levels, weights and age categories and the other emphasizing the notion of limb isolation and control leading to submission over the whole body. While I do believe this is a significant change and will make Jiu jitsu an even better sport going into the future, I do not think it will significantly change the rankings of the champions in the long run. At first there will doubtless be a few big upsets as established champions initially struggle with some of the changes; but champions will do what champions have always done - they will learn, adapt and grow and use the same drive and determination that got them to the top before to get there again - just in slightly new ways. In time the skill level of everyone will rise to the new levels required and the sport will advance with most of the champions holding their ground. In 2010 Judo radically changed their rules by banning all lower body takedowns - a seemingly huge change - but the same champions stayed on top as they simply adapted their game. After an initial period of instability, the same will happen in Jiu jitsu. One thing is certain - the players of the future will have a more complete submission game and fewer defensive weaknesses and our sport will continue its fascinating evolution.

The biggest sale in BJJ Fanatics history continues today! 50% off all my instructional videos! 😜😜

If you can make an opponent stumble - whichever move you choose to perform next will be easy: There are many truly valuable combat skills, but one which may not seem very useful on the surface is in fact, arguably among the most useful of them all, since it makes possible so many of the other more well known and glamorous skills - this is the ability to MAKE YOUR OPPONENT STUMBLE AT WILL. If you can do this it will be MUCH easier to perform the subsequent moves that you use to score or finish with. You must develop the ability to the greatest degree possible. It is particularly important when you are grappling in standing position and in situations where you are seated in open guard and your opponent is standing in front of you (though it is important in other common scenarios also). You must be able to make your opponent stumble both forward and backwards, as resistance to one direction will set up attacks in the other. You will need to develop good dexterity in your feet as you will be using your feet and legs like hands and arms to reach out and grab and push and pull. If you can make a man stumble, you make him well nigh defenseless for a quarter of a second - and in combat sports, quarter of a second can be an awfully long time. So work hard on this skill - for it will make many of your other skills much easier to apply

Biggest sale day in the history of BJJ Fanatics! 50% off all my instructional videos! Today and tomorrow! 😜🤗

Opportunity won’t last forever: Jiu jitsu is a game of movement. As the two athletes move around each other, opportunities to attack will naturally arise. No doubt all of you will already have your favorite opportunities. Some of you will favor front headlocks, some kimura, some leg locks from variations of ashi garami; arguably the most effective opportunistic scramble target is the back - whichever one you favor - understand that the opportunity will be fleeting and the better your opponent, the more fleeting it will be. As such, you must build the capacity to PULL THE TRIGGER UPON OPPORTUNITY. You will need to build this disposition in two ways. First, building the skills that lead to success with the move. Second, building the defensive skills that will enable you to recover in cases you you FAIL succeed with the move. Fear of the consequences of failing in the split second of opportunity has stopped more athletes from attempting the move when the opportunity was there than athletes who tried and failed. In a world of fleeting opportunity it’s not just about the skills that make the move work, but about the confidence to pull the trigger and attempt it - for without the attempt, no amount of skill will be of value in that fleeting time you have to perform the move you seek

Make sure you have good strangles from the front and the back: History has shown that strangles from rear mount have been the single most successful and versatile form of submission in Jiu jitsu. All students should do everything in their power to increase their skill in this area. Less well known however, is the idea that one of the best ways to increase your success with rear strangles is to get good at front strangles. Once you establish a reputation as a dangerous strangler from frontal positions, opponents will be forced to go into strong defensive reactions to that threat - reactions so strong and predictable that they make the task of shifting to a position behind an opponent to set up rear strangles much easier than they would otherwise be. DIVERSION will always be one of the best means to break through strong defenses in combat sports - and a good front strangle is an excellent diversion for a quick go behind and entry into your favorite rear strangles. So make sure you can attack well both front and back with strangle attacks, since improvement in one will very naturally lead to increased success with the other (yes, the relationship goes in both directions, though usually front to back is preferable over back to front because it leads to a more controlling position )

Offensive and defensive initiative from guard: Whenever you are in a competitive match with a skilled opponent and making use of guard position, there will be times your opponent has the offensive initiative and is fighting to pass, and you are primarily defensive - fighting only to retain your guard with no thought of offense. Then there will be other times where you have the offensive initiative - you are trying to sweep or submit your opponent and he is in defensive mode with no thought of passing. Usually it goes back and forth until there is a score. It is very important that you fight to finish every defensive period with a transition into some form of guard that enables you to enter into an offensive period. You cannot just continually play defense/retention. A good opponent will eventually crack even the toughest walls, and even if he does pass he will surely win a decision. Every cycle of defense/retention must be followed by an immediate switch into an offensive cycle where you carry the fight to your opponent. I’m sure you can all guess my favorite way to do this - pommel you’re legs into some variation of ashi garami at the completion of every act of retention and get straight into counter offense to start your own period of offense. Whatever method you choose - make sure follow each period of defense/retention with your period of offense/sweep/submission - that way you will carry the fight To your opponent rather than just worn down over time by continuous defense.

Head and shoulders: people talk a lot about head control in Jiu jitsu, and for a good reason - because head control is probably the single best means of controlling the overall movement and posture of an opponents body. Understand however, that in the majority of cases in Jiu jitsu, it won’t just be control of the head that gives you the control you need for victory, but rather control of the head AND shoulders. When you control the HEAD AND SHOULDER GIRDLE then you truly control an opponent. In most cases this is done via an underhook in combination with a cross face, and this is locked in place through the position of your own head. This creates an unholy trinity of pressure - crossface, underhook and head position - that truly enables you to shut down resistance and movement as you play your game. Look at how Gordon Ryan gets all three elements working in unison here to create the daunting pressure that makes him such a threat in top half guard passing situations. When you go to control the HEAD, think about controlling the HEAD AND SHOULDERS, and soon you will be locking down opponents and getting to your winning positions

Opening an “escape” for your opponent: When the mighty Mongols fought for world supremacy they often made use of brilliant battlefield tactics that enabled them to crush almost all their opponents. Sometimes they would surround an enemy and subject them to terrible pressure with their mounted archers - then when the moment was right, they would create a small opening in their perimeter that must have looked like a miraculous escape opportunity to their beleaguered opponents. The trapped army would be wary of such a ruse. The Mongols would let a few escape, then a few more, then a lot. The trapped army now saw it as a way of salvation - they immediately rushed for the opening - throwing down weapons to run all the faster to the opening, losing all decorum and cohesion. As they sprinted they would form a line to run through the narrow gap until they rushed out and through into what must have seemed like a miraculous escape. The Mongols would watch and wait until there was a long line of running, incoherent, defenseless opponents and then ride up alongside the line, easily overtaking the running men on their horses, and shower the defenseless line with arrows until there was no resistance. Exactly the same ruse can be used in Jiu jitsu when operating from dominate pins. Sometimes you get much better results by releasing pressure in one area - allowing an opponent to move into what appears is an escape - when in fact it’s just a worse situation - usually a submission. Here, Nicky Ryan gives space from too mount Sinai that an opponent can turn to an elbow escape - and then makes his opponent turn further than he wanted to convert the mat mount in to the rear mount with additional arm control that will make strangulation easy. Next time you have a powerful pin on your opponent but are struggling to finish - think about controlled RELEASE of pressure - on your terms - so that you can direct him into a better finishing position

Position and standing technique: From the first day you begin Jiu jitsu you got told the importance of POSITION. Probably you were told that position is more important than anything else and should precede (upper body) submissions. There is a reason why you were told this - because in the vast majority of cases it is true. However, when you were shown standing techniques, all the talk about position was abandoned. You were just shown some random takedowns and told to do them from wherever you were. This is a mistake. THERE ARE JUST AS MANY DEMANDS AND NUANCES IN THE STANDING GAME AS THERE ARE IN THE GROUND GAME - and just like the ground game, getting good position first makes applying the techniques much easier and more successful. Just as position usually precedes (upper body) submission on the floor, position precedes most takedowns on the feet. So what are the dominant positions in the standing game? There are several, but the one I always like to teach first is to constantly seek to get a dominant position OUTSIDE YOUR OPPONENTS ELBOWS. If you can get an advantageous position outside an opponents elbows, most takedown techniques will be easier to apply. When you go to grip up with your opponent - seek to get outside his elbows and either attack directly from there or as your opponent tries to recover and square up with you - having that initial positional advantage will make the takedowns so much easier to apply. Don’t think that position is just something that only applies to the ground game. It’s just as valuable on the feet. Start your journey with the idea of seeking always to get outside your opponents elbows and play from there

Control: The fundamental goal of good Jiu jitsu is always control that leads to submission. A good indicator of the degree of control you have is HOW MUCH SPEED AND EXPLOSIVE STRENGTH DO YOU HAVE TO USE IN ORDER TO SUCCESSFULLY APPLY YOUR SUBMISSION HOLDS. As a general rule, if you can only get opponents to tap by exploding into submissions at maximum speed and strength, you are not really controlling your opponent and you are using speed as a substitute for control. This will inevitably lead to a high failure rate and many injured training partners. When you can use submission holds to RESTRAIN MOVEMENT and apply them in SLOW MOTION with the same devastating effects as at maximum speed and power - then you know you are on the path to mastering CONTROL. Here, Gordon Ryan a young master of control, shows his ability to lock down even the most powerful and explosive opponents as he immobilizes the great champion Matheus Diniz and slowly and safely applies his heel hook submission even under the great stress of championship grappling. Make CONTROL your ideal and you can choose how you apply your submission holds and run the full range of gentle to devastating applications depending upon your circumstances

Double trouble: When it comes to joint locks, here is a an axiom that once learned and understood, will make a big difference to your performance. WHENEVER YOU GO TO BREAK A LIMB DURING A COMPETITIVE MATCH, NINETY PERCENT OF THE RESISTANCE WILL COME FROM THE ACTION OF THE OTHER LIMB. This is true for both arm locks and leg locks. If you try to break the left arm, most of the initial resistance will come from the holding action of the right arm. If you go to break the right leg, most of the resistance will begin with the movement, blocking, or locking of the left leg. As such, whenever we get into position to break a limb - WE HAVE TO BE READY TO CONTROL AND SHUT DOWN THE EFFECT OF THE OPPOSITE LIMB. If you can do this you will immediately create twice as much danger to your opponent (double trouble) than if you only focus on the limb you’re trying to break. Learn to CONTROL an opponent as you move towards the joint lock by controlling BOTH limbs, and then learn to manage the transition to the isolated single limb when it’s time to BREAK him - if you can do this, you will become a dangerous joint locker indeed. Here, Craig Jones uses the principle of double trouble to tie up an opponent and then brilliantly managed the transition from two legs to one so he can generate the pressure required at championship level against the toughest opponents to get the win. Make the principle of double trouble part of your submission mindset and double your effectiveness

Victory in Texas!! The squad went on a leg lock rampage tonight here in Austin Texas in a grappling super show with Whose Number One/Flograppling. The show featured many of the finest and most highly ranked grapplers in a night of super fight showdowns. Nicky Ryan took on one of the best wrestlers in the nation, Tony Ramos. Mr Ryan was able to quickly latch on to a very tight outside ashi garami and employ a very powerful heel hook for an impressive win. Craig Jones played his usual super smooth guard game and latched into a superb inside Sankaku early in his match with the outstanding Roberto Jimenez. Controlling both legs in a very example of double trouble control he exposed his opponents heel and secured one of his frighteningly powerful finishes. Then Gordon Ryan stepped on stage for the main event against current ADCC World Champion one weight division below him, the powerful and explosive Matheus Diniz, a master of tactical Jiu jitsu. Mr Ryan took a rather leisurely pace as it was a thirty minutes match. He scored two impressive reversals from guard position to get mounted and put his opponent under great physical pressure, until he used an off balancing movement from underneath to enter into a very tight inside sankaku with double trouble control and then apply a very well controlled heel hook finish. Three matches against stud opponents and three leg lock submissions - that’s a a great night in Texas!! Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Looking forward to another big show here in December 😜😜

I am very pleased to announce the release of my FEET TO FLOOR: FUNDAMENTAL STANDING SKILLS today by BJJ Fanatics. This is the first of three videos covering the standing gi game in Jiu jitsu. The first volume focus on the key precursor skills of the standing game - stance, grip, motion, off balancing and position - without which you simply cannot perform all the other standing skills. Then it moves to the first takedowns to learn based upon degree of difficulty in learning. The goal is to take a student with very limited standing skills and get them confidently taking down opponents their own size and skill level in live sparring in a three to six month time frame. As such the emphasis is on TE WAZA (takedowns based around the use of hands/arms) since most people find the use of hands and arms easier when they begin than the more difficult but impressive feet and leg techniques that will cover in next volume. Then we go to the crucial rear takedowns that are very important to Jiu jitsu due to the unique scoring system of Jiu jitsu takedowns. Finally I felt that many Jiu jitsu students have as their primary motivation to learn takedowns their concerns about SELF DEFENSE (after all you don’t HAVE to practice takedowns while practicing the sport, but you will definitely need them in many self defense situations). Accordingly I added a look at my guide to takedown selection and philosophy for self defense purposes (obviously this is done no gi). If you are interested in the Jiu jitsu standing game you can check it out at BJJ Fanatics! I will put a link in my Instagram bio 🤗

Your success or failure in the standing position will come from your mastery of the crucial precursor skills: A huge mistake in most Jiu jitsu standing programs is the tendency to teach a set of takedowns as the class curriculum. Students are shown a given move, say a single leg takedown, they drill it for a while and then move to the main component of the class - the ground positions. At best this creates a class of students who can drill the moves - but it never produces a class of students who can perform the moves against a strongly resisting opponent in sparring and competition. A big part of the reason for this is of course, the fact they don’t do any sparring in the standing position; but there is another important reason - THEY ARE NEVER SHOWN THE CRUCIAL PRECURSOR SKILLS OF STANCE, MOTION, GRIP, OFF BALANCING AND POSITION THAT ACTUALLY MAKE THE TAKEDOWNS POSSIBLE AGAINST A RESISTING OPPONENT. In standing grappling, TAKEDOWNS ARE THE CULMINATION OF THE APPLICATION OF PRECURSOR SKILLS THAT HAVE TO BE APPLIED FIRST BEFORE THE TAKEDOWN CAN BE PERFORMED. If those skills are lacking - the takedown will prove impossible the moment the opponent starts resisting. These crucial precursor skills are not sexy - no one gets excited about the prospect of practicing grip fighting, stance or movement - so they get ignored. Just as you can never hope to apply an arm bar on a resisting opponent without learning the precursor skills of passing and pinning and control - you can’t apply a takedown without standing precursor skills and learning takedowns without them is simply not going to be productive - you may look ok doing your drills but you won’t be able to takedown a resisting and competitive opponent. Make sure you spend as much time learning these crucial precursor skills of the standing position as you do takedowns - they may not be as sexy but when the pressure is on they will the factor that makes you successful

Jiu jitsu takedowns - controlling the aftermath of the takedown: A a very distinctive feature of the Jiu jitsu standing game that separates it from many other forms of grappling is THE THREE SECOND RULE which states that takedown points will not be awarded unless the athlete performing the takedown can demonstrate control after the takedown for three seconds where control is understood as the ability to hold an opponents hips, shoulder, side or one knee to the mat for the full three seconds. This is actually extremely difficult. In combat sports THREE SECONDS IS AN AWFULLY LONG TIME. The effect of this rule is that the takedown itself is not really what is valued in Jiu jitsu, rather, what is valued is the AFTERMATH of the takedown - THAT is what you get scored for. In practice your opponent will typically fight to keep his butt/side/shoulder/one knee off the mat. This means the points you score usually come from the scramble AFTER the takedown (rear mount is the most common). As Jiu jitsu students you must pay particular attention to controlling this crucial post takedown phase - very often this is the difference between a winning score versus a tiring scramble that ends with nothing.

The basis of your confidence in your offense is the degree of confidence you have in your defense. Our fear is always that if we take a risk we will be punished with by being put into a bad situation from which we can not recover. However, if you know that your defense is so strong that there is simply no situation from which you cannot recover - all fear evaporates and you will attack with full confidence - holding nothing back. If you want an aggressive attacking game - begin your training by developing an iron defense

Sweeps can do more than sweep: When we go to sweep an opponent from guard position we typically do so with the goal of getting up to to top position and scoring two points. Understand however, that sweeps have TWO major functions. The first is exactly what we just described - the attempt to put an opponent down to bottom position and gain top position. The second is much less talked about. A failed sweep almost always creates SPACE and EXTENSION in our opponent. Space, because he will need to move away to break connection and lessen the power of the sweep; and extension because he will need to base his hands/feet outwards to prevent being turned over. These defensive reactions of space and extension will make it surprisingly easy to switch from the goal of REVERSING an opponent to SUBMITTING an opponent (or standing up to your feet). As the opponent bases out wide with feet and knees - leg lock entries become easy. As he bases out with hands, arm locks and triangles become surprisingly easy. Here, Georges St Pierre is getting ready to test the strong base of Gordon Ryan with a shoulder crunch variation of sumi gaeshi sweep. Mr Ryan is already starting to widen his base in anticipation - ask yourself where you would go with regards submissions in this situation

Quadrants of the body: When it’s time to submit an opponent your main targets are the neck (strangles), arms and legs (joint locks). Divide your opponents body into left upper quadrant (left arm target). Right upper quadrant (right arm target). Left lower quadrant (left leg target) right lower quadrant (right leg target). My favorite way to attack joint lock combinations is either side upper quadrant followed by opposite side lower body quadrant. This is the most natural (it’s always easier to go DOWN the body than UP the body for joint lock combinations on the floor) and the most deceptive (going from one side to the other takes advantage of the natural defenses to the initial upper body attack. You can see it here - I am threatening my partners right arm but positioning myself in such a way that it will be very easy to transition to the left leg (upper right to lower left) should the arm lock fail. Combining your attacks in this way will make you a very dangerous combination attacker - and get you more finishes on the mat!

The two most significant rules in Jiu jitsu with regards the standing game: There are two rules in Jiu jitsu that make the standing game significantly different from other grappling sports. The first is the THREE SECOND RULE which states that takedowns only score when they exhibit control for three seconds after the takedown where the opponents hips/buttocks/back or knee is kept on the floor for the full three seconds. This is a very difficult criteria to satisfy and in competition often means that the critical three seconds generates a scramble and points are scored in the scramble rather than the takedown per se. The second crucial rule is THE GROUND ENGAGEMENT RULE which states that if an athlete elects to sit to guard position the other athlete MUST engage on the ground. This means you can never force the opponent to a standing match - it has to be something they want to engage in. It is this rule which makes it possible for Jiu jitsu students to completely ignore standing skills (other than the easy skill of pulling guard) and makes it important for us to know how to counter a guard pull - a skill that is not necessary in other grappling arts that don’t have this rule. All of your standing training training in Jiu jitsu has to factor in the effect of these two rules. Takedowns that would score in wrestling or Judo may not score at all in Jiu Jitsu and at any time you may have to abandon the standing game if an opponent sits to the floor. It is important that you adjust your techniques and tactics around these two unique rules of Jiu jitsu - they have a huge effect on the standing game in our sport

If you want to understand something - teach it: When someone becomes my student I always teach them TWO skills. The first is the one everyone knows about - excellent performance in Jiu jitsu. The second is much less widely known. I teach all my students to teach. This forces them to be able to articulate exactly what they are trying to do. Learning to articulate this knowledge greatly clarifies it in your own mind. In my experience THE MORE CLEARLY YOU THINK ABOUT A GIVEN SKILL, THE MORE DECISIVELY YOU WILL ACT WITH THAT SKILL. Often I make my students teach back the skills I taught them, or have them teach some new idea they are working on - the act of doing this always sharpens and enhances their understanding in ways that increase performance. The result is that all of my senior students without exception are truly excellent teachers as well as athletes. It has the additional long term benefit that they can make a good living from the sport as a teacher as well as an athlete. Next time you feel confusion about an area of the sport - do some research on it and try to teach what you’ve learned to a Jiu jitsu friend (or if you really want a challenge - to a non Jiu jitsu friend - then you will have to add explanations as to why this skill is important, since this may not be obvious to an outsider - make sure you make it shorter than my explanations or they may not be your friend anymore! 😂😂). I promise this will be more than just a fun experience - it will make you a better performer in that area of the game.

Read your opponent: Competitive matches are a lot easier to win if you know what your opponent is going to do before he does it. Unfortunately our opponents don’t tell us what they intend to do prior to doing it. Sometimes they even deceive us by creating an appearance of wanting to do one thing and then actually doing another. However, the body does not lie nearly as much as the mouth - you must learn to READ what an opponent really intends to do through observing his STANCE, MOTION and LEVEL among other things. If your opponent holds his body in a certain way, it will enable some kinds of action and prohibit others. This will immediately give you clues as to what he intends to do. If you feint offensive movements you will get a chance to read his responses and get good insight into his counter game. USE THE INTIAL ENCOUNTER AT THE START OF THE MATCH AND EVERY SUBSEQUENT TIME YOU RE-ENGAGE WITH YOUR OPPONENT TO HET INSIGHTS INTO WHAT HE INTENDS TO DO. You’ve spent your entire life learning to read people’s eyes and body to make assessments as to what they’re really thinking in every aspect of your life from business, friendships, dating etc. Now you must learn to do it in Jiu jitsu

Use the asymmetries of the human body in your favor: A fundamental asymmetry of the human body is that of the massively greater strength and endurance of our lower body over our upper body. Legs are far stronger than arms. Use this asymmetry to win - as much as possible FIGHT YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY WITH YOUR LOWER BODY. This is one of the best ways for smaller, weaker people to defeat bigger, stronger people. Juji gatame arm bars, triangles and omoplatas etc all do a great job of matching your leg strength against an opponents arm/shoulder/neck strength and as such, are among the best ways to take advantage of this fundamental feature of the human body. Actively look to employ it whenever you can - it is one of the key features of Jiu jitsu

Overlap: Many of the most popular standing takedowns in Jiu jitsu can also be used as sweeps from guard position on the ground. This really helps the Jiu jitsu student speed the process of learning them as standing takedowns. If you already have a strong single leg sweep from open guard, it won’t be so difficult to lead a single leg takedown from standing position. Once you learn standing set ups and elements of stance and motion etc, everything is quite similar. Quite a few takedowns have very significant overlap with commonly used guard sweeps - double legs, Tomoe nage, sumi gaeshi, collar drags, ankle picks - these (and others) all are excellent takedowns from standing as well as excellent sweeps from the floor. By focusing on these overlap takedowns, the Jiu jitsu student can shorten learning time by taking what is already familiar and applying it in a different context. I’m sure that many of you have been applying these moves as sweeps for many years - it will be easier to apply them from standing once you make the necessary additions than learning an entirely new takedown that has no relation to the ground game you are so familiar with. If you’re looking to develop a good standing takedown game in a short timeframe - ask yourself what some of your favorite guard sweeps are and whether they can be applied in standing position - a surprising number can - perhaps they can be your short cut to developing some takedown skills

Killers on the ground - competent on the feet: Over the years I’ve had the honor of working with many elite grapplers from other grappling styles such as Judo and Wrestling etc. What I noticed is that these fellows were always absolute killers on their feet. Some of them were so skilled that they could literally take their favorite throw and toss someone with it from virtually any grip and even determine which part of their opponents body would land first in the floor. They could grip and then IMMEDIATELY throw/takedown. In addition to being absolute killers on their feet, they were also very competent on the floor. They were not elite level Jiu jitsu on the mat but they certainly weren’t bad (there were a few exceptional athletes such as Flavio Canto and my student Travis Stevens who could match even elite level Jiu Jitsu players on the floor - but they were exceptional). This stood in contrast to many Jiu jitsu players who were absolute killers on the floor but incompetent on their feet. There are some exceptional Jiu jitsu athletes who are very competent in the standing position, but a disturbing number had a real discrepancy between their ground and standing skills. In Jiu jitsu you don’t have to be a world beater in the standing position. No one is expecting you to hang with elite Judo or wrestling athletes whose primary focus is standing grappling - but you owe it to yourself to at least be COMPETENT at standing skills. When you train work with the ethos that you will become A KILLER ON THE GROUND AND COMPETENT ON YOUR FEET. That is an ideal that is easily attainable for us all and will make your eventual mastery of the sport much more rewarding and well rounded and give you a deeper understanding of the sport we love

ENTER THE SYSTEM:BACK ATTACKS has just been out on BJJ Fanatics daily deal! 50% off my biggest selling instructional video! See the submission system that has won so many championships matches and makes the back a true match ending position! @bjj.fanatics

Takedowns in Jiu jitsu - favor those where you face your opponent: There are many sins in Jiu jitsu, but the most unforgivable one is BACK EXPOSURE. If you expose your back to your opponent he now gets the highest possible score and has access to the most high percentage submissions in the sport while you can do nothing but defend. As such, when it’s time to decide what kind of takedowns you should employ, DEGREE OF BACK EXPOSURE is certainly a very important consideration. Some takedowns require you to completely turn your back to an opponent. This certainly enables you to generate great throwing power, but comes at a high price - any slip up on your part and your opponent gets a big score and a very good chance to finish you. In most grappling sports such as Judo, the rules reward risk - if you miss a throw and expose your back, the referee will protect you by intervening and restarting you in standing position. In Jiu jitsu, no one will intervene on your behalf. If you make an error and expose your back, you will have to fight your way out of it and recover. As such, there is an understandable preference for takedowns with minimal back exposure. To be sure, there are other potential dangers besides back exposure, but they are generally not as severe. Here, Gordon Ryan tests the formidable takedown defense of Georges St Pierre with a double leg takedown. As long as his posture is remains strong there is little back exposure. Note how he clears the lead arm to lessen another big risk of leg takedowns - neck exposure - Mr St Pierre has a nasty front headlock. When you start building your takedown repertoire, take into consideration the unique features of Jiu jitsu that may make you favor some takedown methods over others. What are your favorites? How well do they adapt to unique rules and directives of Jiu jitsu?

Sweeps AND submissions: Very often there is a natural tendency to divide our attacks from open guard into sweeps and submissions and to see them as as an either/or option - you either sweep the opponent or you submit him. There is nothing wrong with that, but you will get much better results when you understand that they operate best when used in unison. Every time you attack with a sweep, your opponent will be forced to base out with his limbs to prevent it. This will immediately created extended limbs - and extended limbs are breakable limbs. THE MORE YOU CAN GET AN OPPONENT EXTENDED AND OUT OF BALANCE, THE MORE YOU WILL SUBMIT HIM. Don’t see sweeps as an alternative choice to submissions - see them as an essential precursor - and watch your submission percentages increase overnight. Here, Gordon Ryan launches an opponent into some serious air time at the world championships. A sweep attack as powerful as this will either result in sweep points or at the very least, an extended and off balanced opponent who can easily be attacked via submission at both upper and lower body.

When attacking the legs - try to control all three joints: One of the reasons I favor leg lock attacks is because of the very robust connection you can make to an opponents body that makes it rather difficult for an opponent to pull away from you once the attack is launched. This is particularly true when you are able to connect to all three joints of the leg - hip, knee and ankle. You have a choice as which of those joints you seek to connect to first. Sometimes it’s good to begin with the heel/ankle (end of the lever). Sometimes knee and hip is good (keeps the opponents knee inside your knee line). But at some point, if resistance is strong and there is a danger of the opponent pulling completely away from you, it’s wise to find a strong connection to all three joints. Here, one hand controls the ankle, the other the knee and my feet and knees control the hip. Once the control has been established - then you can transition to submission - in this case it will require a movement to get my wrist under the heel - but it will be made considerably easier due to that initial three aspect control. The leg is a long and strong limb - maximize your chances with this principle of control.

Another friendly day training in the blue basement...

Plotting: one of the great things about grappling martial arts is they often offer you good opportunities to SLOW THINGS DOWN and to THINK ABOUT YOUR NEXT MOVE. In striking martial arts there is usually a much higher pace and very little time to think once you get within striking range. In Jiu jitsu, all the dominant pin positions, rear mount, mount, side and north/south, along with top turtle position, half guard top and bottom and closed guard, enable you to take a breather and consider your next line of attack. Learn to use these positions as more than physical advantage, but also as a means to gain TACTICAL ADVANTAGE through the use of plotting a next move. Here, Gordon Ryan has worked himself to top turtle position - a good one for taking some time to consider the next options

Leg locks won’t work in MMA: A very commonly stated opinion is that leg locks won’t work in MMA. When the squad first began using leg locks in grappling competition, critics immediately claimed that they wouldn’t work against higher level opponents. Then when the squad started beating higher level opponents in submission only tournaments the same critics claimed that they wouldn’t work in a points tournament of the highest level such as ADCC. Then when the squad (and others) beat numerous opponents with leg locks in ADCC the critics retorted that they may work in grappling but you couldn’t use them in MMA because you would get pulverized by strikes if you so much as attempted them. I always laughed and shrugged my shoulders at this argument - the same way I did when the early critics said leg locks wouldn’t even work in grappling. There is nothing special or unique about leg locks. They are like any other martial arts technique - IF THEY ARE UTILIZED WELL AND AT THE APPROPRIATE TIME - THEY WILL WORK WELL. IF NOT, THEY WON’T. Every move has its good point points and bad points - their success or failure is not based on the move itself but rather upon our ability to exploit its good points while avoiding the bad points. I have seen grapplers who used triangles, arm bars, Guillotines, lose control of them and get pounded into defeat - yet no one claims triangles, arm bars or guillotines should never be used in MMA. Moreover, there is plenty of historical evidence of leg locks being used successfully in mma for a long time. Understand that the success or failure of your moves is tied much more to the quality of your applications of the move than to the moves themselves. Almost all of the major traditional moves of Jiu jitsu are capable of winning a fight if your use of it is good. Focus on the quality of your application to make your moves work rather than what people try tell you will work and you will find your own creative ways to victory as Neiman Gracie did last night with this beautifully applied hybrid inside heel hook/knee bar leg lock over one of the greatest welterweights in history

Victory in Connecticut!! Neiman Gracie won a brilliant victory tonight via flawless inside heel hook over MMA legend Jon Fitch at BELLATOR MMA in the Mohegan Sun arena. It was a shockingly dominant performance over such a great opponent - Neiman scored with takedowns and fisticuffs and showed his very dangerous submission arsenal in a truly well rounded performance. It was a great pleasure for me to corner next to my sensei Renzo Gracie and Jamie Crowder, who provided excellent tactical advice and coaching through a long and difficult camp with interruptions due to injury and the Covid crises. Neiman showed his ability to attack the whole body with submissions and strikes while controlling the direction of the fight. It was a true honor also to witness the retirement of Jon Fitch - an athlete I have admired for many years and who was undeniably one of the greatest welterweights of his generation. I still remember getting Georges St Pierre ready to battle him years ago and have always admired his ability and character. For Neiman to perform so well against such a great man is testimony to his growth and development. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Getting ready: Neiman Gracie has been training hard for his biggest test yet against one of the greatest welterweights of his generation - Jon Fitch - we are in Connecticut getting ready for the big show with Bellator MMA. Mr Fitch is legendarily tough with a game that shut down the best opponents - but Neiman has world class Jiu jitsu and has shown a great ability to use it effectively in the cage - this will be a great match!

No matter how much destruction is brought to the body and property; as long as the spirit remains strong, recovery and return to greatness cannot be stopped 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Guard passing - two directions for your game: There are a vast number of ways to pass an opponents guard, but at the end of the day they can be divided into two camps. The first are those passes that focus upon USING YOUR MOBILITY TO OUTFLANK YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS. The second are those that focus upon IMMOBILIZING YOUR OPPONENTS FEET AND HIPS AND GOING PAST HIS IMMOBILIZED HIPS. So one is concerned with using your mobility to pass, the other is concerned with restricting the opponents mobility. Toreando (bullfighting) passes are a good example of using your mobility advantage (you are on your feet, opponent is on his back so you should be able to move much faster and more freely than him). Bodylock passes would be a good example of passes that shut down your opponents hips and feet and prevent him following your movement as you pass. It’s natural that you should favor one type over the other, BUT MAKE SURE YOU HAVE AT LEAST ONE OF EACH (and preferably a few more than that) so that you can play both games to throw off difficult opponents. Here, Gordon Ryan puts his opponent under tremendous pressure with his powerful body lock passing style

Purpose: The single most important thing you carry into your daily workout is not your skill, your knowledge or your desire or most of the things mentioned in this regard - ITS A SENSE OF PURPOSE. Know what you want to work on and achieve in every session and you will soon find that progress becomes the norm rather than the exception. Time spent just rolling around sparring is fun and it’s fine to do that periodically or on light days, but it does very little to MAKE YOU BETTER THAN YOU WERE BEFORE THE WORKOUT. Going in to a workout KNOWING WHAT YOU ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE AND HAVING A SIMPLE PLAN TO DO SO makes all the difference. When the workout is over, you will have a sense of improvement and a sense of what you you need to do tomorrow. If you can stack up many such workouts over time - you can achieve things that once seemed impossible

For many Jiu jitsu students the strongest motivation to learn takedowns has nothing to do with the recreational sport they play - after all, you can just sit to guard every time you play if you wish - it’s the realization that in a self defense situation that’s not an option. Accordingly, this is not a subject matter that can be completely overlooked by Jiu jitsu students - at some point it has to be addressed.

Takedowns for self defense - thoughts on amplitude: A common sentiment you will hear is that one of the chief virtues of takedowns for self defense training is that a hard powerful takedown on concrete is a fight ender and means you don’t even need to go the ground. There is definitely some truth to this. I have personally seen some fights ended immediately by a hard slam into the ground. The old cliche is that a boxer can only hit with the weight of his hands, but a grappler (with high amplitude takedowns) can hit with the weight of the earth. My experience was that there were mixed results with big slams in street fights. For every time I saw someone incapacitated by a heavy slam, I saw many others get right back and immediately resume fighting. I have also seen situations where a hard throw was performed and the person thrown tightly grabbed the thrower in panic and BOTH protagonists went hard into the cement with the thrower getting hurt as badly as the person thrown. The truth is, the harder the throw, the more difficult it is to control the landing for both of you. Thus hard throws on cement can be something of a double edge sword. If you are going to throw someone hard and use takedowns as a weapon in itself rather than as merely a means to take someone to the ground, then you will want to use techniques that put the OTHER fellow into a hard fall - not BOTH of you. This means you generally ought to favor throwing techniques where you keep both feet on the floor and can retain balance after the throw (for example, Tai otoshi rather than say, uchi mata) Interestingly in the sport of SAMBO they award the highest score to takedowns that do exactly this - throw someone with amplitude but where you remain standing over them. You don’t see it too often in competition as it’s difficult to achieve, but it does happen and is a good reflection of the self defense ideal for takedowns. Be realistic however - understand that a hard throw certainly CAN end a fight immediately, but is not guaranteed - as I said earlier, I’ve seen plenty of people get slammed hard and come right back up swinging - be ready to follow up appropriately based on the circumstances.

Jiu jitsu takedowns - amplitude: In most grappling sports there is great value not only in takedowns, but in the AMPLITUDE of takedowns. In other words, the more FORCEFUL the takedown as measured by momentum, height, the relationship between feet and shoulders of the person thrown and whether it lands them flat on their back etc then HIGHER THE SCORE THE TAKEDOWN WILL BE GRANTED. So takedowns are graded and scored according to their amplitude. In the case of Judo if sufficient amplitude is achieved along with the back landing on the mat, the match is over. In Jiu jitsu things are very different. First, a takedown can never end a match, not matter how perfect the landing. Second, ALL TAKEDOWNS SCORE THE SAME - regardless of how high or low the amplitude. The biggest and most powerful throw scores the same two points as the smallest trip. It goes further than this. In Jiu jitsu increases in amplitude often get PUNISHED rather than rewarded. The more amplitude is put into a takedown, the greater the danger of ROLL THROUGH - were the momentum of the throw creates a situation where there is no control at the conclusion of the takedown. Jiu jitsu demands that there be three seconds of positional control at the conclusion of the takedown. If roll through creates a situation where the control is weak (and it often does) - no points will be scored (only an advantage). Thus there is no real motivation in Jiu jitsu for big high amplitude throws and some reason to see them as disincentivized. As such, Jiu jitsu tends to favor smaller takedowns that do the minimum to bring the match to the floor and enable control in the aftermath of the takedown. There are still other good reasons to learn big throws - they can be a very valuable tool in some self defense situations and they can have an intimidating effect in matches that you can use in your favor. However, when working your takedowns in Jiu jitsu, always remember that control has greater value than amplitude and practice accordingly.

Active rest: Jiu jitsu, like any combat sport, can be an exhausting experience. Sometimes prolonged periods of exertion, especially when trying complete takedowns, guard passes, guard retention etc gains trough and relentless opponents, can leave you very tired indeed. You can’t stop when tired - but you can take active rests that can recharge your batteries and get you ready for a next push forward towards victory. Whenever you capture a strong position after a prolonged struggle and you feel you are fatigued to the point where performance will be severely compromised - take a break. Use the position to collect your score and understand that the onus is on your opponent to do something to get out. For a period long enough to physically recover - let the other guy do the work and focus on physical recovery. Now, obviously you don’t want to simply go limb and have the opponent escape and undo all your hard work. Do the minimum physical expenditure to hold the position and keep the opponent honest by making some kind of minimal threat, in the case of rear mount - threaten a strangle. That takes little energy but can’t be ignored by an opponent. When you feel you have recovered sufficiently - go back on the attack. You will be pleasantly surprised by how just a little time at lower energy expenditure can enable you to recover and get back to genuine offense. What people call endurance in Jiu jitsu is mostly THE ABILITY TO VARY INTENSITY LEVELS SO THAT SHORT BURSTS OF HIGH ENERGY ARE FOLLOWED BY SHORT REST PERIODS THAT ENABLE YOU TO GO THE DISTANCE AND RETAIN ENERGY FOR A STRONG FINISH.

Knots: I’m sure you’ve all had the frustration of trying to untie a tightly tangled knot. At times there is a strong natural urge to just yank harder on the string/rope and use brute force to untangle it. This rarely works and usually just makes things worse. So too in Jiu jitsu, when trying to untangle the knots of your opponents limbs when attempting arm locks and leg locks. Getting frustrated and tanking and pulling with brute force won’t untie human knots any better than rope knots. Just as you with a knot of rope - take a step back, relax, and look at the configuration of your opponents limbs and then make reasoned solutions to the puzzle in front of you - as with all knots - A GENTLE PULL IN THE RIGHT DIRECTIONS WILL HAVE MUCH GREATER BENEFITS THAN HARD YANKING AND STRUGGLING IN THE WRONG DIRECTIONS. Look at the calm demeanor of Nicky Ryan as he goes about untying his opponents defensive arms while pursuing a juji gatame arm bar - as a result, when he finally does commit to a hard pull - it will separate the arms and bring victory rather than frustration

Don’t stand directly in front of dangerous opponents: The human body is set up to be at its strongest both offensively and defensively against opponents positioned directly in front of it. Just as a good boxer is very wary of standing in range directly in front of a dangerous puncher, and wisely always seeks to stay either out of range or angles off to a side whenever possible; so too, a good Jiu jitsu player is wary of staying directly in front of a dangerous guard and will use distance and angle to gain initial safety and advantage when approaching. As soon as you establish contact - LOOK TO CREATE YOUR FLANKING ANGLES AND DO AS MUCH AS YOUR WORK AS POSSIBLE WITH THE BENEFITS OF ADVANTAGEOUS ANGLE RATHER THAN DIRECTLY FACE THE PERILS OF A SKILLED OPPONENTS LEGS.

Relaxation and tension: One of the toughest things to learn on your Jiu jitsu journey is the juxtaposition of RELAXATION and TENSION as you perform Jiu Jitsu. Relaxation is important for ENDURANCE and EFFICIENT SMOOTH MOVEMENT. If you are overly tense you can’t move well and you’ll fatigue very quickly. On the other hand, isometric tension is important to IMMOBILIZE an opponent in pins and submission holds. If you’re too relaxed while applying pins and submissions an opponent will simply shrug you off and escape. YOU MUST LEARN TO NAVIGATE BETWEEN THE DEMANDS FOR RELAXATION AND TENSION IN ORDER TO BE EFFECTIVE. One without the other will lead you to failure. Look how Gordon Ryan is transitioning rapidly from his usual relaxed state to one of maximal tension as he enters and progresses through a submission attack. He is placing closed wedges via triangle around his opponents head and arm - he will need great muscular tension against ban opponent of this caliber in order to maintain those wedges in place against tremendous physical resistance. When sparring - keep a good sense of when you need to relax and when you need to tighten up. Use tension only in short bursts when either extreme defensive or offensive demand compels you - and the moment it’s over, go back to relaxation.

Don’t be satisfied with teaching moves - go further and teach a PHILOSOPHY of moves - a holistic approach that asks WHY moves are performed as well as HOW. Then when your students look at a performance they see so much more than a series of moves - they see why one athlete is winning and the other losing - and they can take that as a lesson to create their own victories. Many will LOOK, but only a few will really SEE.

When you have dangerous submission holds - even the ones that don’t fully work will have an impact on your opponent: A big part of how your opponent behaves towards you in a match is how DANGEROUS he perceives you to be. If he doesn’t see you as dangerous at all, he will do whatever he wants with no fear of consequences. However, if you have sharp submissions he will recognize that if he ever lets you go too far on a lock, the match is over. As a result, he will be much more circumspect in his approach to the match. If lock on a tight submission hold on a opponent that takes him within a hairbreadth of tapping but he just manages to slip out - I guarantee you the next time he approaches it will be in a cautious manner. It is important that you be able to carry a threat into a match that your opponent recognizes and respects - this will funnel his actions in other directions and allow you to control the direction of the ensuing action. In this way the THREAT of submissions is almost as important in match outcomes as the their actual successful APPLICATION. Here, Garry Tonon puts the powerful Rousimar Palhares under great pressure with a very strong heel hook attack - it was very close - but not completed - but it had a significant impact on the match as it meant Mr Tonon could initiate all the subsequent leg attacks for the rest of the match and force Mr Palhares in other directions (mostly takedowns). Don’t be discouraged by submissions that almost worked but didn’t - THEY WILL STILL HAVE AN EFFECT IN YOUR FAVOR THAT YOU CAN EXPLOIT ON THE PATH TO VICTORY

Know what you want - Train your mind to see opportunities where it is possible - act decisively. At first people will say you are just lucky. When things keep going in your favor, they will say you are somehow gifted - but in truth, you are simply someone who knows what they want and can see when it’s available.

Passing guard as a route to the back: When you first begin the study of Jiu jitsu you learn to pass the guard into top pins, usually side pins but sometimes directly to mount. As you go against better and better opponents you will soon find that they employ many methods of guard retention that make passing very difficult. It can be a very frustrating thing to run into the many roadblocks that good opponents can create to your favorite passes. Understand however, that many of these methods of guard retention are intended to stop passes into top pins, but in doing so they very often create momentary BACK EXPOSURE. You must have your mind programmed to jump on this new opportunity immediately - it won’t be there for long. Every sequences of guard passing versus guard retention is essentially a PROLONGED SCRAMBLE and as such, the back is one of the best targets. Program your mind to hunt for the back in these scrambles just as much as you do for the side pin and you will double your chances of a score against tough guards

Your opponent has two legs - make sure you are capable of attacking both: Its natural in Jiu jitsu to favor one side for attacks. Most of us have a better rear strangle on one side than the other, most of us have a preferred side for the guillotine. In the case of the legs, they are so close together and it’s so common that an opponent can slip free from your ashi garami that you would be doing yourself a disservice if you could only attack one side well. Take the time to develop strong attacks on both of your opponents legs, because very often as you attack one leg and a good opponent escapes, his other leg will be ready to be attacked. The good news is that because your opponents legs are very close together, it takes very little movement skill to transfer form one to the other. Thus Learning to attack the legs on both sides is not so difficult to learn.

When behind an opponent - create a constant threat of strangulation - everything else you feeds off this: The back is the ultimate position in no gi grappling (and you could also argue that the same is true in gi Jiu jitsu and fighting). However, like any position, it has its limitations and getting the position does not guarantee victory against tough opponents. It is very important then, that you create a constant and unrelenting threat of strangulation from the back so that your opponent MUST address it or perish. If you ever see your opponent getting forgetful and raising his chin - go! Snake your wrist under the chin and finish him! If he is disciplined with his chin position, use his defensive chin and hands against him with arm traps and mandible strangles that make defense very difficult indeed.

The incredible value of variations of shoulder rolls for technical development in Jiu jitsu: Here is a fundamental truth that must become ingrained in your thinking about Jiu-Jitsu: For every MOVE in Jiu jitsu there is a MOVEMENT that underlies it and which makes it possible for you to perform it. If you can’t perform that underlying movement well, it is exceedingly unlikely that you will perform the move itself well. Of all the various body movements that help prepare you for Jiu jitsu performance, I out a particularly high value on the many variations of ROLLS. Shoulder rolls, granby rolls, forward rolls etc etc. The movement and postures of rolling will greatly aid your development in guard retention, escapes, inversion into lower body and upper body attacks, keeping you safe when caught by a high amplitude takedown etc. Nothjng else does such a great job of making your body move in the manner associated with high level Jiu jitsu athletes. Time spent before and after class just playing around with shoulder roll variations from your back, butt, knees, all fours and standing is time very well spent. As your fluidity increases so will your Jiu jitsu performance. Here, Garry Tonon uses his exceptional rolling fluidity to escape - later in the same match he would use the same movement to roll into a fine leg lock and take a sensational victory.

The path to powerful arm bars is through the head and shoulders: Ostensibly the juji gatame arm bar is an attack on the ELBOW. After all, that’s what will actually break if the opponent refuses to submit. However, your ability to control a tough resisting opponent long enough and well enough to get to that breaking point is mostly bound up with your ability to dominate his HEAD AND SHOULDERS. In the use of arm bars from bottom position in particular, you must be able to take your opponents head into an unnatural position that thoroughly undermines his ability to stack his weight into you and blunt your attack. Use the crossface leg - the one that goes over the head - to curl back in such a way that his head is taken completely out of alignment. This makes effective resistance very difficult indeed. As is so often the case in Jiu jitsu, you have to win several preliminary battles in order to win the major battle. In this case, the head before the elbow.

My instructional video Arm bar: Enter the System (Juji gatame) is featured on BJJ Fanatics daily deal - 50% off! If you’re looking to become a serious arm hunter and looking for a method that enables you to control and defeat the toughest, most resistant opponents while also offering a perfect secondary entry into leg locks - check it out!

Learn to get comfortable in inverted positions on your shoulders and double the number of submission entries you can attempt: When we first start jiu jitsu we all learn the fundamental attacks from bottom guard positions with our head far away from our opponent and our hips closer to the opponent than your head. That is sensible because Jiu jitsu evolved as a fighting style and in a fight it’s generally wise (especially at beginner level) to keep your head as far away from an opponents fists and elbows as possible. This does rather limit your submission entries however. In a sport context where strikes are not an issue, inversion under your opponents upper body with your head closer to your opponent than your hips suddenly opens up a vast new set of submission entries from unexpected angles. Because your legs are unweighted in these scenarios, they move quickly and easily into attacks. Here, Nicky Ryan inverts Unser brother Gordon to enter into triangles, arm bars, omoplatas. He could also easily go downstairs into leg locks. Learning to get comfortable in these inverted positions is a big part of your development in the bottom submissions game. Time spent getting yourself to relax and breath freely in positions like this will make you able to spin like a top under a tough opponent and whip your legs into attacks that can turn a match around in a second.

5:30am another night done: Here is an old photo taken at the end of a long night working nightclub security back in the 1990’s. Like most bouncers I worked at a few clubs that provided steady gigs for a period of time, along with numerous others where I would do freelance work replacing someone who couldn’t make it, got hurt or recently left. You can tell this was at one of the more action packed venues by the short hair (always better for fighting) and football jersey (excellent for fighting - totally rip proof, bare forearms to facilitate strangles and prevent people gripping sleeve cuffs and interfering with strikes, easy to wash out booze and blood), ultra baggy pants with robust leather belt for mobility while staying firmly in place and preventing someone pulling your shirt over your head in a melee and blinding you - low riding pants are never a good idea in a full out brawl - it’s hard enough to fight other people without having to fight your own pants at the same time! Next to me is a tall bar stool - if a fight went to knives I would immediately smash the stool into the floor and now it provides two long and strong sticks - an excellent improvised counter to knives which saved me on several notable occasions. I’m waiting for the promoter of the event to finish counting his cash - he used to make a lot it from his cut of Moët champagne sales at the bar. As such he was an obvious mark leaving the club with the money - I would escort him to his ride back to Brownsville Brooklyn and then I was done - I would walk home and spoil myself with a big old cheeseburger with lettuce and tomatoes at a local 24 hour diner - sometimes the patrons of the club that I had been fighting earlier in the night would also be there and usually it would be straightened out but sometimes we would fight again 😂 Then I would get some sleep and get ready to go and teach Philosophy at Columbia University- sometimes with cuts, bruises or black eyes from the night before 😂 Crazy times in my early days in America, but it was these early experiences that created my first interest and experience of Jiu jitsu and had a huge impact on how I perceived the value of the art.

SUBMISSION from mount without the gi is often a very different position from HOLDING the mount: Normally when we aim to hold a tight mount we stay roughly aligned with our opponents centerline with our hips over his hips. However, when it’s time to enter into mounted arm bars and triangles we have to climb up high to the shoulders and pivot ninety degrees while totally changing our leg placement (often referred to as S mount). This angle and position allows you full use of your hands to pull and manipulate and the legs and hips to wedge your opponent and prevent defensive movement. This requires some balancing on your part, since you have less base under you, but as they say - nothing risked, nothing gained. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of the mounted position goes to work with hands, hips, legs and angle - you know already what the outcome will be

Hunting legs from bottom position: When I began studying leg locks many years ago in the early 2000’s, they were seen almost entirely as an attack from top position against an opponents guard. Essentially they were seen as an alternative to guard passing when on top. Indeed, the main criticism of leg locks in those days was that if they failed, you would lose top position. When I began studying them, it soon became apparent that there were MANY ways to enter from bottom position. This immediately destroyed the old criticism that if you attempted them you would lose position - if you started on bottom there was no issue with ending on bottom. Furthermore, there were good reasons to FAVOR bottom entries into leg locks. The top athlete uses his legs as his primary base of support. This means any time he is taken off balance, he must spread his feet/knees wider to stay on top - and every time he does this he surrenders inside position to your feet or knees - the precursor of ashi garami variations leading to leg locks. There is more. When in top position the legs not only provide your BASE, they also bear your WEIGHT. As a result, it is more difficult to move them defensively (as opposed to the bottom player where his legs bear zero weight and thus can be moved very rapidly to evade top leg lock attacks). Heavy legs spread wide apart for base are easy targets for leg lock attacks. Time soon showed that the bottom leg lock game was even better than top leg lock game - it fit very well into the smaller athletes arsenal. It is very difficult to fully sweep a skilled opponent, but quite easy to simply disturb their balance - and that’s all that is required for a sharp leg lock attack. Nowadays the leg lock game has changed greatly from those early days. The vast majority of attacks now are done FROM guard position - not AGAINST guard position. Leg locks now don’t have to be opposed to the traditional positional game - they can be a part of it by greatly adding to the submission arsenal of the basis of the bottom positional game - guard position. Here, Garry Tonon works for another of his entries into ashi garami from open guard.

Fighting bigger opponents: Jiu jitsu is one of the few combat sports that still allows open weight competition where smaller athletes can be matched against much larger opponents. In addition, in daily training at the dojo we are routinely matched with larger training partners. Whenever faced against someone bigger and stronger than yourself I always advise - GET BEHIND THEM TO STRANGLE OR ATTACK THEIR LEGS. These two approaches to victory have proven more successful in my experience watching my students over quarter of a century than all others. There are other good methods - I think the guillotine works well against bigger opponents, but nothing has had the level of success of back strangles and ashi garami based leg attacks. The back makes good sense. A big opponent can’t crush you with his weight when you’re behind him and strangles can be applied even on very big people. An opponent can use simple strength to push or pull someone behind him. In the case of leg locks, most people are inherently less coordinated with their feet and often more careless and forgetful of foot/leg placement than they are of hand/arm placement. The most incredible athlete I ever worked with regards competition against bigger opponents was Garry Tonon - he took on some absolute monsters and emerged victorious almost every time by emphasizing this strategy of constantly attacking back and legs. Here he is on the way to winning another EBI title at 205 pounds - incredible given that he was the 155 pound champion ( as well as every other weight division between!). When it’s time to take on the big fellas, think about BACK and LEGS as your path to victory!

In a crises situation, everything begins with a calm mind: There is a huge amount physical stress associated with bad/inferior positions in Jiu Jitsu. If your opponent knows what s/he is doing, they can make your life thoroughly miserable with cross faces, chest to chest pressure, forcing you into contorted positions etc. it’s very natural for that PHYSICAL pressure to create MENTAL pressure, where you feel stress to a point where you start to lose effective decision making capability. This creates a vicious spiral where additional mental stress shuts down your ability to plan escapes, resulting in worsening physical stress, which creates still more mental stress, which begets additional physical stress...Learning to maintain a calm mind under intense physical pressure will enable you to see what needs to be done and make decisions to get you out of there. The only real way to develop serenity of mind under pressure is to experience that pressure often enough to adapt to it. Here, Gordon Ryan works on his mental game as much as his physical game by absorbing the powerful cross face pressure of Georges St -Pierre, who has passed many Jiu Jitsu champions half guards from this position. ONLY THE CALM MIND CAN MAKE SOUND CALCULATIONS, and that ability to observe accurately what’s happening and calculate what’s needed to turn things in your favor is what will make the difference in your sport performance when things are not going your way.

Angle is your friend: Gunning for submissions underneath a tough opponent is never easy work - but you can generally make it easier if you consistently look for side on angles that result in your hips coming out to one side rather than being square on and exposed to all of your opponents weight in vulnerable stacking positions. Arm bars, triangles, omoplatas all benefit from getting your hips out. Often a big help is to scoop your arm deep inside your opponents leg and use it to help pull yourself to a good angle. Whatever method you opt for, look to get hips out/side on, and soon you will suffering a lot fewer failures to to stacking counters to your favorite submissions from bottom position

Making yourself strong is good - but making your opponent weak is far better: The human body is set up in such a way that it can be impressively strong in some postures/positions, and embarrassingly weak in others. Your job as a Jiu jitsu athlete is always to actively seek to put yourself in strong postures whilst pressuring your opponent into unnatural, weak postures where the body simply cannot exert strength. A classic example is putting an opponents hand behind his back. Show me a man with a strong arm and I’ll show you that same man with his arm pinned behind his back no longer has a strong arm. There are MANY cases where this simple concept can be applied to your advantage in Jiu Jitsu. Whenever you can get an opponents hand behind his back, you OWN that arm now. Seek always to make strong opponents weak by putting them into unnatural positions and you will make your task on the mat considerably easier.

Open guard is a four limbed beast - get your hands and feet working in unison: when working from open guard it is not your hands alone that will make you successful, nor will it be your feet working alone; rather, it will be the INTERACTION of your hands and feet working TOGETHER that will make you a devastating open guard player. Remember always that as your opponent passes your FEET and LEGS, you will stop and briefly hold him with your HANDS, but your HANDS are not strong enough to hold hime for LONG, so must recover your FEET AND LEGS back into position and start anew. Thus it is the constant cycling and interaction of FEET and hands, ARMS and LEGS that will make you the master of open guard that you must become in order to master the sport itself. Don’t emphasize upper Body and don’t emphasize lower body - emphasize WHOLE body and get feet and hands working TOGETHER and your open guard will one day become Unpassable and your attacks from there unstoppable

Survive first - escape second: When you first begin Jiu jitsu is natural to feel totally intimidated by the power of your more experienced training partners attacks. Some days you feel that as soon as they get a good position on you, it’s all over. Start with the most modest, yet important Jiu jitsu goal - survival. Begin by seeing how long you can hold off submission attacks. Learn to tuck your him back in close to your torso and chin to chest. Learn to turn on your side rather than flat on your back so that you can bear weight more comfortably. Once survival seems attainable you can learn to relax a little - AS ANXIETY LEVELS FALL, YOUR CAPACITY TO THINK, REASON, RECALL INFORMATION AND SOLVE PROBLEMS WILL INCREASE - and that’s what will get you out of bad positions. Everything begins with survival skill that leads to mental calm. Mental calm begets sound decision making and sound decisions will create the routes you need to exit out of trouble. Make your first goals small. How much longer can you hold off a partner who usually finishes you in one minute from dominate position? If you can last two minutes you’re getting twice as good as before - that’s a small beginning, but most beginnings are small - in time they can lead to results that are huge.

Maximize your connection and minimize your opponents postural integrity: The biggest initial problem you will face when working from open guard is having no solid connection to your opponent. This will allow him to immediately get past your legs and pass before you can do anything effective. The second problem is that if his stance is well set, it will be very difficult to attack him successfully with either sweeps or submissions. So start by getting, whenever possible, BOTH FEET AND BOTH HANDS SET ON YOUR OPPONENT to form a solid connection that won’t allow an opponent to simply blow past your guard before you can do anything. Then make a pledge to yourself that prior to any major attack from underneath, you will BEGIN BY DISTURBING YOUR OPPONENTS STANCE/BALANCE. Do this two things consistently and you will soon find yourself a better offensive and defensive guard player.

Hold ‘em by the nose and punch ‘em in the face: Those words were famously said by General Patton to describe the idea of devastating aggression - if an opponent can’t move while you’re hitting him - you are twice as threatening to him as usual. So too in grappling. Getting your body into position to attack someone is never easy. It becomes a lot easier if you can hold them in place somehow first, and then swing the rest of your body into a devastating attacking position. We aren’t allowed to hold opponents by the nose in Jiu jitsu (I’m very grateful for that because I’ve got a big nose so I’d really be in trouble! 😂😜) but we can hold them in place with something even better - Kimura - and then bring the rest of our body into the attack, usually with triangles, arm bars, back attacks and leg attacks. Here, Craig Jones uses a very well applied Kimura grip to immobilize an opponent so that he can swing his legs into attacking position - he now has the full choice of his favorite weapons - triangles, arm bars, back attacks - or going downstairs for the legs. So, Hold ‘em by the arm and (no - no punches in the nose) and attack them with your legs!

Strangles - Gi vs No gi: Strangles, and in particular, back strangles, are the single most devastating weapon in all of Jiu jitsu. Nothing else gives such certainty of success in application whilst maintaining your own safety from counters. Yet the two primary applications, gi and no gi, are very different from each other. In the case of no gi strangles from the back, you must use your head as a blocking wedge close to your opponents head. Your bodies will be aligned and the power of the strangle will come from the rotation of your elbow around his neck. The instrument of strangulation will be your wrist/forearm and bicep. This is rather thick and so often it can be problematic to penetrate under the chin and often requires trapping the opponents defensive arms prior to applying the strangle. In the case of collar strangles, things are very different. Now the instrument of the strangle is the opponents lapel/collar. It has a hard and very thin edge that slices under the jaw/chin like a knife and makes penetration to the strangle far more efficient. The collar/lapel is like a rope around the neck - an extraordinarily effective strangulation implement. In addition, unlike naked strangles, you want to form a perpendicular angle to your opponents shoulders and the power of the strangle comes from your bodyweight hanging off your opponent and your leverage leg pressing over his far shoulder. This puts all your bodyweight and leg strength into a strangle with a cutting rope around the neck - this creates a far greater degree of efficiency strangle than any naked strangle can ever hope to attain. Compare the two body positions in the photos and see the big differences in alignment, leg work and bodyweight application and understand that back strangles with a gi are a very different matter from strangles without one.

I am very happy to announce the release today of the final volume of the GO FURTHER FASTER Jiu jitsu fundamentals series STRANGLES AND TURTLE BREAKDOWNS. I cover the 3x3 gi strangles system in which the three most high percentage gi strangles in the sport are applied in the three most important strangle scenarios to give you the match winning details and tactics that you will use every time you step on the mats in your Jiu jitsu career. There are a vast number of strangles in the gi, many are interesting and exotic, but Almost Ninety percent of the successful strangles in top level gi competition come from just three families of strangle - my recommendation is to focus the vast majority of your study and training on them. To paraphrase - “fear not the man who knows thousands of strangles - fear the man who knows the three best strangles and has practiced them thousands of times and knows every aspect of their successful application.” I also cover the closely related skill of turtle breakdowns, which obviously sets up many of the best strangle opportunities. If you are interested in boosting your performance with gi strangles and breaking down the toughest turtle defenses - check it out! I will post a link in my Instagram bio Know more - win more!

It takes a village: One of the greatest things about our sport is that it’s a club sport where the best athletes in the game work out daily alongside regular members of the gym. In most sports, elite athletes are carefully shielded away from ordinary folk - you won’t see Lebron James working out with average Joe players. In grappling and Jiu jitsu there is no separation between the elite and the recreational player. The result is that MANY recreational players develop a shocking high level of skill over the years, just in virtue of constantly working out with world class competitors and being exposed to the same techniques and tactics as them. I have seen many cases of recreational players give a very hard time indeed to visiting world champions - I don’t think you would see that in many sports. This is a wonderful thing - as the great rule is that THE STRONGER THE ROOM OVERALL - THE BETTER THE BEST MEMBERS OF THAT ROOM WILL BECOME. It becomes the rising tide that lifts all boats - some may float higher than others but all rise to some degree. Just as they say it takes a village to raise a child, so it takes a room to raise a champion - and the better that room overall, the better the champions who come out of it.

The single greatest advantage of half guard passing methods over regular methods of guard passing - head control: The pattern of events in a guard pass is for the passing athlete get past the feet, knees and most importantly, the line of your opponents hips, and then transition to the head to complete the pass. That transition to the head (the cranial shift) is a constant source of problems, as the defending guard player can exploit the time and pressure release involved in that transition to create strong defensive frames and move back to guard position. Half guard passing methods on the other hand, involve working your way to a situation where your opponent is locked around one of your legs whilst your other leg is free. If you can attain a chest to chest position you can now control your opponents head BEFORE getting past the line of your opponents hips. This means that when you extract your leg from his hold, you already have head control in place and there is no problematic cranial shift. This enables you to impose tremendous control and pressure throughout the pass all the way to completion. Here, Craig Jones shows his ever improving top pressure game, taking a solid cross face grip (the most common form of head control) before beginning the task of extracting his trapped leg. As a result he will be in a fine position to exercise total pin control as soon as the pass is completed.

Heels or toes? Whenever your opponent is standing in front of you there is a question of the greatest importance that in most cases can only be answered you and your opponent - where is your opponents weight centered? Is it on his heels or on his toes? The answer to this question will determine what form of attack and what direction of attacks you will use. Learning to read whether your standing opponent has weight forward on his toes or back on his heels is one of those skills that is often passed over in teaching but has has the greatest effect on whether your subsequent moves actually work or not. Here I use a basic arm drag on a standing partner and feel his reaction between heels and toes. Weight on toes is a good sign to continue the drag forwards. Weight on the heels is a good sign to switch from drag to some form of takedown or sweep to the rear. Failure to pay attention or the subtle but all important weight transfers between heel and toes means you have to use brute force to get moves to work - reading the heel to toe weight transfer well makes for seemingly effortless moves.

Attacking submissions from bottom position - aim for the joint above the one you are attacking: The most common problem I see when students go to attack from bottom position is that they lose the war against gravity and let their hips sag too low. This always results in a mediocre control of the limb being attacked and inevitable failure against a resisting opponent. If you go to attack the elbow with an arm bar - AIM YOUR HIPS FOR THE SHOULDER. If you go to attack the knee with a heel hook - AIM HIPS FOR THE OPPONENTS HIPS. In other words - if you want to attack a given joint - aim to control the joint above it and you will be in an excellent position to get breaking pressure on your actual target. GET THOSE HIPS OF YOURS RISING UP HIGH OFF THE MAT AND YOU WILL FORM THE KIND OF CONNECTION REQUIRED TO BREAK STRONG RESISTING OPPONENTS. Look at Garry Tonons high hips here as he fights for a heel hook from bottom position. Pushing his hips up to his opponents hips ensures a solid entrapment of the knee he seeks to attack.

In Jiu jitsu - you don’t have to be the fastest athlete - you just have to be the athlete who gets to the finish line first: Speed is a wonderful thing in combat sports, but not all of us are born fast and even those who are born fast lose speed over the course of a lifetime. The idea is not to value raw speed so much as the ability to get to a goal before your opponent - and there are many ways to do that that don’t involve speed. One way to create the illusion of speed is to travel less distance in the same time. For example - the basic juji gatame arm bar from guard. If You begin the move with your feet locked at my opponents lower back, that’s a considerable distance to move your legs and feet all the way up to the head to perform the move. If instead you slide your locked legs up to your opponents shoulder, then the distance required to transition to the arm bar is massively shortened - creating a much quicker performance of the arm bar even though you are moving at the same speed. In everything you do in Jiu jitsu, ask yourself - is there a way to speed up my performance of this move without speeding up the movements of my body? In most cases the answer is YES. And the act of researching how to do this will make you a better student of the sport.

You only really control the pin when you control the elbows: Getting to a dominant pinning position in Jiu jitsu is a great thing - it scores more points than any other action if you can get to mount and rear mount. Understand however, that real dominance in top position pins comes not just from the position (in no gi) but the combination of the position AND control of your opponents elbows in ways that prevent him turning into escapes and setting up finishing holds so that you translate position into submission. Next time you are working your way into side of mounted pins - go the extra distance and start looking to control your opponents elbows as well. The more you can elevate and separate his elbows from his torso the more control you will have over the pin and the more likely that pin will turn into a submission hold.

Going from good to great - The example of Craig Jones and triangles: It’s perfectly natural and good to find that certain moves seem more natural for you than others and that your progress with them exceeds that of other moves. Often this is a reflection of your personality and body type, sometimes it’s due to the coaching program you work under. My point today is that whatever these favorite moves of yours are - are you maximizing your progress with them? A natural fault we all have is to think that if we are good at something then that’s good enough, and we remain satisfied with that level. I always counsel my athletes that if they are GOOD at something, then that’s a clear sign that they can become GREAT at it, with just a little extra work. When Craig Jones started training full time with the squad a couple of years ago, he had a really good front triangle. Anytime you join a new gym it’s natural to be impressed by what they’re good at so he spent a lot of time improving his back, front headlock, arm bar and leg attacks - but through it all I always pushed him to expand his already strong triangle skills in new directions. Instead of just using front triangles he started adding rear triangles and side triangles and reverse triangles. He started making his right front triangle as good as his left. Soon his triangle attacks became such a concern to his training partners that his leg lock percentages doubled as they tried desperately to get away from the dangerous triangles. It’s an excellent example of how you can take something you feel you are good at, and double or triple your effectiveness with it by really making it a focus of study. If you have a natural propensity for something, there is a very good chance that you can take it a LOT further than you currently have, and that when you do, it will open other door of progress as well. So follow the example of Craig Jones - take those skills you are good at, and a make a plan to take them further and become great at them.

Victory in Texas! Garry Tonon had a hard fought win tonight in Austen Texas over the very tough and talented Dante Leon. Mr Tonon was able to show off his usual dynamic attacking style with some trademark submissions and submission counters. The rule set at whose number one grappling shows really pushes the athletes to attempt submission attacks and few can keep up with Mr Tonon in this regard. Mr Tonon won a unanimous decision victory. Thanks to the organizers of the show who allow Jiu jitsu athletes to remain active during these times. They put on a stellar show tonight with legends such as Cyborg, Hulk, Ronaldo Junior and Wagner Rocha on the card. Wishing you all the best from Texas!! Hope you enjoyed the show!

Tunnel vision: One of the biggest detractors from performance improvement in grappling is tunnel vision. We all have a tendency to get fixated on one course of action and become blind to other possibilities that are right there in front of us - but as in life - if you can RECOGNIZE possibility you can ACT on it. This one important sense in which combat sports are a mental game - every action begins as an idea/possibility in the mind - when that is absent, no physical action will be taken. Make sure in all your major attacking positions you have three or four major options that you work with on a regular basis so that you don’t become overly enamored of one and fall into a one track mind. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of strangles from the back, shows versatility in a switch that could lead into juji gatame arm bars and rear triangles (ushiro sankaku), or indeed, an entire shift of position into mount - so that an opponent has to defend against a much wider spectrum of attacks

Breaking a turtle down versus riding: When it’s time to attack an opponents turtle position, I general counsel students to begin by breaking an opponent down to a hip. This immediately reduces their athletic potential and makes them much more controllable so that you can focus on applying your attacks. However, there are going to be times you cannot do this on tough opponents. Then you will have to get hooks in and ride the opponents turtle while they are still on their knees. You can see Nicky Ryan doing a fine job of this here. Be sure to maintain a tight chest to back connection at control both sides of the body - otherwise you can slip off and end up underneath your opponent. Interestingly, the more your opponent resists being off balanced and broken down to a hip, the more he will have to widen his base and open himself up to your hooks and riding. The more he tightens up to resist the insertion of your hooks and riding, the easier he will be to off balance and break down to a hip - so the two modes of attacking turtle work very well as a dilemma.

The company I make instructional videos for @bjj.fanatics is having their company anniversary sale this week with 35% of all my instructional videos! I am very happy to say that we will be donating from this sale to FEED AMERICA charity - an relief organization that organizes free meals for underprivileged and unemployed Americans struggling during the covid crises that has left more than 40 million Americans unemployed. I believe the sale goes through to August 7. If you’ve been looking for a chance to see how the squad does what they do - now is your chance!

Action in Texas this Friday: This weekend the worlds most exciting grappler, Garry Tonon, will take on one of his toughest rivals, the extremely talented physical specimen Dante Leon, for a rematch after their classic confrontation at ADCC 2019. Mr Leon stunned everyone at that event by defeating the great Lucas Lepri, a man who undoubtedly ranks among the greatest Jiu jitsu players of all time. Mr Leon has an exceptional mix of positional and submission skills, along with excellent takedowns and is known for his devastating guillotine. Last time these two met, Mr Tonon was able to win after a tough battle with his dangerous leg locking skills - but as anyone familiar with top level competition will tell you - the difference between winner and loser at that level on any given day is so close that in the great majority of cases the outcome could be very different if the same athletes competed against each other the next day. Mr Leon is a smart and tactical player and doubtless has worked hard to improve in all the areas that Mr Tonon was able to use successfully last time. Unfortunately Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones tested positive for covid and will have to delay their matches until quarantine and subsequent testing is complete - then of course they would need some amount of time to get prepared. They were excited to face two of the legendary gym ATOS Jiu Jitsu’s most brilliant athletes, Lucas Barbosa and Ronaldo Junior - hopefully when medically cleared those matches can be rescheduled as they would have incredible for spectators. Looking forward to getting back to Texas! Hope you enjoy the show!

When working from open guard - constantly seek to off balance your opponent forwards so that his hands go to the mat: A man taken out of balance is an easy target. A huge part of your ability to develop a strong attacking game from open guard comes down to your ability to off balance your opponent and one of the clearest signs that you have been successful in doing this is your opponents hands being snapped down to the mat. Remember - if his hands are on the mat - they aren’t on you - and if they aren’t on you - he can’t pass your guard or stymie your attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan, a master of off balancing from open guard, gets his opponents hands to the mat as a way to prevent him interfering with the ashi garami he has locked up.

Turtle breakdowns - start by forming an effective connection and get them out of balance (kuzushi): When you first start out working to attack turtle position it seems like an easy task - your opponent has his back to you and seems quite harmless. Then you start working against more experienced opponents and attacking turtle position seems like trying to attack a fire hydrant, then you start working with people who specialize in counter offense from this position and suddenly it feels like you are trying to ride a barrel floating down a fast moving river. One thing is clear - you need to be connected to your opponent or they can simply move away from you. You have a bunch of good options when it comes to connection - just make sure you connect with both upper body through arms, and lower body through hips. Once this is done - GET THEM OUT OF BALANCE. The turtle position gives your opponent a surprising degree of athletic potential. They can roll, stand up, sit to guard, trap and roll you into a pin etc. Take all that away from the start by breaking their balance and suddenly the task of attacking turtle position gets a LOT easier. The only way an opponent can stop an attack on his balance is to widen his base - and that will immediately create different opportunities for your turtle attacks. Make it a habit - get connected and attack his balance - then you can choose all your other options at will

Turtle breakdowns: The main concern of turtle breakdowns (attacking the turtle position in order to gain points and/or to gain some kind of advantage that leads to submission) is quite different in Jiu jitsu than in other grappling arts. In Judo and wrestling the idea of any turtle breakdown is usually done with the idea of forcing the opponents BACK TO THE FLOOR in order to pin his back to the mat. In Jiu Jitsu this scores nothing. The central focus in Jiu jitsu is generally towards GETTING TO THE REAR MOUNT POSITION. This scores the maximum possible in the sport - four points. As such, it makes sense to make your primary focus in Jiu jitsu training for breaking down an opponents turtle position geared towards getting your hooks in a advancing to rear mount. This will satisfy both the demand for scoring points (you get the maximum score) and for submission (you end up in the position that allows you to use the most high percentage submission method in the sport - rear strangles. There are other good ways to attack a turtle position that have their merits, but getting to rear mount should be your primary focus. The central problem you will have to overcome will always be the connection of your opponents elbow and knee, which serves as an obstacle to your ability to insert your hooks and score. Here, Gordon Ryan looks to break that connection and open space for his legs to enter and get into his favorite finishing position. When it comes time to train your turtle breakdown skills, out the majority of your time into those methods that take you to rear mount - no other methods are so well suited to the unique nature and points system of Jiu Jitsu

Turtle position - the OTHER bottom position of Jiu jitsu: When people talk about playing bottom position in Jiu Jitsu, they almost always mean to play from GUARD position, which is defined as a situation where you face your opponent in bottom position with at least one of your legs between you and him as a barrier. There is of course, a second bottom position that gets a lot less attention due to the fact that it offers a lot less attacking potential and has a high risk of back exposure - turtle position - where you are in bottom position facing away from your opponent on your knees. Though it is not the preferred bottom position in Jiu jitsu it is nonetheless very important due to the fact that it commonly occurs in competitive guard passing and takedown scrambles when opponents are reluctant to concede points. As such it is crucial for your development that you build a strong set of attacks and controls to breakdown the defensive structure of the turtle position. Just as you should be able to pass an opponents guard, you should also be able to break down an opponents turtle position if you are to have a complete top game. Remember that a guard pass score three points - but a turtle breakdown that ends with you in rear mount scores four points and results in you being in the single best finishing position in the sport - so it’s actually the preferred situation for the top player if you get a choice. Here, talented back attack juggernaut Nick Rodriguez looks to initially control a turtle position with the intention of breaking it down to score with hooks and finish with his powerful rear strangles

Forethought: Things happen quickly once sparring begins. It’s a lot easier to get things done against a tough opponent if you have at least a rough idea of what you want to do before you attempt the next move. AS YOU ARE ATTEMPTING ONE MOVE, YOU SHOULD ALREADY HAVE AN IDEA OF WHAT YOUR NEXT MOVE SHOULD BE IF THE FIRST MOVE SUCCEEDS. Here, Gordon Ryan has stood up and successfully opened his training partners guard. This gives good attacking opportunities to BOTH athletes. THE INITIATIVE WILL GO TO THE ONE WHO MOVES WISELY FIRST. The only way to consistently do this is to look beyond the move you are currently performing and plot the next so that the very second the previous move is completed, you are entering the next. You must train your mind to operate this way. It’s unrealistic to plot too far out into the future - there are too many variables to control more than a move or two into the future. One step ahead is enough to gain advantage. Don’t be satisfied with the move your doing now - let your mind be restlessly seeking out the next move - and you will soon find yourself seizing the initiative from your opponents in sparring and competition

Ethan Crelinsten wins EBI Overtime event! Outstanding squad junior Ethan Crelinsten, one of our Canadian representatives, out in a near flawless performance last night to win the new EBI overtime event, a new version of EBI that only uses the distinctive overtime period of the old EBI competition format as the basis of the event. In the old EBI there was a ten minute submission only regulation period. If there was no submission the two athletes went into overtime with a choice of starting either on the back or juji gatame arm bar position. This was an exciting and viewer friendly format that proved very popular and was an excellent way to showcase the leg lock revolution that changed the face of submission grappling. I was always very proud of the fact that the three senior squad students, Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan, all achieved the remarkable feat of submitting all their opponents in regulation time on the way to their victories (I think Garry May have done it twice). Eddie Bravo shelved the old format in favor of combat Jiu Jitsu but recently brought in the idea of overtime competition. I think the idea was that Many athletes now simply stall in the regulation time with the intention of winning in overtime, so the idea was to cut to the chase and go from the start where it was likely to end up. Our back attack system is very well suited to EBI overtime format and Mr Crelinsten showed the depth of his knowledge training in this very unforgiving position - he won three of four match via strangle and won the final decisively on riding time. It was a great performance and shows well the spirit of training hard to reach for ever higher goals - well done Ethan!!

The power of elbow control: A huge part of success in Jiu jitsu becomes from posture - and a big part of good posture in Jiu jitsu is concerned with keeping your elbows close to your hips and torso. The more you can do this, the more difficult it will be for an opponent to control you and open you up to attacks. It stands to reason then, that Taking your opponents elbows out of position, away from the hip and torso, is an excellent way to undermine his game and makes it easier to apply your own. This is particularly important when employing chest to chest pins, but it’s also a valuable idea when passing half guard. Here I use double underhooks to undermine my partners elbow position and thus make defense from half guard bottom very difficult. Note that head position also becomes important in this context as you can see here. The basis of defense in Jiu jitsu is elbow position- there is a reason why the old masters call them elbow escapes - knock that domino over first and all the others will soon fall

Gi and no gi - the strangling medium: When it’s time to strangle someone with your upper body (strangles with the legs are quite different) there are options. In no gi grappling it will generally be your arms, in particular the biceps on one side and wrist/forearm on the other with the wrist/forearm side doing most of the work. In gi grappling the preferred method will be with the opponents collar (there are other methods that are very effective). The collar has a thin edge to it that is harder and thinner than the forearm/wrist and thus does a better job of penetrating under the jaw to get to the carotid arteries. The collar mimics very well the superior strangling properties of a strong rope or sash that is the best means of strangulation you can ever use - but which of course is not an option in a Jiu jitsu match. There are a few cases where one can use naked strangles in a gi match, but in the vast majority of cases, the collar will provide a much better strangling medium than the arm/wrist. Here you can see the limits of a arm/wrist to penetrate under the jaw as Gordon Ryan strangles an opponent on his run to double gold at ADCC 2019. In this case he had to perform a mandible strangle over the jaw - less efficient but still very effective. A gi collar would allow much easier penetration under the jaw in circumstances like this due to its blade like edge. Learning to use the edge of the collar will make you strangle with even greater power and precision than you do with the arms.

Start with negation - then build your attacks: The toughest matches rare those you you go blow for blow against your opponent. You are attacking him and he is simultaneously attacking you. Everything becomes a hectic battle where in truth, the outcome could go either way. Battles like this can be fun and certainly make for excitement, but they do not exhibit the ideal of control that is central to our sport. I usually encourage my students to BEGIN WITH NEGATION. Start each encounter to shutting down an opponents ability to attack through grip fighting, stance, position and motion. Once you have removed the initial danger, then you can really focus on launching your own attacks without the distraction of having to simultaneously deal with an opponents attacks. Here, Nicky Ryan comes into the dangerous guard of Masakazu Imanari behind string grips and stance so that he can remove the initial danger and set up the passing pressure that saw him to victory.

Double your submission success rate by attacking posture as well as the submission: We work in a sport where all the highest percentage submission holds and their counters are known by both athletes. This makes it very difficult to apply them successfully against someone your own size and skill level. One of the best ways to improve this situation is to understand that strong submission defense requires a strong posture from the defense can be fought. IF YOU CAN BREAK HIS POSTURE WHILST HE IS DESPERATELY DEFENDING THE SUBMISSION YOU GREATLY UNDERMINE ANY DEFENSIVE MOVE HE MAY TRY TO EMPLOY - as a result - you will get a lot more submission success. Don’t be happy with just getting the submission locked on and then try to fight to completion. Go the extra distance and try to break his posture at the same time. Now your opponent has TWO problems to solve at the same time. Here, submission master Gordon Ryan locks on a devastating triangle and simultaneously breaks his partners posture to thoroughly undermine any attempt at defense.

All strangles are good - but rear strangles are generally the best: The back is the king of positions when engaged in no gi submission grappling. When using a gi you can use the collars to create strong strangle threat from the mount and in MMA you can use punches from mount to set up myriad submissions - so you can make a strong argument for the mount as the ultimate position (or at least AS good as rear mount) in those contexts - but no gi submission grappling I rate rear mount above all. The statistics back up this belief. Strangles from the rear greatly outperform other upper body submissions in success rate. It’s like a perfect storm of submission success. Your opponent has almost no attacks upon you once you settle into rear mount, so you can totally focus on your attacks without distraction. Your opponent cannot simply explode out of the position (especially if you lock a body triangle) as a strong man can sometimes do from mount - he is only going to get out if he KNOWS how to get out - so again, you can focus on your attacks. Lastly, anyone you are behind someone they cannot use pushing strength against you. You must become adept at all strangles - but out the lions share of your strangle training into rear strangles - for they will provide the lions share of your successes.

The path from knowledge to skill: When all is said and done the single biggest determinant of how successful you will be in Jiu jitsu by far is the depth and quality of your SKILL SET. Most people go through their Jiu Jitsu careers thinking that skill is someone that magically forms over time - you train long enough and the skills will come. There is certainly some truth in this - it’s impossible to train for a long time without picking up skills along the way. However, when it comes to skill acquisition, you will do much better if you begin the quest for SKILL with a quest for KNOWLEDGE. If you KNOW what the right thing to do is from the start, it takes a lot less time to build that into a skill. Remember that skill is a knowledge that has been hardwired into the movements and reactions of your body. Knowledge and skill are linked but not the same. Many people know what they ought to be doing but lack the physical ability (skill) to actually do it - that’s why you don’t see any knowledgeable but old and decrepit red belt masters on the winners podium at the world championships. The pattern of your development is clear - if you want to shorten the time taken to mastery - begin by seeking knowledge and then embody that knowledge through an intelligently crafted physical training program to turn that mental knowledge into physical skills.

The strangle is the ultimate weapon in Jiu jitsu: Jiu jitsu is the art and science of control that leads to submission. Within the realm of submissions you have two main choices - joint locks and strangles. Both are essential knowledge, both are extremely effective - but if you are ever given a choice - go with the strangle. Strangles take the element of CHOICE out of submission. Whenever you attack a joint your opponent has a choice of whether to submit or not. The higher the stakes - the more likely the choice will be no - I will not submit- and the match will continue. With strangles, their choice becomes irrelevant. If the choice to submit, the match is over. If they choose not to submit - they pass out and the match is over. The choice has no effect on the outcome. In a truly tough match with an opponent who is prepared to reckless with their physical health and safety - The strangle is truly the grapplers equivalent of a knock out punch, while the joint lock is perhaps closer to the notion of a body blow - it causes damage that degrades your opponents ability to fight and thus takes you closer to victory but will not always provide a decisive finish. LEARN YOUR STRANGLES! In your toughest matches they will be your most trustworthy weapon.

Control the hands and everything else is a lot easier: When an opponent comes forward to begin passing your guard, he will generally come in and approach BEHIND HIS HANDS. His hands will initiate contact with your lower legs somewhere between the knee and ankles, either gripping the body or the cloth of your uniform. If he establishes a good working grip, he will be in the drivers seat. That’s good for him - bad for you. Don’t just accept hands controlling your lower legs - fight to control his hands and he won’t be able to control your legs - and then YOU will be in the drivers seat. Here, I use the sleeve cuff to control my partners right hand and a foot in the bicep to control the left hand. This prevents my partner using his hands in unison - a big part of success in these situations. Learn to use your hands and feet to control his hands when working from bottom guard and watch your overall guard game take off!

My KIMURA: ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video is on @bjj.fanatics daily deal for the first time ever today! 50% off! All my students excel in this powerful method of attack - both as a submission and as a positional move between the back, upper body locks and lower body body locks. If you ever wanted to have a devastating Kimura attack from everywhere this may be your chance! 😜😜

Turtle breakdowns in Jiu jitsu: Many grappling sports feature turtle breakdowns. You see them in wrestling, Judo and Sambo. The INTENT of turtle breakdowns in these grappling styles is usually very different from Jiu jitsu however. Jiu jitsu is very unique among grappling styles in so far as it awards points (maximum points actually) to rear mounted positions. In Judo, wrestling and Sambo, the primary goal is not to get hooks in and rear mount - that score no points in itself - but rather to turn the opponents back and shoulders towards the floor into a classic pin. So the whole direction of turtle breakdowns in Jiu jitsu is quite different. The primary focus is on getting your two legs hooked into his hips to attain the rear mount - it does not matter whether you end on top or bottom - if you get two hooks in you score. Interestingly, in other grappling styles such as Judo if you topple an opponent from turtle and end up in a side pin you can win the match if you hold him down for a period of time. In Jiu jitsu the same action would score you nothing. The different rule structure leads athletes in different sports in very different directions. When practicing Jiu jitsu always keep this in mind and make your primary focus the rear mount position. It gets you the maximum points score and puts you immediately in position for the most high percentage submission in the sport - rear strangles. Here, master of back control and strangles, Gordon Ryan practices his craft.

Big weekend for the squad: The squad heads back into action this weekend. Gordon Ryan, Nicky Rod and Nathalia Santoro will be in Texas at Third Coast grappling. Mr Ryan will take part in a Charity event Ten minute exhibition bout to raise money for We Defy @wedefyfoundation an organization for the care and rehabilitation of America’s wounded combat veterans. Mr Rodriguez is entered into an extremely tough tournament featuring some of the greatest athletes in Jiu jitsu such as Lucas “Hulk” Barbosa and Roberto “Cyborg” Abreau among others - this should be an incredible event! Ms Santoro is matched against tough local talent as she looks to gain more competition experience. On the other sides of the country, the Aussie Assassin, Craig Jones will take in ADCC rival Mason Fowler under EBI rules at Chael Sonnen’s SUG event. Last time was a tough match even for the inestimable Mr Jones as he had to dig deep into his ever growing submission repertoire and take a highlight reel win via his lethal guillotine - this time its a shorter match and with an overtime shoot out it will be a very tough test. It’s always great to see the squad on stage, even more so in these tough times for Jiu jitsu competition - hope you all enjoy the show!!

Avenues of attack: Things move quickly in combat sports. Opportunities come and go quickly, so when there is an opening one can’t procrastinate. It’s important to have pre-established lines of attack sorted out so that when an opportunity flashes in front of you you know exactly what to do. When working from seated guard against an opponent on their knees, the main avenues of attack will begin at either the wrists, elbows or collar. Each presents very different forms of control and very different lines of attack - make sure you have yours figured out and ready to roll. Here, Gordon Ryan takes on the great Buchecha, a master of hand fighting and posture in guard play. As such he targets the head as the initial connection to base subsequent attacks upon. You must have your own chains of attack starting from each of wrists, elbows and head - when you do, you will be a dangerous opponent from seated guard!

You use your hands as a base of support every day - why not use your head as well? Most beginning Jiu jitsu students instinctively use their hands as a base of support and post them on the mat to preserve their balance as they grapple. Don’t forget however, that your HEAD (in particular your forehead) is your third hand - and can also be used to post on the mat to preserve your balance. Always remember, if you use your head to post on the mat instead of a hand, one of your hands will now be free to perform other tasks. This works particularly well in half guard passing where an extra hand can greatly facilitate passing tough opponents. Next time you step on the mats remember that in everyday life you have two hands - but in Jiu jitsu you have three

Supine and seated guards: The foundation of the bottom game in Jiu jitsu is the guard position. Most Jiu jitsu students are taught very early to distinguish between CLOSED and OPEN guard. This is good, because they are very different games and understanding the difference is important for progress. There is another equally important distinction however, that gets much less attention, which is unfortunate because it too, is extremely important for your progress and understanding. This is the distinction between SEATED and SUPINE (lying on your back) guards. Seated guards create great opportunities to use your mobility and hand fighting skills. In addition they allow you to use falling body weight to generate impressive momentum and thus greatly increase your sweeping power. This does come at the price of increased back and neck exposure however. Supine guards on the other hand, practically eliminate back and neck exposure, but at the price of greater leg exposure to a skilled leg locker. Supine guards make your legs weightless and this allow for excellent leg dexterity for guard retention. They also place your legs very close to your opponents head and arms and therefore are ideal for upper body submissions when opponents are on their knees. Just as every Jiu jitsu student has an obligation to learn both open and closed guard to maximize the effectiveness of their bottom game, so to they have an obligation to learn to weave together seated and supine guards so that they can employ the strong points of both against tough opponents. Here, Gordon Ryan, a true master of both supine and seated guards and who specializes in integrating the two together to create a devastating bottom game, employs good foot/leg positioning to use a “forward shift” the most important transitional movement between supine and seated guards to move easily from one to another as he spars brother Nicky Ryan.

Nothing beats a strangle: Jiu Jitsu has three major categories of submission attacks - upper body joint locks, lower body joint locks and strangles. All are superb weapons that can end a match in a second, but strangles have a special set of qualities that elevate them over the others. In any joint lock, your opponents choice to tap is exactly that - a choice. If he is fearless he may well decide to let the limb break and continue fighting. In the case of strangles there is not choice - you either submit or pass out - but you don’t get the choice to fight on. In addition, strangles offer offer a flexibility level of intensity to the match. You can apply a strangle in ways that range in intensity all the way from a gentle constraint, to a TKO all the way up to killing someone. Joint locks have no flexibility in their application - it’s all or nothing - it either breaks him or no effect, and even if you break him he may elect to continue fighting. As such, strangles are the ultimate weapon of Jiu jitsu. Work all your submission skills, but set aside special time for your strangle training. Develop a good strangle from the back and one from the front and you will have a weapon that will never let you down. Here, Nicky Rod applies a very tight strangle with perfect head and arm positioning. It’s easy to see the mechanical tightness of the hold and how even in the most competitive matches, this will never let you down.

Getting to truly know a move: Jiu jitsu does not reward superficial knowledge. If you know a little about a given move it’s unlikely you will be able to perform it successfully against a fully resistant opponent your own size and skill level. Jiu jitsu rewards DEEP KNOWLEDGE. In order to get it to work you must know a LOT about how it works and how to apply it against someone who also knows how it works and how to stop it. As such, the general pattern of success in Jiu jitsu is to spend vast amounts of time and energy on a small set of moves to gain mastery of them to a point where you can get them to work against the toughest resistance. I teach a relatively small set of moves; for example, ninety percent of my submissions training time with my athletes is spent on only six submission systems, but my students have an unusually deep understanding of them. Jiu jitsu demands of you mastery - plan your training accordingly. Think of your favorite moves (Tokui waza) as trusted old friends who you know better than you know yourself. Spend time with them, studying them and understanding them - and when you call upon them for help in a tough battle, they will be far more valuable to you than a thousand superficial friends and passing acquaintances

When you go to finish a submission - in the majority of cases it’s not a fight against the CLOCK - it’s a a fight against MOVEMENT. When we get into a potential finishing position there is a natural tendency among all of use to think that TIME will be the determining factor behind success or failure - the faster we do it the less chance an opponent can defend. In fact, the only case where you must race against time is when there is a set time limit and time is close to expiring. In all other cases, your prime concern should not be time, but rather, RESTRICTING MOVEMENT. It is MOVEMENT that will enable to get an opponent out of the move. Set your mind to focus upon control over movement, rather than speed of execution. Slow things down rather than speed things up and soon you will be exhibiting the kind of control necessary to finish high level opponents

Pursuing submissions without simultaneous positional pressure creates a weak and ineffective attacking style; pursuing position with no regard for submission means even your victories will be inconclusive. Only when you splice the pressure of positional attacks with the threat of match ending submissions do you get the ideal of Jiu jitsu - control that leads to submission

Want to make faster decisions? Limit your options: One of the most important factors in who wins and who loses in a Jiu jitsu match is SPEED AND QUALITY OF DECISION MAKING. Athletes who make good decisions quickly generally beat athletes who make good decisions slowly. One simple and effective way to increase your speed of decision making is to LIMIT YOUR OPTIONS PER SCENARIO. If you have a thousand options you will inevitably slow down as you decide between competing option. Have one or two strong attacks per scenario and the decision making process becomes very easy and very fast. Of course it’s no good to make BAD decisions quickly - they have to be good ones. To accomplish this I suggest researching the most HIGH PERCENTAGE moves in modern competition in a range of scenarios. If you have a small set of well trained high percentage moves in each of the main scenarios we regularly find ourselves in daily sparring, you will immediately notice decision making is faster and more decisive - and that will result in the fast and decisive action - a key element of winning Jiu jitsu

A simple Jiu jitsu test for you: Here is a simple test you can perform during or after your sparring training every day - a test that will tell you a lot about yourself and your game. At the conclusion of training take memorable part of the session, day for example, a submission that you successfully applied, or a good escape from a bad position, or some other slice of action that had a discernible finishing point and ask yourself - WHAT EXACTLY HAPPENED AND WHAT DID I DO TO GET THAT MOVE TO WORK? When asked this question, Most people can give only a very general answer. Some cannot give any answer at all - the whole round was just a blur in their memory until a move happened. If you cannot give a reasonably accurate breakdown of what transpired from start to finish for a given move soon after it happened, this tells you something very important - that you are acting without thinking. In some cases this can be very good. If you are winning most of your matches against tough opponents without thought then this would imply that you have programmed your subconscious to read the match second by second and react correctly before conscious thought was necessary. In these cases most athletes can, if pressed, go back and recall what they did and why, even if initially they couldn’t. In the great majority of cases however, it means that you are simply acting from blind instinct. Your recollection is just a blur of action and the only thing you can recall, even when asked, is the result. This tells you very clearly that you had no control over the events. You just reacted instinctively as things happened - no identification of problems and thinking towards a solution. Every time class ends, USE IT AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO TEST YOUR MINDS RECOLLECTION OF WHAT HAPPENED SO THAT NEXT TIME YOU ARE STARTING TO ENGAGE THE POWERS OF YOUR MIND INTO YOUR SPARRING. You will soon find that you are much more mentally in control of the situation than previously and that you see and identify opportunities, dangers, and patterns that you are previously blind to. Here, Garry Tonon applies another brutally tight heel hook for victory - he knew the how and why of every step to get there

Variations: For any given move in Jiu jitsu there are many variations. It is crucial for your development that when you find a move that suits you well, you study it deeply and come to know all its variations and how these work together. Only in this way can you exploit the full potential of a given move. Think of the triangle - one of the most commonly seen and effective submissions in the sport. Most people talk about THE triangle - as though there was only one type. In fact you have the front triangle (the most well known and common variant in Jiu jitsu), side triangle, rear triangle, reverse triangle and back to front triangle - and within each of those main variations there are sub variations. Each is well suited to a specific task. Learning to use them together to cover every possible contingency as you grapple is the basis of your path to mastery. Here, Garry Tonon applies a beautiful and shockingly tight sub variant of the front triangle that creates a very tight strangle indeed.

Be greedy with your pins: There are five major pins in Jiu jitsu. Two of them are non scoring - side and north south. Three of them score - knee on belly, mount and rear mount. Once you get in a position to pass an opponents guard, it’s time to maximize your scoring potential. Don’t be satisfied with the non scoring pins. There will be opportunities to rack up big scores by passing directly to mount, or if you pass to the side, progressing further to mount or rear mount. Once mounted, many escapes attempts by your opponent will open up opportunities to move on to rear mount and vice versa. Being greedy for big points will translate immediately into more submission opportunities as your opponent feels compelled to resist more. Here, Gordon Ryan has quickly transitioned to mount after an initial pass to the side. Now as his opponent tries to escape there is back exposure - if Mr Ryan can get past his opponents elbow he can double his pin score. Don’t just hunger for a pass into a static pin - get greedy and use all the pins to create big scores that also create so much tactical pressure on an opponent that you are much more likely to be rewarded with more chances for submission

Learning from another perspective: We all know our favorite moves and do our best to add as much knowledge of them as we can. Usually when we think of learning about a move, we think in terms of PERFORMING the move. Let me tell you that a great supplemental way to learn about a given move is to have someone else perform the move upon YOU. Now you will see the move from an entirely different perspective which can often be quite illuminating. Learning how to escape and resist a move will teach you a LOT about the correct mechanics and tactics to perform it. Here, Gordon Ryan spends some time on the receiving end of a juji gatame arm bar, a move he excels in - when it’s his turn to perform it - he will have a new set of insights to help that performance

Submission holds - they either work completely or they don’t work at all: No one remembers a a submission hold that “almost” worked. In the heat of high level competition against athletes aren’t afraid to take some pain, the only only ones that work are those that are perfect in their application. As far as the outcome goes, a submission hold that was 98% perfect is as useless as one that was 5% perfect. ONLY THE ONES THAT ARE 100% PERFECT COUNT. As such, if you are to take the long and difficult path towards submission mastery you MUST seek mechanical perfect in your holds. It’s not easy to attain against determined and skilled opponents - but when you get there you will have a truly impressive weapon at your disposal. Look at the pressure generated by this lock from submission master Gordon Ryan - pressure and mechanical tightness like this must be your goal.

Squad senior and widely regarded as the worlds most exciting grappler, Garry Tonon @garrytonon is back in action this weekend against the great champion Osvaldo Queixinho Moizinho at @f2wbjj in Dallas Texas. Mr Moizinho has himself a very exciting and dynamic style of Jiu jitsu that won him multiple no gi world championships. He is a master of juji gatame arm bar and omoplata attacks which he can get from almost anywhere. With these two submission wizards in stage this should be a great match!

Working against resistance: Everything you do in Jiu Jitsu is done against strong resistance by someone who probably knows the moves you are attempting and knows the counters to those moves. This makes for a situation where you will GENERALLY FAIL MORE OFTEN THAN YOU SUCCEED in the application of your moves. You must get used to this fundamental fact of live sparring and competition - understand that failure is only temporary and that you always have options to follow up with subsequent attacks. Victory almost always goes to the athlete who can SUSTAIN ATTACKS OVER TIME until a breakthrough is achieved. As you feel strong resistance take confidence in the fact that you are offensive and he is defensive and that if you can maintain this long enough you WILL break through no matter how tough the resistance feels.

In all combat, victory will almost always go to the one who, to a greater degree than his rival, KNOWS WHAT HE IS DOING and and has the PHYSICAL ABILITY to do it along with the CONFIDENCE to implement it when the moment of opportunity arises. Thus victory is the meeting point of knowledge, physical skill/preparation and confidence. Spend your time developing these three factors and you will experience victory far more often than defeat.

Check out Australian submission juggernaut Craig Jones in Chael Sonnen’s SUG event today! Mr Jones was always very good, but working with the squad full time the last two years has seen him rise to a different level. A gentleman off the mat but a straight up submission assassin once he steps on stage! Follow his journey to the top!

Getting better at pins in Jiu jitsu: Pins are the highest scoring maneuvers in all of Jiu jitsu. The mount and the rear mount score double what you get for a takedown or sweep. As such there is a great incentive to get there. This often creates a mindset where the pin is enough reward in itself. In the long term however, you must go beyond this and see the dominant pins of Jiu jitsu as not just a good position to score - but a great position to submit people. The key to making this shift is your opponents ARMS. Don’t be satisfied with the pin itself - go further and trap your opponents arms. This will help immeasurably as you try to convert the pin into a submission. From the rear mount pin one of his arms with your legs and suddenly your strangle success rate will double. From the mount, walk your opponents arm out and away from his torso and suddenly you will be strangling and arm locking opponents at twice your normal rate. Make it a habit once you get to your dominant pins to start working on your opponents arms and bridge the gap between position and submission!

Experiment with different variations of your favorite finishing holds - you will need them all against tough opponents: All the various submission holds of Jiu jitsu have many variations. Each of those variations have their strengths and weaknesses. Each has a domain where they work very well and other domains where they work less well. As such it is important than you familiarize yourself with them all, as tough opponents will put up a level of resistance that will inevitably take you into different domains as you try to apply your favorite submission. Here, Garry Tonon takes on the great ADCC champion Vinny Magalhaes in an absolute division match way back in 2015. Despite the big size disadvantage, Mr Tonon was able to get in deep on the legs on several occasions. Excellent defensive awareness from Mr Magalhaes saw the two athletes exchange several different positions, prompting Mr Tonon to go through several different varieties of ashi garami to maintain pressure - here he works with an outside lock as his opponent turns prone to shut down an initial inside sankaku lock. Rapid fire transitions from one variation to another in the face of changing positions and circumstances is a hallmark of good submission specialists - and it must become a part of your game too!

In a world of confusion those who have a clear sense of where they want to be will prevail: Some of the scramble situations we find ourselves in Jiu jitsu can be totally disorienting. Both athletes head over heels and spinning like tops. It is crucial that you be able to go from this common type of scenario and emerge in a good situation, or at least, a better one than your opponent. The key to this is to have a small set of goals as to where you want to maneuver towards as you tumble around around each - so that you are working towards those goals even as you tumble. When the tumbling stops - you can emerge in a winning position. Don’t just scramble for the sake of scrambling - scramble towards something. Being someone mostly interested in submission I usually like to aim towards some form of leg entanglement in a heated scramble. Variations of ashi garami are almost always available and when the scramble is done you are in a potentially match winning position or a good position to sweep for a reversal. You might have different preferences and aim for juji gatame arm bars in a scramble, or a Kimura, whatever you prefer - just have a prior goal at the onset of a scramble to make sure you got something good in your hand at the end of the scramble.

In Jiu jitsu you can FEEL failure before it happens - use this to your advantage: You spend a lot of time drilling moves - as a result you all know what a GOOD application of the move feels like. As such, when you are sparring and your application of the move is inadequate, you have a tactile sense of failure - it just FEELS wrong. Moreover, there is a time period from the beginning of the application to the onset of that sense of failure. As you fight to apply the move you can feel yourself coming up short of the ideal of the move you as you felt it in drilling. THIS IS A CRUCIAL MOMENT. Most people will feel the onset of failure, recognize it, and give up so they can start all over again. Instead, try hard to see this as an opportunity to make a renewed attack either with a re-application of the same move or a switch to a new move. Here, Garry Tonon has made a spirited attempt at an inside heel hook but you can clearly see his opponent has slipped his knee through Mr Tonon’s knee line - this clearly signals the failure of the initial move. At this point your mind must start searching for follow up attacks. In a game where failure occurs over time and in which failure can be felt before it is fully manifest - you almost always have time to search for alternative follow ups if you just train your mind to do so.

The great theme of Georges St Pierre’s career - preparation supersedes everything: Fighting and competition can be a scary thing. It’s natural to think of it interns of how it appears to an audience - as a battle between two athletes on a competitive stage where the man or woman who shines best on the night takes victory - but the great theme pushed by arguably the greatest MMA athlete of all time is that the athletes PREPARATION is more important than any factors on the night of the bout. As such, the entire focus of Mr St Pierre’s career was in progressive skill development over the year and meticulous preparation in specialized fight camps for a given opponent whenever a bout contract was signed. Understand this - NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF THE OUTCOME OF A GIVEN BOUT IS DETERMINED BEFORE THE ATHLETES STEP IN THE CAGE OR ON THE MAT. What transpires on the stage is just a reflection of their relative depth of preparation prior to the match. Don’t focus on giving your heart and soul on the stage - FOCUS ON GIVING YOUR HEART AND SOUL IN THE PREPARATION LEADING UP TO YOU STEPPING ON TO THE STAGE - and then the bout will take care of itself.

Young masters: When we think of martial arts masters the image that usually comes to mind is that of a wizened Pei Mei type talking like Yoda and recounting many decades of knowledge of the art. In fact reality is quite different. Mastery is not a reflection of your physical age, but rather THE NUMBER AND QUALITY OF HOURS OF PRACTICE you have behind you. This means that it is possible to get deeply impressive levels of mastery at a young age. Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones are in their mid twenties, yet they have each spent so much time on the mats and done so in such an efficient and progressive manner that I have no doubts whatsoever that both can be considered true masters of grappling. Their knowledge level of everything from strategy, tactics, mechanics and training methodology of grappling is as good or better than masters twice their physical age. The key to this notion of young mastery is practice time and practice quality. Only when large amounts of time where each session BUILDS UPON THE LAST IN A PROGRESSION TOWARDS A GOAL does one see early mastery. I see in these young athletes a level of knowledge that usually takes much longer to accumulate. When you come to assess your progress, don’t get distracted by insignificant factors such as your physical age, how many years you have been training etc etc. Focus on the only factor that counts - how much time spent in progressive high quality training have you accumulated? Be confident that well planned training can get you towards mastery in fewer years than our common images of martial arts mastery suggest and that there are many youngsters out there with extremely impressive levels of mastery - perhaps one day you can be one of them!

Improve your pinning by focusing on your opponents elbows: It’s always a good feeling when you get to a strong pinning position on an opponent, but it will be a much better feeling if you go beyond the basic pin and start focusing on controlling his elbows in addition to the basic position. Most of your opponents escapes and ability to survive from underneath a pin involve his elbow (there’s a reason why they’re called elbow escapes). If you take take his elbow out of position - either away from the torso, over his shoulder or towards his center line - you will greatly subvert his ability to escape, keep him flat on his back and set up your submissions so that you can use position to set up submission, rather than be satisfied with the pin alone. Here, Nicky Rod does a fine job of walking his opponents elbow out and away from the torso towards the shoulder line - this will make escape difficult and submission easy - the best goals you have have when asserting your pin control!

Your guard is four limbed, not two: The centerpiece of guard position is your legs. Your legs are radically stronger than your upper body and so guard position is the best way for smaller people to take on and defeat bigger opponents from underneath. Nonetheless, we must always understand that it is THE SYNERGY BETWEEN ARMS AND LEGS THAT WILL MAKE YOUR GUARD EFFECTIVE BOTH IN DEFENSE AND OFFENSE. In the case of guard retention, when your opponent beats your LEGS, it will be your ARMS that hold him off long enough for the legs to reclaim their position. In the vase of offense, it will be your arms that hold the opponent for your legs to make their way into the various ashi garami, triangle and arm bar position that will bring you victory. Always it will be that critical INTERACTION of arms and legs that will make your guard a stalwart of defense and a powerhouse of offense. Look how Nicky Ryan’s arms form temporary barriers and frames against a strong passing rush and how this creates the time and space to bring the legs back into play and defend the position. Make your guard an interactive four limbed monster of attack and defense and your bottom game will be much closer to where you want it!

The back - How should I play between the position and the strangle? I coach always that in a no gi submission match with no striking, the back is the ultimate position. When athletes wear a gi the mount is arguably as good as the back because you have the collars to creat a strong strangle threat that combines will with arm bar threat. When punches/elbows are allowed the mount becomes a devastating position, but for no gi grappling the back is king. A natural question to ask is - what is the relationship between the position and the main submission from there - the rear strangle? In the great majority of cases focus first on solidifying the position first and strangle second. As you get more advanced, your opponents will get very adept at defending the strangle and you must then start trapping arms to get the breakthrough - my students are all very adept at this crucial skill and employ a step by step system to get the breakthrough. Understand that the higher you go, THE MORE YOU MUST START TO CLOSE THE GAP BETWEEN THE POSITION AND THE STRANGLE. The moment you lock the position, YOU SHOULD BE THREATENING THE STRANGLE and in some cases where appropriate, you can even get you strangle arm set FIRST and then get the position AFTER. Look at how Garry Tonon immediately creates a strong strangle threat against the great ADCC champion Davi Ramos the second he locks in the position - this is very important against such a skilled opponent as this. The more threat you can create at the neck, The easier it will be to trap arms and sometimes even get a quick finish as your opponent defends the position instead of the submission

When you train with the smaller guys: In Jiu jitsu we are expected to train with a wide array of partners. Some will be very good, some will be beginners, most will be somewhere in between. Additionally, they will come in all shapes and sizes. Figuring out the unique challenges of each different body type is a big part of your development. In response to the many different types of training partner you will work with, you must learn to develop different intensity levels in your game. When training with smaller or less experienced partners, use this to develop your defense or a weaker part of your game. Remember - unlike competition, the goal of training is DEVELOPMENT, not victory. That means seeing a sparring round with someone you know you can defeat easily not as a chance to beat them as expected, but as a chance to take some aspect of your game that needs improvement and spend time on that or by handicapping yourself in some way to make the match more even. In this way you can derive great benefit from training with a lessor partner in ways that will make you more successful in the future against your toughest partners.

Three great entry points into submission
Ashi garami
Front headlock
Kimura
The game of Jiu jitsu has a dizzying array of moves, tactics, principles etc and in the hurly burly of sparring or competition it can be very difficult to remember what to do. Whenever confusion reigns - SIMPLIFY. If you are searching for submission in a dynamic and chaotic situation - focus on the three best entry and most accessible entry points that will give you a tight hold on even a very challenging opponent and get you in a position to start threatening submissions. These are ASHI GARAMI, KIMURA and FRONT HEADLOCK. Ashi garami will open up a vast number of sweeps, reversals and leg lock submissions. Kimura will open up submissions via Kimura itself, plus juji gatame arm locks, triangles and sweeps/takedowns. Front headlock will give you Guillotine, Darce, Anaconda strangles (among others) and transitions to the back along with many takedowns. In a chaotic and confusing scramble - stay focused on these three control grips - they are almost always available at some point, and will get on the short cut to submission! Here, Craig Jones, a young master of Ashi garami, gets a deep bite on his opponents leg that points him a situation to attack with leg locks and sweeps and immediately gets his opponent into a defensive mindset.

My leg lock lock instructional video is on the BJJ Fanatics daily deal today! Big savings on the video that started a revolution
https://bjjfanatics.com/collections/daily-deals/products/leglocks-enter-the-system-by-john-danaher
You can follow the link on my Instagram story if you are interested!

I am often asked the question - what makes a good student? People offer all kinds of attributes - intelligence, dexterity, coordination, strength, flexibility, height, mental toughness, confidence etc etc. In fact over the years I have seen champions emerge who were totally dissimilar in their attributes. Some were confident, some weren’t. Some were strong, but not others. When you look at the winners podium you see every body type and psychological profile represented. In the end I came to the conclusion that there was no set of attributes that determined how far you would go in Jiu jitsu - except one. There was one attribute that every champion I ever met or trained possessed. It was the only commonality among them all. It was PERSISTENCE. All of them withstood the many trials, heartbreaks, pitfalls, boredom, fatigue and sacrifices on the path towards excellence and stayed true to the course. When I think about this I find it very encouraging. Most of our physical attributes are determined at birth and most of our mental attributes are determined quite early in our upbringing and so there is little to no choice in them. But PERSISTENCE is something that all of us can realistically exhibit, regardless of whatever else we have or lack. In this sense, you all have what it takes to get very good indeed if you can develop and strengthen this simple and widely available attribute. Don’t worry too much about your progress for this day or this week - concern yourself more with this year. PERSISTENCE OVER TIME is the most valuable trait you can possess and interestingly, the one most likely already in your possession.

Dominate the space between the knees: A fundamental premise of guard position is that THE TWO LEGS MUST WORK IN UNISON IF THE POSITION IS TO BE EFFECTIVE. If you can place the your body between his knees and prevent the legs from working together, you will have taken a big step towards shutting down your opponents guard. In addition, you will have placed yourself in a fine situation to pass. Look at Craig Jones wedging himself between the knees of his opponent in a way that totally shuts down the bottom athletes ability to use his legs in unison. Now he has shut down most forms of attack and resistance from the bottom player, he can focus on a choice between passing and leg lock attacks - and there is very little his opponent can do to stop either. Look for this situation whenever possible as you pass. You will find the other fellow can’t attack with much, whilst you can attack with whatever you want.

Half guard passing - Once you control the head you can focus upon extracting your leg: The ultimate goal of every half guard pass is to extract your leg and pass either to the two sides of your opponent or straight up the middle to the mount. A crucial step on the path to that goal is to pin the head and shoulders. This is usually done via crossface and/or underhook, though there are other good methods as well. Here, Gordon Ryan uses only a cross face without an under hook. This means he must pay extra attention to keeping his opponents hips flat on the mat so that he is stable enough to begin extracting his leg. Don’t think the cross face alone is enough to flatten an opponent and keep him flat - your hips are an important part of that process also. Walking your hips forward into his is an excellent way to use your legs to keep him flat rather than rely exclusively on your arm.

The power of the triangle - Gordon Ryan victorious in Dallas: Gordon Ryan defeated 10th planet standout Kyle Boehm here is Dallas tonight in his first return to competition since the covid 19 crises broke out. It was wonderful to be back in action again and see so many of the great figures of the sport again after the long lockdown inactivity and what seems like an eternity. The match featured a no time limit submission only format - arguably the most “pure” form of Jiu jitsu as there is no doubt about the eventual winner. These matches have a very different pace and tempo from regular points matches with time limits. Mr Ryan paced himself well early on but started to apply increasing amounts of pressure as time passed until he was about to take Mr Boehms back after a leg lock attempt and in a scramble transitioned beautifully from arm bar to triangle. The threat of the strangle forced Mr Boehm to come forward and into a very interesting bent arm lock variation within the triangle (essentially a variation of an American lock) that created a vicious break and a quick end to the match. It was a fine example of MULTIPLE THREATS - so important in high level Jiu jitsu where the resistance levels are very high. The triangle offers an incredible ability to fuse together strangle threat with multiple arm lock threats - you have juji gatame, ude gatame (reverse armlock), kimura and American locks (even a wrist lock in there). It is so hard for an opponent to cover all the simultaneous threats - worse still when the person doing it is Gordon Ryan. Hope you all enjoyed the show. Thank you to the promotion and flograppling for starting the road back to Jiu Jitsu with the these small first steps. Wishing you all the best from Dallas, Texas!

The beginning of every application of a physical technique is the mental act of recognition of opportunity: Every time you go to apply a move or tactic in the sport of Jiu jitsu the first step is a mental one - recognizing that the opportunity is there to apply it. Learning to train your eyes and brain and SEE and RECOGNIZE is this a HUGE part of your development. A big part of your training must therefore be a kind of MENTAL PROGRAMMING that teaches your eyes to see and your kind to recognize so that your body can pull the trigger and execute the move. Nowhere is this more important than programming yourself to see the multitude of opportunities that occur to take the back during any grappling exchange. The back is a huge percentage of our body’s total surface area - so opportunity will ALWAYS be there as you grapple. Learning to see and recognize those opportunities is the beginning of actually TAKING the opportunities and becoming renown as a master of back attacks. Here Garry Tonon sees a fleeting vision of the back and immediately capitalizes!

I had the pleasure of a chat with the crew at @londonrealtv a while ago and they will air the interview today. We discuss Jiu jitsu and my remarkable students along with some other related topics. Hope you enjoy it!

First contact: Every grappling match begins with the closing of distance and first physical contact, whether it be in standing position or on the floor - it greatly behooves you to have a plan in mind BEFORE first contact rather than make contact and see what happens. There are only so many ways the two of you can initiate contact - having a good response to the major possibilities worked out ahead of time let’s you get off to a good start - and when you are facing tough opponents, that’s a great thing. In order to make an effective and proactive first contact you will need an appropriate STANCE, MOTION, GRIP FIGHTING SEQUENCE and PLAN OF ACTION for the initial encounter. These will all vary depending upon what your aims are. Make sure you devote some time developing these SKILLS OF FIRST CONTACT. So many times the outcome is heavily influenced by those crucial opening seconds.

In Jiu Jitsu no single pin will be final: Pinning in Jiu Jitsu is very different from other grappling arts. In most styles of grappling a pin can end a match if held for a period of time - but not in Jiu jitsu. Pins never end a match in Jiu jitsu no matter how long you hold them. As such you can never hope to win by simply holding someone in place for extended periods of time. Add to this the simple fact that if your opponent is roughly the same size and skill level as you are he will invariably be capable of eventually escaping your best pin if given sufficient time. So in Jiu jitsu training to hold a single pin is not really the goal. Instead, the idea is to hold it long enough to score (around three seconds) and then to hold it long enough to tire and frustrate an opponent enough that as they try to escape you cause them to concede an opening that will let you either to move to a new pin and get more points or to a submission attempt. ONLY USING PINS IN COMBINATIONS SO THAT AS HE ATTEMPTS TO ESCAOE FROM ONE YOU SWITCH TO ANOTHER WILL ENABLE YOU TO HOLD DOMINANT POSITIONS FOR EXTENDED PERIODS OF TIME AGAINST STRONG RESISTANCE. Don’t just think about holding him down with a single pin, but rather about FLOWING FROM ONE PIN TO ANOTHER AND SMOOTHLY BYPASSING HIS ESCAPES BY MOVING TO A NEW VARIATION OF THE SAME PIN OR A NEW PIN ALTOGETHER. You can only immobilize an opponent so long before eventually he gets out - focus primarily on the skill of moving AROUND resistance from one pin to another once you feel your original pin is becoming untenable. Dynamic movement will keep you in good position longer than squeezing someone from the same position as long as you can and at the same time will open up many submission opportunities so you can bridge the gap between position and submission

Use all your options when passing half guard: Half Guard passing represents perhaps the most high percentage and versatile method of passing your opponents guard in the sport. Use it well and use it often. Whenever you choose to use it, be aware that you can pass in three directions. First, to the same side as you initiate the pass. Second, straight up the middle to the mount. Third, across your opponents body to the far side. All three are highly effective and all three combine well with each other. Learning to use all three possible directions, especially in combinations, will make it very difficult for an opponent to stop you. Here, I have back stepped over to the far side to get into a particularly effective passing method that controls an opponents head while while creating great pressure by getting head and hips pointing in opposing directions. Make sure you have at least one trusted method of half guard passing for each of the three main possible directions of passing from half guard and you will soon find your passing game generating a lot more success for you!

I am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video HALF GUARD PASSING AND DYNAMIC PINNING. As many of you know from watching my students, I am a huge advocate of forcing your way to half guard and using this a premier passing position due to the unique possibilities for the most important kind of control in Jiu jitsu - head control. This is probably the most versatile form of guard passing as it works equally well in Gi, no gi and MMA. It offers great opportunities to greatly increase your passing scores by passing directly to mount and it is fair to say it is the passing method that requires very little athleticism and no speed. A closely related topic is dynamic pinning. Pinning in Jiu jitsu is very different than other grappling arts. It offers the greatest point scoring potential in the sport getting mounted or rear mount scores double what a takedown or sweep scores with far less effort and athleticism required. At the same time it creates the kind of pressure and purposeful movement required to enforce your upper body submission game. If you are interested in the potential of these skills to help your game - check it out! Link in my Instagram bio 😜

If you can’t get under ‘em...knock ‘em backwards: A big part of my approach to open guard situations is to get deep UNDER an opponent so that you can lift and elevate them into vulnerable position from which attacks often succeed. Any kind of lifting attack will require you to get UNDER AN OPPONENTS CENTER OF GRAVITY. Pretty soon opponents will figure that out and start backing away from you to prevent you getting under them. That’s when you must start adjusting the direction of your initial attack from UNDER and FORWARDS to BACKWARDS in the same direction as their defensive movement. Playing these two games against each other as a dilemma pairing will make you a very dangerous attacker from open guard.

The ultimate pressure pass - half guard: There are two main methods of guard passing. The first is based on MOVEMENT. The idea is to move rapidly to an angle and close distance at a rate that your opponent can not keep up with. Good examples would be toreando passes, x passes, long step passes etc. Second, there are pressure passing methods based around the idea of STOPPING THE OPPONENT FROM MOVING. Good examples would be over/under passing, stack passing etc. The best form of pressure passing in my opinion, is HALF GUARD PASSING. The reason is that the pressure is usually applied directly to the HEAD AND SHOULDERS, which has the greatest effect of stopping movement in your opponent. CONTROL OVER THE HEAD IS THE SINGLE MOST SIGNIFICANT FORM OF CONTROL YOU CAN EXERT UPON THE HUMAN BODY. No other passing method offers such unrelenting and intimidating pressure as half guard passing. The main weapons at you disposal are a strong cross face or reverse cross face to control the head; and either a far side or near side underhook to control the shoulders. Look how Gordon Ryan, a truly devastating half guard passer, flattens out his opponent to set up his cross face and work towards an under hook on either side - then with direct control of the head and shoulders the pressure mounts very quickly indeed - leading to the kind of passing success you will need as you progress to the higher ranks!

Dynamic pinning: Jiu jitsu has a very different conception of pinning from other grappling sports and learning to understand those differences is extremely important for your development and success. In most grappling sports pins are static and held for time and the pin itself can end a match. Once you get the pin there is no need to move, you just hold him in place for the specified time and it’s over. In Jiu jitsu a pin never ends a match. Moreover, not all pins score points. Side pins, north south pins are considered good and valuable, but score nothing. THE REAL REWARDS IN JIU JITSU COME FROM DYNAMICALLY MOVING FROM ONE PIN TO ANOTHER - THAT’s how you get big scores and set up submissions. Here, Nicky Rod has done a fine job of getting mounted - but you can see he is not satisfied with the static pin - he has loosened his feet as he isolates his opponents head and arm. This will allow dynamic transitions to other pinning positions to set up the submissions that he really wants. Learning to move from pin to pin WITHOUT GIVING UP SPACE AND LETTING AN OPPONENT ESCAPE is one of the most valuable and rewarding skills in the sport and is one of the key bridges between POSITION and SUBMISSION. It’s a wonderful thing to have a solid and secure static pin - that’s the first skill you must master in pinning - but you MUST go on to develop the real match winning skill of dynamic pinning, where you move smoothly from pin to pin. Only then can you use the unique characteristics of Jiu jitsu pinning to your advantage

Don’t be satisfied with the mere act of pinning - go the extra distance and isolate his limbs away from the torso: It’s good to get to a classic pinning position like mount, side or rear mount, but that won’t help much against a well trained and mentally tough opponent who knows his escapes. Once you get to a pin, the onus is one you to immediately work to get his arms separated from his torso so that you can
1 - get even better control over your opponent by making escape considerably more difficult
2 - make the task of dynamically shifting from one pin to another (the best way to score big points in Jiu Jitsu) much easier
3 - bridge the gap between position and submission by isolating a limb in a way that make submission far more likely than simply waiting for an opponent to make a mistake.
Here, Nicky Rod amplifies the pulverizing pressure of his top mount game by separating his opponents elbow from his torso to make a transition from pin to submission much more likely. Make this a habit every time you get to a pin and you will immediately find you are much harder to escape from, move more easily from one pin to another, and score a lot more upper body submissions

You have to be able to perform your favorite moves under any conditions: Usually when we drill moves it is under ideal conditions. Our partner is not resisting, we’re in a comfortable position, breathing comfortably, normal orientation, skin dry - but when it’s time to do it for real; it’s almost always under FAR FROM IDEAL CONDITIONS. Upside down, exhausted, opponents skin slippery as an eel and resistance at maximum, often in ways you did not anticipate. That’s what sparring is for. Drilling gives you the outline and direction of what you are supposed to do, but only sparring will give you the tenacity, improvisational nuances, tightness etc that will make it work when the chips are down. Here, Garry Tonon practices his beloved heel hooks upside down as he rotated through three hundred and sixty degrees - just as is required in most realistic match situations. Of course most of of your drilling will be under ideal conditions - that’s normal and preferable when your start out m, but set some time to drill under non ideal conditions to, it will help when it’s time for sparring 😜😜

If you can train yourself to survive any predicament in the gym, you can walk into any competition with confidence. Set some time to subject yourself to the stress of bad positions and situations. Staying calm and composed under stress is a skill that can be learned like any other, but you will never learn it if you are always the hammer. Take some time to feel what it’s like to be the nail. The more you do that in the gym the less you’ll need it on the stage

YOU! Yes you...that was the worst arm bar in the entire history of arm bars...you could go back in a time machine to feudal Japan and observe in fast forward all the arm bars performed since the thirteenth century and you would not see a more feeble attempt at an arm bar than that one! You couldn’t arm bar a sleeping, drunk one armed man with that miserable technique! #positivereinforcementFTW

Passing half guard - head control: The final stage of most forms of guard pass is to get control of the head and shoulder. In most cases you begin by passing the feet, knees, hips and then finally getting a hold of the head to complete the pass. Half guard passing is very different. In this case you usually get past one knee and then get control of the head and shoulders - THEN you go to extract your trapped leg and pass the guard. The great advantage of half guard passing is that is enables you to control the head PRIOR to the pass rather than as the COMPLETION of the pass. This creates unusual amounts of control and pressure as you pass. Here you can see Gordon Ryan, a true master of half guard passing, exert eye popping pressure on a training partner as he goes to work passing half guard. Though the head is the primary control - don’t neglect the shoulders - this usually done through some form of underhook - here Gordon Ryan has selected double underhooks, a particularly devastating form of control. Take advantage of the unique character of half guard passing to create the kind of match winning pressure you will need to pass the best guards in the gym.

Heels and toes: Jiu jitsu is a subtle game. Sometimes the smallest actions can have deep consequences. A good example is the significance of shifting an opponents weight on to different areas of the feet. A well balanced person has the weight going down through the center of their feet. All that changes when you can draw an opponents weight FORWARD ONTO THEIR TOES or alternatively, BACKWARDS ONTO THEIR HEELS. When you can do this you can throw/sweep them forwards and backwards with ease - if you can’t, it’s going to be very difficult to throw or sweep anyone your own size and skill level. You must learn the craft of shifting your opponents weight to the toes and heels - this is the precursor of most successful throws and sweeps. When sweeping opponents TRY HARD RO GET A SENSE OF DRAWING THEM ON TO HEELS OR TOES BEFORE YOU COMMIT TO THE ACTUAL SWEEP. This will massively increase your success rate.

Distance control: When you first go to engage an opponent from seated guard there are a lot of variables that will influence how you will engage. Some of these variables are within your control and some are not. One that often is within your control and which has great importance, is DISTANCE. Depending upon what kind of attack you want to employ, you will want to be at an appropriate distance for that attack. Learning to move in such a way that you control the distance between you and your opponent so that you can choose the weapon of your attack is a big part of your development. You should be able to move efficiently from the seated position - scooting - so that you can close distance, maintain distance or increase distance, depending upon what you want to do. Here, Gordon Ryan and the great Xande Ribeiro square off and try to gain advantage through distance before they even engage in grips. Both athletes know what they want, both have a good idea what the other fellow wants - now it will come down to movement skills to see who can actually GET want they want. Often there is considerable jousting for distance and angle at this part of the game - this is normal and to be expected. These skills may not be the exciting to learn, but they have a big impact on the outcome, so make sure you devote time to them.

Don’t stay on your knees in a closed guard - stand up and open it: One of the most common problems i see beginning students struggle with is opening a closed guard. On the surface it feels like you are better off staying in your knees as you are stable and can retract your arms and neck for safety. This is an illusion. Remember that as along as you stay inside the closed guard you have very little effective offense in a grappling situation (MMA is very different). despite being in bottom position, your opponents hips are actually higher than yours, which means he has some very effective offense from bottom. There are a few specialized ways of opening a closed guard from your knees, but they tend to be used either by a few specialists in those methods or by beginners on other beginners. As you go higher in level, in the vast majority of cases, you will need to stand up to effectively open your opponents guard. When you first try you will feel unstable and be knocked down many times. Don’t despair. Get back up and try again. It doesn’t matter if you get knocked down to your butt, so long as your opponent doesn’t actually get in top of you he won’t score. In time you will be knocked down less. Through all of your early attempts and frustrations I offer you this - WHATEVER PROBLEMS YOU HAVE GETTING KNOCKED DOWN BACKWARDS WHILE STANDING IN YIUR OPPONENTS CLOSED GUARD ARE INSIGNIFICANT WHEN COMPARED WITH THE PROBLEMS YOU WILL HAVE WHEN YOU ARE PULLED FORWARD INTO A CLOSED GUARD ON YOUR KNEES. The former is an annoyance, the latter will very often end in your submission. You must develop your ability to stand in a closed guard and open it with confidence - it is a foundational skill of the sport.

Building your repertoire: When a young musician develops, a big part of that development is building a repertoire of musical pieces that they can play extremely well, a good gauge of their developing maturity as an artist is the growing extent of their repertoire. As a Jiu jitsu athlete, you are as much an artist as a musician, and like them - you must constantly seek to both refine and expand your repertoire; only your repertoire won’t be concerned with music, but with moves enabling you to control, break and strangle opponents. Make sure that at any given time you have a specific set of moves (usually a rather small set) that you are actively working to learn and develop into something you can use successfully against your toughest opponents. If you keep coming out to fight the same people with the same moves it will become difficult as they learn to predict and anticipate your attacks. Actively adding to your repertoire is a fine way to make you unpredictable and stay ahead of your competition. Here, Nicky Rod works on his leg lock game - totally new to him when he first started - but one day can perhaps be a major part of his offense. So too in your own life - just because you are not good at something now does not mean you are condemned to stay that way. I have seen many an athlete turn a weakness into a strength in time - you can too!

When to be tight and when to be loose: when it comes to physicality, Jiu Jitsu is a game of contrasts. There are times we need to be loose and relaxed and times we need extreme isometric tension in order to be effective. Learning to balance these opposing demands is a key requirement for your improvement and the price of getting it wrong is either fatigue or ineffective application of potentially winning moves. As a general rule, the more MOVEMENT is the key to gaining advantage, the looser and more relaxed you want to be. Tightness makes our movement both tiring and inefficient. The more STOPPING AND OPPONENTS MOVEMENT is the key to success, the tighter we want to be. Here, Craig Jones shows total isometric tension in a spirited application of a heel hook. This is exactly the time you want tightness to hold an opponent in a finishing lock long enough to do real damage. It’s hard to imagine that just a few seconds before and after this photo his body was very relaxed, making it possible for him to move smoothly and easily into the move and into a follow up afterwards. Learning to switch gears between softness and hardness is a big part of your progress in the sport and represents a good sign that you are making progress. If you constantly find yourself getting tired or having opponents skip out of your moves even when the initial application was good, then there is a good chance that your physical switching from dynamic looseness to isometric tension is at fault.

Get a good bite on the leg: Probably the single most common error I see young athletes make when entering into cross ashi garami to get an inside heel hook from bottom position is failure to rise up from the floor high enough to capture the leg close to the hip. Don’t be satisfied with getting to your opponents knee - when he resists he will only have to slip the knee an inch or two and he’s out. Come up off the floor and get the lock of your cross ashi garami up high by the hip. This will give you a deep bite on the leg that will prove very difficult for an opponent to extricate himself from. In addition it will make it easier to off balance the opponent to create better breaking conditions

Pins - static pinning and dynamic pinning: In Jiu jitsu the biggest point score come from pinning. Getting to mount or rear mount score double what a good takedown or sweep scores. You must be able to exhibit pinning skills in two main ways. The first is STATIC PINNING. This is the ability to hold a resisting opponent in place for time. The minimum requirement in three seconds, if you can’t hold the pin and exhibit control for three seconds you will not score. Of course in most cases you will want to hold much longer than this to tire and frustrate your opponent and set up further opportunities to score. The second is DYNAMIC PINNING. This involves transitions from one pin to another. This is without doubt the key to getting big scores in Jiu jitsu. If you can transition from pin to pin you will rack up big points and create the kind of movement that sets up submission. Nonetheless, it all starts with the foundation - static pins. You must learn to hold a man down and stick him. Here I am demonstrating one means of doing so - loading my weight to one side while posting wide with one hand and crossfacing with the other arm, whilst at the lower body cross ankles create a closed wedge around the hips. This creates a combination of wide base, preemptively loaded weight, closed wedges and head control that will make escape surprisingly difficult. Play around with these concepts along with experimenting with posture, particularly your spinal posture and you will soon be unmovable in top position!

The magic of ashi garami: Most people associate the use of ashi garami by my students as a leg locking position, but never forget that it is equally useful as a sweeping position from bottom and a passing position from top. Only when you start to use the POSITIONAL function of ashi garami will you be able to maximize or SUBMISSION potential. Here, Gordon Ryan sends a man tumbling to the mat with a standard form of ashi garami - this will immediately create a dual positional and submission threat. He can attack the legs or get up on top with his own legs in the perfect position to begin passing pressure. As much as you may enjoy leg locking out of ashi garami - don’t neglect your positional attacks from this incredible hold!

Fastest way to control a leg lock scramble? Control both legs: Nothing is more frustrating when going to attack an opponents leg than the other fellow twisting and turning, heisting over your hips, scooting back and away to free his knee and all the other commons lines of defensive movement that make it difficult to get to the heel and apply your lock. You can drastically curtail that defensive movement by controlling both legs and sitting your opponent to his hips. This will immediately slow things down and bring order to chaos. When you can control movement and pace you can think clearly - and if you can do that you can win most of the time. So next time your opponent is flying about in your ashi garami, bring him back under control by securing the second leg - you will immediately double the amount of danger he is in and halve your workload - a solid forward step in the path to victory!

Half guard passing and MMA/fighting: Modern Jiu jitsu has many exciting and very effective methods of guard passing that have risen to prominence in last decade. When it’s time to apply some of these to MMA or fighting however, they often run into problems due to lack of gi grips or the fact that many opponents simply stand up from bottom position as you try to pass. When it comes time to pass under fighting conditions, one method stands above all - half guard passing. When I used to coach George St Pierre for his passing/top control, the overwhelming majority of training time was spent in forcing half guard and passing from there. No other method adapts so well to the rigors and demands of MMA than pressure passing from half guard. He used this with great effect throughout his career - repeatedly passing even world champion Jiu jitsu specialists with no problems. I can confidently attest that no other method of guard passing adapts so well to gi, no gi and MMA as half guard passing does. Even when Mr St Pierre trains in pure no gi grappling he is able to put even elite level grapplers under shocking pressure using this simple but powerful method of guard passing. Notice how his chest to chest contact will make it very difficult indeed for an opponent to stand up on his as he passes

Learning to extract your leg from the grip of your opponents legs is among the most valuable skills in all of Jiu jitsu: A fundamental feature of Jiu jitsu as a sport is that positional dominance is largely understood in terms FREEING YOURSELF FROM THE GRIP OF YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS. As long as an opponent controls you to some degree through the use of his legs, you are not considered to be in a dominant position. As you get better at Jiu jitsu you will find more and more you can get quite close to passing an opponents legs, only to have your opponent snatch ONE of your legs in a last ditch attempt to prevent you scoring. A second situation is that you actually do pass your opponents guard, but he manages a partial escape by grabbing one of your legs with his and thus breaking your pin. As your opponents get better a third scenario you will often encounter is that if athletes who favor half guard bottom as an attacking position and who actively look to ensnare on of your legs so that they can enter their favorite attacks from there. These three common situations will all require you to be able to extract your leg from your opponents grasp and get to a dominant pinning position. It is thus one of the most commonly occurring scenarios in the entire sport and one that you MUST be very good at managing. It tends to be a rather slow moving situation due to the close body contact. As such it is a scenario that older and less athletic athletes can excel in and defeat younger and faster opponents if they know what they’re doing. Here I am demonstrating a partial sit out method of stabilizing the position, an essential prerequisite to extracting the captured leg successfully. Learning to get a controlling upper body grip and marrying that to a stable posture are the first steps in a good extraction that can get you the dominant positions you seek at relatively little cost in physical output and tactical risk. It will be among the first skills you will need to become a master half guard passer and dynamic pinner.

Look where you want them to land! Whenever you want to throw someone from standing position or sweep from guard position, you will need to align your body’s structure and in the direction of the throw/sweep. Only a unified effort recruiting every part of your body will get the job done against strong resistance. One of the best ways to do this is to obey the simple adage - LOOK WHERE YOU WANT YOUR OPPONENT TO LAND. In many cases (there are exceptions) this simple act of looking will get your head pointed in the correct direction. The head leads the body and will thus help you create a unified effort in the proper direction to get the results you seek. Here, Nicky Ryan launches into a beautiful hook sweep (sumi gaeshi). By looking where he wants his opponent to land he creates a powerful body align that creates high amplitude and a spectacular finish. Next time you are sweeping from bottom, employ this simple but very useful principle and you can get better results!

The soul of Jiu jitsu will always be submission: Every combat sport has its soul. For boxing it is the knock out punch. For judo the perfect ippon throw. For wrestling the pin. In Jiu jitsu it is the submission hold. You can be losing the entire match, down by a landslide of points, but if you successfully apply a submission hold - you win regardless. A submission hold trumps all. I would wager that for all of us the original appeal of Jiu jitsu that brought us in the door and kept us in the dojo despite many injuries, disappointments and frustrations, was the innate appeal of CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. That is the ideal and the appeal of Jiu jitsu. As a coach, every lesson I teach has this message as it’s underlying assumption. As a student, every training session you partake in should have this as your underlying direction. The further your Jiu jitsu slips away from this basic appeal and degenerates into a study of advantages and match tactics and holding on to a lead, the less interest you and those around you will have in the game. When an athlete makes submission his or her priority, they will be a both a dangerous opponent and an entertaining performer - the faces in the crowd tell the whole story about the most basic appeal of Jiu jitsu and the best direction to take your game.

The pins of Jiu Jitsu: Any grappling style that involves ground work will have some form of pinning built into it. Pinning demonstrates control and dominance. Each grappling style has its own interpretation of pinning and the differences between them are very significant for your development within each sport. In Jiu jitsu the whole notion of pinning is radically different from other grappling sports such as wrestling, Judo and Sambo. The basis of Jiu Jitsu’s interpretation of pins is the idea that pins should reflect the degree to which a pin allows the dominate athlete to strike an opponent while not being struck back. As such, Jiu jitsu is unique among the main grappling sports in that it recognizes rear mount as a pin - even in cases where you are underneath an opponent. In wrestling, Judo and Sambo rear mount scores nothing. In Jiu Jitsu is scores the maximum four points. There are five major pins recognized in Jiu jitsu. The first two are non scoring - you score zero points when you attain them. They are great positions with high tactical value, but you get no points for getting them.
1 Side pin
2 North south pin
The other three are the scoring pins of Jiu jitsu.
3 Knee on Stomach - 2 points
4 Mounted pin - 4 points
5 Rear mounted pin - 4 points
You can clearly see that the by far the biggest point scoring opportunities in Jiu jitsu come from the ability to MOVE INTO A SCORING PIN AND FROM ONE SCORING PIN TO ANOTHER. This skill of dynamic pinning, the skill of moving into a pin and between pins is crucial for your development and allows you to amass big scores on an opponent with almost no risk. The biggest challenge when you learn these skills is to balance MOVEMENT with TIGHTNESS. You want to be loose enough to move efficiently from one pin to another, but tight enough that you give no space for an opponent to escape as you move. As such, it’s a subtle part of the game and given the scoring methods of the sport, the most lucrative!

The best entries for Ashi garami based leg locks from bottom position require you to first either get your opponents hands to the mat or butt to the mat: want to increase your success with leg locks from bottom position? You need to develop two precursor skills. You should be able to make your opponents hands touch the mat by tripping him forwards, or make his butt touch the mat by tripping him backwards. If you can make this happen at will, you will find the world of leg locks opens up a LOT easier for you. Almost all the skills of Jiu jitsu have PRECURSOR SKILLS - Skills that you must have if other subsequent skills are to be made possible. The two great precursor skills of bottom position leg locks are getting opponent hands to mat or butt to mat. Like any general rule of Jiu jitsu there are some important exceptions, but most of the time it holds true and will help your performance in this part of the game

The two most dominant grapplers I ever saw had something in common - they were devastating pinners: Over the many years I have spent running classes in the basement in NYC, the two most dominant grapplers I ever saw were Gordon Ryan and Roger Gracie. There are many commonalities between them and some important differences, but the thing they share most in common and which is important for YOUR development is that both men were truly devastating in their application of the various pins of Jiu jitsu. Having either of them on top of you once they had passed your legs felt you had a Cadillac parked on your chest while you attempted to do escapes. The pressure was so immense in any one position that you almost hoped they would move to another position to score, just to get a temporary reprieve from the pressure. A minute under a mount like theirs felt like an eternity. There is no question that a simple pin can be among the most devastating weapons in your arsenal if applied to its full potential. Learning to shut down escapes and generate pressure while moving from pin to pin is perhaps the single most important skill in raising your submission success rate - particularly at the higher levels. You must begin to pay attention to your posture and how certain subtle changes in posture can make you feel lighter or heavier; how a shift to one side can sit down a potential escape, how moving up or down an opponents body can change how he tries to escapes. Pinning is perhaps the most subtle part of the entire game. The movements are very small but have deep consequences for your success or failure. Here, Gordon Ryan makes someone’s life totally miserable with one of his trademark mounted pins. Ask yourself what is he doing with his posture at this moment ? His foot positioning? Head position? Near side elbow position? Learning to answer these questions is part of your journey to developing a truly devastating arsenal of pins - from which your submissions game will greatly benefit!

Trust: It’s important to understand that I never coach INDIVIDUALS - I coach the ROOM. Only when the whole room is on the program can individuals rise to their potential. Of all the characteristics I try to imbue upon the room, one of the most important is TRUST. My athletes are renown for their ability to escape from seemingly hopeless situations, specialize in the use of potentially very damaging types of joint locks, and focusing on submission above all. This is only possible because the athletes trust each other to train hard, but not to recklessly try to hurt each other. In a game where victory comes from holds designed to snap limbs and strangle people unconscious, there has to be an understanding among the athletes that they will train hard, but not recklessly. If i know my partner will not try to immediately snap on an arm lock as hard and fast as he can, this gives me the confidence to practice my escapes and get a feeling for what i need to do in a more competitive situation. The rule with joint locks that I always preach in the room - you can extend the limb but not hyper extend the limb. Focus on control of the limb rather than snapping it. This keeps it realistic enough for students to practice and acquire skills but safe enough to give them confidence to try out risky escapes and counters they will need in top level competition settings. Here, Gordon Ryan practices his last ditch escapes against armbars with a junior who gives him realistic tension but not dangerous hyperextension. In this way you can practice even the more extreme elements and skills of Jiu jitsu in a safe manner

Half guard top - no need to rush: Of all the methods of passing guard, passing from half guard gives you the most ability to slow things down and dictate the pace. You must learn to use this in your favor. When you first get over your opponents knee and enter half guard - take a moment to to first solidify your top position rather than rush into the passing game. Your first goal should be to shut down your opponents ability to off balance and move you (if he can do that he will be attacking you relentlessly). This means there will be a contest for arm position (most opponents will be looking to get an under hook), head position (opponent will be looking to get your head far forward over his shoulders) and hip position (opponents will be looking to get under you and on to one side rather than flat). Who wins these three battles will generally dictate the overall battle from half guard. So when you first settle into half guard - look to win these three battles first before you go into your favorite passes. Here, Nicky Ryan loses the battle for arm position but compensated by winning the battles for head position and hip position, setting him up for some strong passes.

Have a definite goal when you scramble: Scrambles are one of the most common scenarios in Jiu jitsu. Too often, scrambles degenerate into a situation where athletes are moving for the sale of moving, rather than towards a goal. As the pace and intensity of the scramble intensifies, so does fatigue and confusion, until you are left with a feeling of having done a lot of hard work with nothing to show for it. It’s important that you movement always be movement with DIRECTION. In a scramble it is often difficult to identify and choose a direction because it’s all happening so quickly. The four easiest and most readily available desirable outcomes are front headlock, Kimura, ashi garami and the back. When you first start of your scramble training, I recommend using the back as your primary goal since it scores both points and submissions (the other three score submissions but no points). It will give you a clear sense of direction no matter how confusing the scramble. In time you can add the other three, but initially - focus on the back. Next time you are whirling around the mat like a gi inside a clothes dryer, starting looking at your opponents back as your next stopping point - you will be pleasantly surprised at how just being mindful of that goal will make you arrive there!

Memories: Here is a set of photos taken in the basement from long ago. This was during the MMA period of my coaching prior to the squad. My primary focus was on getting Georges St Pierre and Chris Weidman to championship victories. The grappling classes reflected the needs of the athletes for a Jiu jitsu that would apply well to the cage. You can see Mr St Pierre, my great friends Roger Gracie (who was transitioning from grappling to MMA at this time) and Romulo Barral, Shawn Williams and a VERY young Garry Tonon (did you recognize him?). So many athletes have come through these doors over the years - different people, different goals, different times - but Jiu jitsu can be adapted to them all. Looking at these old photos makes me realize how lucky I have been to meet and work with so many amazing people over such a long time. I miss those old days and all the great people you see on the mats - wherever you all are I wish you the best! Stay safe. Hopefully before too long we’ll all be back in action. Thanks to Luca Atalla for the awesome photos!

Overwhelming and passing a good guard player - the half guard route: When you have a dangerous guard player underneath you, there are few better routes than getting chest to chest, with an intimidating cross face and flattening him out with either an underhook or hip walking so that he is left with little offense. The beauty of half guard passing is that it reverses the normal order of events in guard passing. In most guard passes you pass the hips first and control the head last. In half guard passing the first target is usually the head and then you pass the hips by extracting your leg. As such it is qualitatively different from regular methods of guard passing. You must make it a separate study and delve deeply into it. Almost all of the great guard passers had strong half guard passing as a big part of their repertoire - make it part of yours too!

Gordon Ryan learns the art of tactics: Every Sunday (before this whole Coronavirus thing kicked in) Gordon and the squad come in to do a private class. We discuss a topic and get to practicing/sparring. One day Gordon was asking questions about match tactics. Usually he doesn’t bother with tactics at all - he just goes out on stage with the intention of controlling and submitting his opponent come what may - but as you can see - Mr Ryan may well be a true young master of control and submission - but he is a straight up white belt when it comes to devious tactics!!

The quality of your connection will be the criteria by which the worth of your submission holds will be judged: Most of the time whilst grappling it’s a good idea to keep a soft and pliable body that you don’t exhaust yourself and so that you can move efficiently and not give away your intentions to an opponent. That changes however, when you lock yourself into a submission hold. Now you want a tight body with strong isometric tension that will lock your body to your opponents and stay in place long enough to get the win. Look how Garry Tonon locks himself to his opponents hip with a tight figure four lock that will not be shaken loose easily. This will enable him to stay in place despite the most acrobatic defensive maneuvers, hip to hip, where he should be for a good heel hook finish. Learn to distinguish between your need for pliability when moving for position and your need for tension when preventing movement and aiming for submission - only then will you be able to make position and submission skills work in harmony rather than against each other.

Great victory for Craig Jones! Aussie grappling super star and champion Craig Jones took on the great Vinny Magalhaes, former ADCC champion, last night in Chael Sonnen’s Submission Underground Event. Mr Sonnen has done a great job of keeping the event running during the Coronavirus epidemic by staying inside government regulations - events are played without a crowd and with special restrictions on the numbers and interpersonal contact of people inside the venue etc etc. In the end regardless of the situation it’s always two athletes and a referee inside the cage and when the action started Craig Jones went straight into his powerful leg attacks. Mr Magalhaes has a well deserved reputation for tremendous resistance to submission holds in general and leg locks in particular. Previously squad members Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan had gotten close but not the breakthrough. This time we worked on a particular strategy based around hip positioning and Mr Jones brilliantly worked it to get a severe break. Mr Magalhaes showed his usual unflappable composure but after two very strong inside heel hook attacks it was apparent that there was a spiral fracture of the fibula - that’s an injury that is rarely seen with heel hooks as usually the soft tissue of the knees and ankles gives way first. Mr Jones is as much a gentleman on the mat as he is off - he realized what had happened and backed off. It was agreed by all that the match could not continue even though Vinny had never actually tapped. There is only so much that flexibility and stoicism can do in the face of a determined application of good breaking mechanics so the match was over. Mr Jones was always a real stand out, but has shown tremendous improvements over the past twelve months. He went through a very difficult training camp for this event due to the many restrictions and limitations in currently in place that put very precise limits on who he can train with and how often and under what conditions - but he went through it all and on to a brilliant performance on the stage. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

The back is the perfect marriage of position and submission: Normally we think of position and submission as differentiated. One comes before the other. Most players tend to be either a positional player or a submission player. The back is the position that lets you be both at the same time. Not only is it the strongest position in the sport - no other position creates such a massive difference between your attacking potential from there and that of your opponent. You have access to the most high percentage attacks in the sport plus devastating strikes if this were a fight, whilst your opponent has almost nothing. At the same time, no other submission comes close to rivaling the principle submission from this position - the rear strangle. Thus the back represents the intersection of the two main elements of Jiu Jitsu - position and submission. Make it your lifetime study to get there and finish from there - the day you make positive progress in this direction you will see the results

Train your mind to see and identify the next steps: People talk to me about SPEED in combat sports all the time. Don’t get me wrong - physical speed is a wonderful attribute to have and is extremely valuable in combat sports - but let me tell you this - THE MOST IMPORTANT SPEED IS YOUR SPEED OF SOUND DECISION MAKING. If you can make good decisions faster than your opponent you will appear faster than an opponent who is physically faster than you. Most actions begin with a decision. If you are making decisions faster than the other fellow you will have the advantage of a head start that can make up for slower physical actions. Of course the decisions themselves have to be good ones - idiotic decisions made quickly don’t help - but as they say, even a decent decision made in a timely fashion is better than a great decision made too late. When you watch people spar, don’t just watch for entertainment - watch to learn the mental skill of second by second decision making. Try to figure what they ought to be doing to each other as the action unfolds. You can do the same thing watching competition footage of athletes. This kind of mental training has direct ramifications for your physical game and will make you a better physical athlete next time you are sparring.

Don’t use triangles because of short legs? Rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) FTW! The triangle has many variations. Unfortunately in Jiu Jitsu most students only really make use of one of the variations - the front triangle - usually performed from guard position. There is no question that the front triangle has proven to be the most applicable and effective in Jiu jitsu competition, but many students tell me it they they are simply too short legged to get the move to work for them in sparring. While there are some ways to maximize your effectiveness with short legs, it is nonetheless quite clear that short legs can be a problem for front triangles. If you want to make use of the incredible power of triangles but feel your leg length is an issue - START USING REAR TRIANGLES. Rear triangles, due to the changes in position and angle, are much easier for short legged athletes to use on broad shouldered opponents than front triangles. Once you start scoring regularly with rear triangles perhaps your confidence will rise and you’ll be more willing to try again with front triangles 😊 You never know! Here, Nicky Ryan locks on a flawless rear triangle and shows its incredible power as a restraining hold, arm lock potential and a strangle - it’s an amazing weapon for everyone - including short legged athletes (like me 😜)

If the most important battle of the position is the hand fight - learn to trap and immobilize hand and victory is yours: So much of our sport involves gripping and grabbing - learning negate and opponents grips is a huge part of the game. Even better are situations where you can trap an arm/hand entirely and take it out of the fight completely - it’s hard to hand fight when you can’t move your hands! 😜😜 Here, Gordon Ryan goes into his signature hand trapping sequences from rear mount, ruining his opponents ability to use his hands as a barrier to strangulation - once this is achieved the chances of a successful application of the strangle go up tremendously. The hands may not be the strongest part of the human body, but they are the means by which typically begin connection to an opponent and perform most of our tasks - learn to negate or remove an opponents ability to use them whilst retaining your own ability to use your own hands and you will be a very difficult person to defend against

Pathways to the back - the elbow: The back is king of positions in grappling. You score maximum points for getting there and you are in a position to attack with the most high percentage finishing methods in the game whilst your opponent has virtually no effective attacking options. There are many pathways to the back - it is the duty of Jiu Jitsu students to study and master them all - but the best one all round and the method you should start with is the ELBOW. If you can get past the elbow - the back is yours for the taking. There are many ways to beat the elbow - you can drag it, duck it, slide by it - they all work well. Here, Gordon Ryan uses an arm drag to beat the elbow in an attempt to take himself from in front of his opponent to a situation where he can get behind him and where everything is easier. When you are in front of a tough opponent, don’t just look at his elbows - see them for what they - A GATEWAY TO THE BEST POSITION IN THE SPORT! Once you make that perceptual change then you can start changing your position to one where you can win!

BJJ fanatics is launching a big sale starting today through next week! All my instructional videos 30% off! Increase your knowledge so that when we all get back to the mats you can translate that knowledge into skill - and get a lot more wins on the mat under your belt!

Two approaches to leg locking: When it’s time to attack the legs there are two main methods. The first is to get to the finishing position as soon as possible so that it is set before an opponent can gather up an effective defense. The second is to exert sufficient control over an opponents hips that they cannot move defensively. This enables you to pin them for extended periods of time in leg locking positions and work your way patiently to the finishing position and completion. Both methods are very successful. If you choose the second method a big part of your success or failure will come from a principle of control I call “double trouble.” When an opponent goes to escape any given ashi garami based leg lock, the overwhelming majority of the defensive issues are caused by their other leg (the one you aren’t locking) - if you can control THAT leg as well as the one you intend to break - you double the difficulty of escape for your opponent. Here, Gordon Ryan makes use of double trouble to secure a knee bar finish. Look for many ways to employ this important principle in your lower body attacks, whether it be leg locks, takedowns, sweeps - it will make you much more successful on the mats

The greatest submission of them all - pressure leading to fatigue: let me tell you something rather obvious but which has torment ramifications for your success or failure in grappling - EXHAUSTED PEOPLE ARE FAR MORE LIKELY TO SUBMIT TO YOU THAN FRESH PEOPLE. Understand this - a BIG part of submission is mental - it’s always an act of choice to submit and exhausted people are far more likely to make that choice than an opponent who is not under any physical duress. Learning to PRESSURE AND OPPONENT OF TIME so that they get NO RELIEF from the constant PHYSICAL PRESSURE and TACTICAL THREAT is as much a part of the submission game as perfect breaking mechanics and positioning. When you are sparring l, constantly monitor the physical state of your opponent and learn to dictate pace and position - for these two key ingredients will be the means by which you can make even a strong opponent wilt in time. Remember, every opponent will be strong and explosive at the onset of a match - your job is to test how strong and explosive he is at the tail end of a match. Pressuring an opponent into fatigue is as much a part of the road to grappling success as position, leverage and all the other major keys to a great game.

Downtown ninja: First Bane - now NINJA’S!! WTF!! Going for a solo stroll around a very quiet downtown Manhattan - I always knew growing up in the 80’s watching ninja movies would pay off one day!! Normally if you walked around Manhattan like this you’d get arrested; but in these strange times you’d get arrested for NOT dressing this way! 😂😂 You know me - Always setting the latest fashion trends. Hope you are all well!

Quiet days in NYC: It’s strange seeing the city like this - almost no one about as the seasons begin to change. I’ve lived here almost thirty years and never seen The Apple this way. One of my first students @zimlion took some beautifully haunting photos of the city the last few days that give some impression of the ghost town that NYC has become. The city has an eerie science fiction vibe to it. It has created a time for something that modern life doesn’t give us many opportunities to pay attention to - our surroundings, the change of seasons and most important - self reflection. Wherever you are, I hope you are safe and finding ways to adapt and grow. This situation won’t last forever, but perhaps the lessons we learn about ourselves and our lives in this down time will.

Strangers: One of the most valuable training tools you have is a stranger. The overwhelming majority of our training is done with people we know pretty well. This is good, as their constant progress alongside us forces adaptation and growth if we are to stay abreast of them. However, every so often you get chances to train with someone you’ve never trained with before, and this can be a very positive learning experience. They will move in unfamiliar ways, employing techniques differently from you and sometimes use techniques you have never seen before. This forces you to think and improvise on the spot - one of the more difficult feats of combat sports. So when the opportunity arises to train with someone that is not part of your regular circle (and of course, they seem to be a safe training partner) - take it - it’s the best way to test your ability to instantly adapt to new challenges. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon train with strangers shortly before a grappling tournament in England early in their careers. The same need to adapt and improvise to an unknown challenge will be required to an even greater degree in competition.

Possible Bane sighting on NYC subway: I was heading down to the supermarket for weekly grocery shopping when I came across this fellow sitting on the train with some other people who appeared to be working on some kind of underground construction project. He somewhat resembled criminal mastermind Bane and so, struck by curiosity, I approached as close as current social distancing protocols allow and said, “Excuse me sir, I was just wondering if you are in fact Batman’s arch nemesis Bane?” He turned to me and said, “It doesn’t matter who we are...what matters is our plan...” Then he returned to a conversation that appeared to be about the stock market, nuclear blast radius and some guy named Bruce...should I be worried?

There are a thousand possible targets for you to attack from bottom positions - but whenever possible - make your opponents BALANCE the first target - only then will all the others be realistic options. Gordon Ryan does a fine job here of getting his opponent completely out of balance - now he can attack wherever he chooses - upper body, lower body or sweep/reversal. Your opponents first line of defense to all your attacks is his stance - if you take him out of balance you will break his defense and open a floodgate for all your favorite moves.

The back and the serpent: There is something very serpentine about a good back attack. Whenever a constrictor snake goes to attack it’s prey, it needs several key elements. The first is an initial connection or anchor to the body of its victim. This is done by biting. The bite is almost always applied close to the head in order to optimize the subsequent actions. Then the snake wraps itself around the victim in order to apply constructing pressure that can stop the victim from breathing and according to recent research, stop blood flow around the body causing unconsciousness and ultimately heart failure leading to death. Now when humans go to the back there are some important similarities and differences. Just like constrictor snakes we need an initial anchor to the opponents body. We have neither the ability nor the desire to do this with a bite, so instead we use our hands, which, like the snake, must be applied close to the head. The hands lock around the head on one side and under the elbow on the other - offering an anchor as good as any serpents bite. Then, just like a snake, we need to throw some coils around the middle of the body to solidify our connection to the opponents body. For us humans, this is best done with our legs. The other big element we share with constrictor snakes is the need for the ability to stop blood flow. Snakes are blessed with power and length that we feeble humans will never have, so we we have to be very specific in our target - the neck. This target is small and vulnerable and the human arm is more than sufficient to close off blood flow at this location. Here is Gordon Ryan, looking remarkably serpentine as he shows all the classic features of a strong back attack - a strong initial anchor to the head via a control hand under the elbow connected to the wrist, backed up with coiled legs around the torso, finalized with an arm around the neck directly attacking blood flow in the opponent. Learn your lesson from the serpent, who has been performing this mode of attack for millions of years before humans even existed, and watch your back attack improve dramatically as a result

The incredible power of experimental testing, observation of results and refinement over time: The single greatest asset that combat sports have is the application of a simplified scientific method - start with a conjecture or theory, test it with various forms of experimentation, observe the results of testing those conjectures and theories in sparring and competition and make adjustments and refinements over time in the light of your observations. In time you can make incredible progress in knowledge and skill. Along the way you will discover that many commonly accepted beliefs are in fact quite doubtful and some theories that are commonly considered absurd actually have some merit. Using this trial and error method will take time, but it will furnish the most trustworthy conclusions in the long run. I will always favor conclusions attained by rigorous trial and error over the usual appeals to authority, tradition or orthodoxy. Every day on the mats gives you a chance to exercise this trial and error method. Every moment off the mats gives you a chance to think and speculate over new theories and conjectures that you can test when you return to the mats. In this sense the mats are your laboratory, your training partners your experimental assistants and your sparring your experimental testing. Here I am many years ago at one of Renzos schools before the blue basement experimenting with triangle and Kimura overlap with the very talented Magno Gama, with whom many trials and errors were made early in my career that steered me towards my current coaching philosophy. When it comes to making progress in Jiu Jitsu you have many resources - all of them have their good and bad points - but none will ever surpass the value of your own restless and enquiring mind as it seeks to solve problems through the raising and testing of questions and theories and refinement of your answers over time

Alignment to angle: Most of the time when we begin from bottom guard positions we BEGIN aligned square to our opponent; but when it’s time to enter and FINISH the most high percentage submissions from the various guard position it’s usually the case that we need to misalign ourselves and create a substantial angle to be successful. Learning to make a habit of this constant switch from aligned to perpendicular is a huge part of your journey towards mastery of bottom position attacks. Make your use utilize both LOWER BODY methods - feet on hips to push to an angle etc) and UPPER BODY methods (scooping inside the leg with your arm to pull yourself to an advantageous angle). Paying attention to this fundamental feature of guard position attacks will make you much more successful from bottom position!

Learn to create multiple threats to break through tough defenses: The higher the skill level of your opponents, the harder it will become to finish them with even very strong single attacks. At some point you have to start creating multiple threats at the same time to force talented opponents to spread their defensive resources thin and make a final breakthrough possible. Look at how Gordon Ryan threatens with a Kimura grip that can also threaten a juji gatame arm bar and even a triangle entry of the hips can swivel around the torso, whilst also creating a positional attack via threat of points for attaining rear mount. Attacking in this matter puts an opponent under tremendous pressure and very few can stop it if applied for a good period of time. Once you become strong with a few single attacks, start exploring how you can link those attacks together - some fit together more naturally than others. Don’t forget to add in lower body attacks - while you may have to move a little further the results can be outstanding.

Making first contact with your opponent - start with hands and head: All grappling requires contact with your opponent. When it’s time to initiate that contact it is almost always the case that we begin with HANDS and HEAD. You must get used to getting to your grips with your hands and establishing forehead to forehand contact. This will create situations where you have ENOUGH CONTACT WITH AN OPPONENT TO CREATE STRONG DEFENSE and at the same time, be close enough and with sufficient contact TO INITIATE OFFENSE WITH A HIGH PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS. Make a habit of making first contact with well placed hands and (gently) head and you’ll get off to a strong start every time!

Identify the potential threat(s) and negate it - then go to work: The most obvious and important feature of all combat sports is RESISTANCE. You are expected to impose your moves upon an opponent who is actively resisting your attempts at those moves AND who is simultaneously attempting to impose his own moves upon you. It’s tempting when this occurs to turn this into a battle of wills - if I want it more than the other guy, perhaps i can prevail; or, I simple expend more strength and energy than the other fellow and outlast him. While these approaches can certainly work, they are not an expression of the ideals of Jiu Jitsu. Instead, look to identify the specific grips and positions your opponent is using on you. Identify what specific dangers they create and begin BY FIRST NEGATING THOSE GRIPS AND POSITIONS and only when you feel they have been nullified, go on to impose your game. AVOID SITUATIONS WHERE YOU ARE BOTH SIMULTANEOUSLY TRYING TO IMPOSE YOUR WILL UPON EACH OTHER - this always degenerates into a dog fight where the stronger and fitter man wins. Rather, begin by robbing your opponent of any means of imposing his moves upon you, and only then trying to impose your own game. Here, Gordon Ryan begins his guard pass - NOT WITH PASSING, but rather with the shutting down of his opponents butterfly guard by compressing his feet to his buttocks and locking the hips. Without free movement of the feet and hips the butterfly guard is useless. NOW it’s time to think about how you wish to pass. To get the POSITIVE results you seek - BEGIN WITH NEGATION

The less time you spend directly in front of your opponents legs - the better: Whenever you play top position your primary concern is getting past your opponents legs. The overwhelming majority of your opponents submission and positional offense relies on his legs - if you get past them he will not be able to launch many serious attacks upon you, whilst you can launch many attacks upon him. Make it a habit to immediately step to an angle outside of your opponents feet and knees and you will make your job in top position MUCH easier. The second you get an initial angle on your opponent you put him in a defensive framework where he is only concerned with recovering his leg position, rather than attacking you. As soon as the engagement begins - GET TO YOUR OUTSIDE ANGLE - and soon you will find too position is a lot easier and more profitable for you

Two things you need: The first is a clear sense of what you want to accomplish. The second is a clear understanding of what the main obstacles/problems that prevent you from making that accomplishment. If you have these two things you can start the magic of problem solving to get to your goals. See everything in Jiu Jitsu in the light of these two things and you will go far

The power of observation: There are many great learning tools in Jiu Jitsu - I always rate realistic drilling, experimental research and structured sparring as the three most important. Another which I value highly is OBSERVATION. You can learn a tremendous amount through ACTIVE observation of athletes sparring. By this I mean watch the action in such a way that you are actively trying to assess what the athletes ought to be doing second by second - essentially the act of putting your mind inside their sparring session and critiquing them second by second. This can be done either watching live as we are here, or video. Whenever the main methods of sparring, drilling and physical experimentation aren’t available - go ahead with active observation - you will love the results next time you are on the mats.

If he can’t grip you he can’t control you - if he can’t control you he can’t attack you: The game of grappling begins with grip. Learning to IMPOSE YOUR OWN GRIPS WHILST DENYING GRIPS TO YOUR OPPONENT is this a HUGE part of the game. You simply must make grip fighting a serious study if you are to make progress in Jiu Jitsu. The athlete who consistently gets to his or her grips first has a huge advantage in a competitive situation. Here, Georges St Pierre practices grip denial - once this has been achieved, its time to attack. You don’t want to just deny an opponent grips - that’s a negative way to play. You want to deny him grips as a lead in to your own positive attacks - when you can do this, your game will leap forward.

Letting your opponent pick his poison: It’s always impressive to see an athlete impose his will upon another and force him into a given finish even when the other fellow knows very well what’s coming. What is every bit as impressive however, is the art of DELAYING YOUR CHOICE OF FINISH UNTIL YOU SEE YOUR OPPONENTS REACTION TO YOUR INITIAL THREAT. Once you make an initial attack upon a knowledgeable opponent you can expect some form of defensive reaction. If you have a good understanding of what those defensive reactions are - you can capitalize upon them in ways that will dramatically increase your effectiveness on the mat. In truth, there are only so many effective ways to defend the main attacks of Jiu Jitsu. If you invest time in getting to know what those are you can learn to anticipate an opponents next move and take advantage of them as they occur. THERE ARE FEW GREATER ADVANTAGES IN COMBAT THAN KNOWING AN OPPONENTS NEXT MOVE. If you can gain that advantage few will be able to stop you. Take your favorite moves and start to learn the most common and effective reactions to them. Then start building a game based around the anticipation of those reactions. Whatever success you had previously with those favorite moves will be DWARFED by the new success rates you experience with a game that combines those favorite moves with follow ups based on anticipation and the advantage of knowing the next step in an opponents game.

From open guard on a standing opponent: Dominate the head and dominate the space between his elbows - and victory will be yours. Whenever you have a standing opponent in your opponent guard, your first goals is always to BREAK HIS POSTURE/BALANCE. One of the best ways to do this is through the use of the cross lapel grip and the use of a foot on the bicep that dominates the inside position between his elbows. If you can keep his head lower than his waist and his elbow behind his shoulder - he won’t be able to threaten you with passing but you will be able to threaten him with any sweep or submission of your choice. So when you go to tie up from open guard - dominate the head and dominate the inside position at the elbow - your success rate will immediately rise 😜😜

Back in time: Here is an old clip from around 2005-6 featuring me teaching a young Georges St - Pierre the fine art of ashi garami entries from top position. I am contrasting traditional methods that focus upon ankle control and falling backwards away from an opponent, with an approach I often favor, focusing control on the area between the knee and hip and falling forwards into and across an opponent to set up strong heel hook and Achilles lock entries. This is an excellent application for MMA as legs often are used to defend against strikes and become quite vulnerable to a switch into leg locks. It’s a fun look back into the old days long before the squad, early GSP and of course...legendary haircuts...Apologies for horrendous video and sound quality - this was all long before the modern marvels of digital cameras and smart phones.

Worried about forward stacking pressure when you’re going for your favorite submissions from bottom? Angle is your friend. Learn to RE-DIRECT forward stacking pressure by turning beyond perpendicular so that the forces of your submission hold COMPLIMENT your opponents stacking pressure rather than fight it. This will off balance your opponent and force him to either back off the pressure or get swept into an even worse situation. Make ANGLE a big part of your triangle and arm bar attacks from underneath and you will experience a lot more success from guard with your submission game!

Learn to prioritize: Sometimes it can seem like the many details and nuances that underlie the main moves of Jiu Jitsu can be a burden when it’s time to perform them in a competitive situation. As you try to remember them all it might seem they actually slow you down and become less efficient in your movement. Understand that the information has an order of priority. There are always one or two main ideas that are most responsible for the success or failure of the move and then come all the other details, usually in an order from most important to least important. For this reason it is crucial that you be able to list the three or four main details in (rough) order of importance (this will vary somewhat from one individual to another so make the list a personal one). In this way you will learn to focus on the small number of main ideas that make it work without being burdened by trying to satisfy too many demands of you afford every detail equal priority. In this way you can get information to work FOR you instead of AGAINST you - and that’s when the game becomes fun.

When in doubt...Jiu Jitsu is a complicated sport with a requirement on your part to learn a lot of information - sometimes it’s a good thing to have one simple idea or directive to give direction to all that information - this can be worth its weight in gold in a stressful match situation where it’s unclear what the next move ought to be. In ashi garami based leg locks - that simple directive is always GET AS CLOSE TO YOUR OPPONENT AS YOU CAN AND STAY THERE UNTIL THE JOB IS DONE. The vast majority of your opponents defense will involves loosening the connection of your ashi garami and then pulling away to free the knee of his trapped leg. SO FOCUS ON GETTING AS CLOSE AS YOU CAN AS EARLY AS YOU CAN AND STAY THERE. Only when you stay true to this simple directive can you apply all the other stuff you need to demonstrate your growing leg lock mastery.

You can make the strongest arm weak if you put it behind an opponents back: A huge part of Jiu Jitsu is the study of exploiting the inherent weaknesses of the human body. For example a sizable part of my approach to leg locking is built around the simple idea that shackling an opponents two ankles together strips him of most of the mobility required to escape the ashi garami he is caught in. Another classic example is the idea of shackling a prisoners hands behind his back - a simple insight that has successfully restrained countless strong men since the dawn of time. Try to take advantage of the fact that there is a dramatic difference between our strength potential when our arms are in front of us versus situations where are arms are pinned behind us. The most commonly seen application of this principle in Jiu Jitsu is with the kimura lock. Kimura is often disparaged as a strong mans move - but if you can reliably get the opponents hand behind his back you can apply it very well on the strongest of opponents. Here, Craig Jones does a fine job of quickly getting an opponents hand behind his back to set up many potential attack options and completely robbing his opponents arm of any strength.

When you encounter resistance - do you see closed doors or open doors? If there is one thing you can safely assume in combat sports it is that every opponent you ever face will resist every move you try upon him with as much tenacity and skill as he can muster. RESISTANCE TO EVERYTHING WE ATTEMPT is the basic feature of all combat sports and the thing that makes them realistic and effective. Now when you encounter resistance to your moves, your mind can react in two ways. The first is natural, but undesirable. This is to feel frustration and a sense of failure that your opponent identified the threat you created and stymied it. The second is created through training and is highly desirable. This is to see the resistance as a pathway to new attacking possibilities elsewhere. An opponent cannot close one door without opening others - YOU MUST HAVE FAITH IN THIS! Your job is to identify the new possibilities and act on them promptly. Here, Nicky Ryan has had an initial attempt at an arm drag partially stopped by an opponent - just a second after this photo was taken he had already gone into two subsequent attacks en route to victory. What do you see here? Where would you go? Could you do it under the pressure of match conditions within the time available? These are the questions you must constantly ask yourself on your march towards your Jiu Jitsu goals

The three routes to victory in combat sports - the first is to have such PERFECT EXECUTION of technique that it can be known and anticipated by an opponent but he simply cannot stop it (this usually requires a skill and/or athletic disparity (speed,strength or size) between the two athletes. - The second is based on SYSTEMATIC CONTROL where the idea is to have such a an elaborate system of set ups, controlling grips and positions that an opponent is gradually funneled into an ever more controlling predicament that increasingly limits his defensive options until escape becomes virtually impossible (this is typically only possible when extreme control and a slower pace is available which usually means ground techniques)
- The third is to be able to DECEIVE an opponent as to what your real intentions are and achieve a breakthrough via feint/fake/misdirection that creates an opening or weakness that can be exploited before he can detect the ruse and create an effective resistance (this is typically done more in speed based elements of combat sports usually standing techniques where speed is far easier to generate than on the ground)
Study all three methods - you will need them to break through against knowledgeable opponents

There is a strong relationship between guard passing and taking an opponents back: We normally think of passing an opponents guard to the side, or occasionally to mount; but some of the most commonly occurring and profitable opportunities come in situations where opponents turn into defensive turtle positions to prevent giving up passing points. YOU MUST BE ABLE TO CAPITALIZE UPON THESE OPPORTUNITIES!! Not only can you potentially score more points with a back take than a guard pass, but in addition you are now in the single best finishing position in the sport. Keep you eyes open for the back when passing!!! Be ready to capitalize immediately upon the great opportunities in front of you!!

My favorite way to pass guard: There are many effective ways to pass an opponents guard, each has their good and bad points - but if I had only one way to pass guard for the rest of my life I would unquestionably choose the method of FORCING MY WAY TO HALF GUARD AND PASSING FROM HALF GUARD. Of all the methods out there, this is in my experience the most versatile and the most high percentage. It works equally well gi or no gi, grappling and fighting. All my students excel at it and it figures very heavily in their passing game. No other method of passing can create such direct pressure upon the opponents head, which is a big part of why it is so successful in world championship competition. Next time you get stymied in a tricky guard, break it into two steps - force your way forward into half guard and then pass from there!

If you understand exactly what the main underlying body movement patterns of Jiu Jitsu are - you can shut them down - and if you can shut down the MOVEMENTS, then you can shut down the MOVES. The vast majority of the moves from bottom position, everything from pin escapes, guard retention, sweeps etc etc all involve the body movement of SHRIMPING (in its various manifestations). It stands to reason then, that if you study exactly what is required to shrimp your body, then you will know exactly what it is required to shut it down; and if you can shut down shrimping, you will have shut down any move from bottom position that is reliant upon shrimping to work. Shrimping always has three key elements. A planted foot, a moving hip and a moving head. If you can subvert any of those three elements, you can shut down the movement overall and any subsequent moves that were based on it. This is why I put a heavy emphasis upon learning the underlying solo body movements of Jiu Jitsu - not as a boring and fruitless warm up before class - but as a specialized study in its own right. Understand the movements and you can grasp how to shut them down. Shut down the movement and this shut down an opponents moves. Here, Nicky Rod does a good job stopping a shrimping movement at the head and hips to prevent any effective defense to his passing attack.

My philosophy of attack in Jiu Jitsu can be stated in a single sentence. Learn to attack the whole body with equal efficacy from top or bottom position, but if you have a choice, favor the back above all.

When you have a good position - TAKE YOUR TIME: One of the traits of good Jiu Jitsu players is that they know when they have to hustle and when they can slow things down. A great skill that you need to develop is that of CONSOLIDATION. When you get a good position - LET THE POSITION DO THE WORK FOR YOU. The only time you should be working hard is when you don’t have a good position. The whole purpose of good position is that it creates a situation where the other guy has to do more work than you do. If you are working harder than him when you are winning something is wrong. Next time you get a position take your physical tension down a notch and switch your effort to the mental game of plotting your next move. As the body relaxes, the mind gets more active and it’s the mind that will guide you to your next step.

What are your next two moves if this one fails? One of the great features of Jiu Jitsu is the relatively SLOW PACE in which the game operates compared with other combat sports. When a move is starting to fail - YOU CAN FEEL THE ONSET OF FAILURE before it happens. Take advantage of this fact. Make sure that you have the next two moves planned out ahead of time any time you enter into a given move. This will greatly increase your effectiveness on the mat. It’s not realistic to think too many moves out into the future - there are too many contingencies to cover for that to be realistic, but two is a a very doable and realistic number that will turn your failures into success. Start with your favorite positions and map out your best options when they fail in a particular way. I promise this will increase your win rate much faster than learning entirely new moves.

Grey zones: Most of the time in Jiu Jitsu we like to push the game towards certainties. We like the idea of positions where it’s known by both sides who has dominant position, who is winning and who is learning. However, as you rise in skill level there will be more and more occasions, the majority of most matches in fact, where the picture is much more grey. It is unclear who has advantage or disadvantage and the two athletes will have to improvise from unorthodox positions where it could go either way. Learning to navigate from uncontrolled scramble to dominance is not easy when you start. There are a thousand different directions you can go. My advice when this type of issue first arises in your training is simple. YOU CAN NEVER GO WRONG WITH THE BACK. Make the goal of every scramble your opponents back. This will give DIRECTION to your scrambles when everything just seems like a tumbling confusion. It’s not the ONLY option - there are many - but all things considered it’s probably the BEST option - so make that your first goal whenever your positioning is confusing and ambiguous - you can’t go wrong.

The biggest sale in BJJ Fanatics history!! The company I make instructional videos for @bjj.fanatics is having their biggest sale in the history of the company today through next week in response to the corona virus situation. Company directors Bernardo Faria and a Michael Zenga told me that there has been a great demand for video instruction during this time where regular training has been curtailed for most of us. They have just created a sale that is bigger even than the Black Friday sale! 42% off all my and the other instructors videos across the store! This one came out of nowhere as usually Black Friday is the biggest sale of the year but special times require special responses - sounds like a great idea to me! If you are interested check out the sale and build your knowledge!!!

Ever try to untie complex knot under pressure? Did getting emotional or hyped up or excited help you untie the knot? No - it never does. Jiu Jitsu is the task of untying many complex knots in a sequence under great pressure as an opponent is trying to tie you in knots - getting emotional isn’t going to help you there either. You will be amazed how much better you perform just by keeping a calm mind and a cold heart as other people get emotional around you. The best problem solvers know that a calm mind and spirit solves problems better than an emotionally fraught one. No matter how much one part of your mind screams at you - the conscious decision making part of your mind should stay calm - only then will you get the results that bring out the excitement!

The two most important parts of the body to control - head and hips: Never lose track of the big picture - we humans are vertebrates. Essentially we are a skull connected to a spine which is anchored to the hips and everything else hangs off that! As such the spine is the longest lever in the body and given that we always like to maximize our effectiveness by working at the ends of the lever - most of our strongest attempts to control the body must occur at head and hips. Whenever you feel lost out on the mat and nothing you do seems to work and control over your opponent seems an impossibility - renew you’re focus upon the head and hips - I am certain you will perform a little better

I am very happy to announce the release today of my 100% FREE video SELF MASTERY: BJJ SOLO TRAINING DRILLS. It is designed to help everyone get through any situation where you are denied regular training - in particular the corona crises. Just as a good boxer develops movement skills for his craft with shadow boxing - so too a grappler can do the same with shadow grappling. The problem most people have with solo drills is that they perform them as a simple warm up before class with zero mental engagement. Done in this way they have little value because the student never gets to associate the movement with an actual combat skill. Only when you know THE WHY AND THE PURPOSE of the movement and actively IMAGINE/VISUALIZE a competitive sparring situation as you perform the movement in a spontaneous/realistic fashion (not a mechanical and thoughtless warm up) do they make a difference to your sport performance. Of course nothing will ever replace the primacy of partner drills and sparring as the major source of progress in the sport, but I do firmly believe in the value of a combination of movement drills/shadow grappling, a good physical training program to enhance strength, flexibility and endurance (I leave that to the athlete to choose their program as preference varies a lot and there is no evidence showing any one method to be demonstrably better than the others for grappling purposes) and knowledge acquisition through video analysis/learning either by watching great athletes (if you have the necessary observational skill) or instructional videos. If you can make positive strides in those three directions you will most certainly not deteriorate in skill and you will set yourself up for very rapid improvement when you return. This free video is designed to help you with the first of those three training directions. If you are interested, check it out at @bjj.fanatics Wishing you all the best progress possible through this time away from training - stay healthy and stay sharp!

Training alone - Three directions to make genuine progress when you can’t be in the dojo: Whenever I have students who can’t make it to the dojo for regular training I always encourage to work hard in three specifics ways. The first is to put time into solo movement drills/training. Every sport has a unique set of postural and movement demands required to play efficiently - those of Jiu Jitsu put an extraordinary emphasis on floor movement, especially from supine (back on the floor) positions. The more efficiently you exhibit the underlying movements of a sport, the better you will perform the moves and the faster you will learn new ones. Second, stay in good shape. Jiu Jitsu is a contact sport where physicality plays a big role in the outcome. This is an opportunity to increase your overall physical prowess with gains in strength and flexibility. Over the years I have seen every variation of strength and conditioning program. No one method stood out as obviously superior to the others. I’ve never seen an athlete or group of athletes take on a new strength program and suddenly get dramatically better results than they were previously. Find a program that suits you and which you enjoy and which has a proven record among respected athletes and trainers and you can’t go wrong. Third, seek to increase your knowledge of the sport in all aspects. Knowledge is power. Very often just knowing one new piece of information can get you a win where previously you would have lost. Video is the preferred method of knowledge acquisition when the dojo is closed. Study the games of the great athletes past and present, if you find that difficult due to inexperience (at championship level the action is sometimes difficult to understand or confusing or unclear), instructional videos from your favorite athletes are a great alternative. Using this three directional approach means that when you return your body will move better, you will be stronger and more flexible and your mind will know more - this will set you up for rapid progress rather than deterioration during your time off. It has worked for all my athletes and it will work for you too!

Special announcement: corona virus: Over the last few days the Jiu Jitsu community world wide has faced a situation that is entirely unprecedented in the history of our sport - the majority of students and schools will have to cease regular training. We all accept that there will be many times we have to stay away from the mats - injuries, family commitments, travel etc etc can all keep us out of the dojo - but this is different, we will all be kept away at the same time despite being physically able to train. I have received a vast number of requests for advice on how to train and improve while unable to attend the dojo. Last night I called the team at BJJ fanatics and jumped on a train to Boston to film a video on exactly that question. BJJ Fanatics will release the video in the next few days (after editing) FOR FREE. It’s yours. I want to do this for the BJJ Community. Jiu Jitsu has given me the best times of my life and now I want to give something back to Jiu Jitsu during the worst time for the sport. One thing I have always loved about this game is the passion and commitment of the people involved in it. Every day I see men and women from all walks of life make incredible sacrifices to get to their Jiu Jitsu goals - this ones for you. The video covers how to train effectively by yourself so that when this crazy time is over and we all get back to the business of snapping limbs and strangling each other unconscious, you are better than you were before this damn virus screwed things up. I cover my favorite solo drills that I use whenever I’m beat up, traveling or just unable to get on the mat. I explain exactly what the link between the solo movement and the actual combat skill along with an actual workout program you can use solo to boost your skill level. Remember - every MOVE in this sport has an underlying MOVEMENT that makes it possible. Without the movement, the move won’t happen. Training your movement skills will enhance your performance of the moves when you get back in action. BJJ Fanatics just needs to edit it and then release in a couple of days. I’m on the train home now, tired but happy - wishing you all the best - stay safe and stay on track

When you can’t get the breakthrough with your hands - strangle with your legs: Probably the most common source of frustration when you attempt to strangle from the back is your opponents defensive hand fighting and chin positioning that prevents you getting a clean strangle. Indeed, concerns over exactly this problem was the motivation behind my back strangle system where we use our legs to trap defensive arms and if necessary, strangle over a defensive jaw (mandible strangles) - these signature techniques are often brilliantly used by my students to get breakthroughs where most people experience failure. Nonetheless, there is always going to be that day you simply can’t get through the defenses with your arms. In those cases, it’s time for you to make use of the impressive strangling power of the LEGS - using the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku). I don’t Carr how strong your opponent is - his hands aren’t as strong as both your legs - the rear triangle will overcome hands and give you additional arm lock and wrist lock options that virtually guarantee a finish. There is no question that strangles with the arms are the most high percentage finishes from the back - always use them first. But when they aren’t working be ready to switch to legs and get the finish!

Lost time? There are not many certainties in Jiu Jitsu but here is one - AT SOME POINTS YOU WILL HAVE TO TAKE TIME AWAY FROM THE MATS. It may be due to an injury, a personal crises, family problems, financial issue - or in this cases - unanticipated pandemic. I am sure many of you are faced now with the prospect of time away from the dojo due to this problem. A natural question to ask is - is this going to ruin my hard won progress? The answer is - THAT DEPENDS ON YOU. My crippled leg and resultant problems meant I often had to take periods of time off. One case that occurred when I was a white belt may be of some relevance to your situation now. I tore my knee meniscus practicing drop seoi nage (I always had a love/hate relationship with that throw - I love its effectiveness but it was hell on my crippled knee - if you have normal healthy knees it’s fine and a throw you all ought to study in depth). I tried to train through it but kept re- injuring it and so finally agreed to just take time off and let it rest. I took off two months. In that time I practiced whatever solo drills i could perform every day. As I performed them I visualized performing them on a sparring partner in live training. Then I performed callesthenic training to maintain strength and stretched. In free time I would watch video (video in those days was old VCR cassettes with terrible picture quality 😂😂) I tried to gain understanding of set ups, tricks and mechanics of the stand out athletes of that time. When my knee finally felt better I went back to the dojo with some trepidation - I think we all feel that we will get crushed by everyone as they have all been training hard in our absence. In my first returning class I was matched with a blue belt who always used to beat me and to my absolute shock I easily triangled him with a simple set up I had observed and practiced in my solo drills. I submitted him twice more that night despite never having done it before. I say this only to illustrate the point that TIME OFF DOES NOT HAVE TO BE TIME LOST. Keep your body in shape, your mind active, and use solo drills as a boxer uses shadow boxing and you can come back better than ever!

Gaining a superpower: Imagine if you were offered to power of being able to see five seconds into the future. Would it not make you almost impossible to defeat in combat? You could literally avoid or counter any move before it can be applied against you. In a way - Jiu Jitsu gives you that superpower. One of the great benefits of physical control over an opponent is the RESTRICTIONS ON POSSIBILITIES it imposes upon him. A match or fight can be a wild and unpredictable affair. We have no idea what our opponent will do at the onset of a match - but as we get further and further into the business of control we cut down our opponents movement options into a few predictable alternatives. By the time we get to finishing positions a good Jiu Jitsu player can literally read the future as there are only a couple of realistic options for an opponent to take. YOU MUST LEARN TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS INCREDIBLE POWER TO KNOW WHAT AN OPPONENT WILL DO AHEAD OF TIME. From all your favorite finishing positions, map out the few realistic counters and plan your counters to those counters. Then work backwards from the finish all the way to the set up, mapping out the main reactions to your best moves. You will be pleasantly surprised by how few realistic reactions there are to the more controlling positions in the sport. This means that once you gain advantage, you will be able to funnel an opponent into progressively fewer and fewer options as you work towards finishing positions. When you know where an opponent will be and what he will be doing a few seconds from now - your job will be a LOT easier.

Life takes us in many directions - but you can always come back to Jiu Jitsu: Many people appear to think that my Jiu Jitsu coaching began with the rise of the squad - in fact it began more than a decade before the squad first came to prominence. I was known mostly for coaching the link between Jiu Jitsu and MMA to great athletes like Georges St Pierre and Chris Weidman. Yet during that time I had many very fine Jiu Jitsu students as well. Most of them chose not to compete or just compete locally since grappling was not a lucrative sport in those days and most of the focus in the gym was on MMA preparation. One of those early students was Steve Williams. He was among my first black belts long before the squad. In time he moved away to Las Vegas to pursue a music career. Almost a decade later he returned to NYC and began training with the squad back in the basement where he learned his craft. Recently he entered some local competitions to see if his game could still hang with all the changes of Jiu Jitsu in recent years - this video captures some of the action. We all have different forces pulling on us in our lives - we never know which direction we will take - but through it all, you can always return to Jiu Jitsu. Your skills can get rusty, your body can get out of shape, but you can always come back and those skills you worked so hard on will come back quickly and once again shine like the edge of a knife. Great to see skills return and an old school black belt can still shine after all these years 😜

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video in the GO FURTHER FASTER Fundamentals series - PASSING GUARD - which focuses on two of the most important skills in all of Jiu Jitsu top game - opening a closed guard and passing an open guard. Ninety percent of our time in Jiu Jitsu is spent either in bottom position retaining/attacking from open guard or passing guard from top position - MAKE SURE THIS FUNDAMENTAL FACT IS REFLECTED IN YOUR TRAINING TIME! As always I present not just a collection of favorite moves, but a complete program to get the job done from start to finish against a skilled opponent. The focus is on the most high percentage guard passing moves in the sport - not the flashiest or coolest - but the ones that really work at the highest levels and work across all belt levels, all weight categories and all types of opponent. If you are interested check out the link in my bio! Wishing you all the best with this crucial part of the game! 😊😊

When you can pass guard you get to choose the battleground: The beauty of guard passing is that it enables you to put yourself in positions where your opponent cannot use his best weapons - his LEGS - to defend and attack from bottom position. It creates an immediate and devastating ASYMMETRY where you can attack at will whilst your opponent can only defend. A second great benefit is that you can now attack the whole body and choose where you want to to attack - legs, arms or neck. No other positional skill opens up so much variation in submission choice as guard passing - there is a reason why it is the centerpiece of the top positional game in Jiu Jitsu - make it the centerpiece of your game too!

Fighting the big guys - the story of Nick Ronan: This weekend in England, talented junior Nick Ronan entered the Polaris Grappling Grand Prix qualifier tournament in Bristol UK and won gold. What makes this a really interesting story is that Mr Ronan weighs less than 170 pounds and this was an open weight tournament with many of his opponents weighing over 240 pounds and higher belts. Now my advice to my students when they take on the big boys is always the same - FOCUS YOUR ATTACKS UPON THE BACK AND THE LEGS - for these are the areas of the body in which strength and size play the least role in the outcome. The human body is set up in such a way that no one can apply much strength behind themselves and with regards the legs, dexterity, positioning and knowledge play a much bigger role in the outcome than size. Nick Ronan did exactly that - winning every match by heel hook or back attack. When you take on the big men - focus your attacks on the back and the legs and get the breakthroughs! Now Nick Ronan is qualified to enter the Grand Prix tournament and compete against some of the most famous heavyweights in the world!

Big wins at a fun day of competition at local event for Gordon Ryan and Nathalia Santoro: Gordon Ryan and partner Nathalia Santoro spontaneously entered a local grappling tournament Grappling Industries in Ohio at the Arnold Classic fitness event while traveling for a seminar. Gordon winning every match by submission probably did not surprise anyone, but Nathalia, who has not been doing Jiu Jitsu very long entered the expert division and won every match via leg lock submission! This is a fantastic achievement for a blue belt who started the game quite late in life and who had no background in martial arts whatsoever. I always love to see episodes like this as they show what is possible with hard training and a good plan in a relatively short time frame. Ms Santoro trains alongside her partner in crime every day and has made incredible progress and today was her day to show off that progress. She hit a blitz of heel hooks and Achilles locks to take the gold! Congratulations Nathalia!

Do leg lockers need to be able to pass an opponents guard? I question i am often asked is whether athletes who specialize in leg locks even need to bother with guard passing - after all, can’t they just directly attack the legs and forego the whole notion of getting an opponents guard? Certainly if you were very good at leg locking you could employ this strategy, but it would soon run into problems. The problem with this line of thinking is fourfold. First, it makes you very predictable - that’s never a good thing in combat sports, as opponents will soon figure out what your game is and adjust themselves accordingly. Very soon it will be exceedingly difficult to get the breakthrough with leg locks alone. Secondly, it largely removes what is perhaps the single biggest determinant of success or failure in grappling in general and leg locks in particular- physical and tactical PRESSURE OVER TIME that melts opponents so that they are far easier to defeat in the tenth minute than they were in the first minute and which creates distraction so that as an opponents defends guard passing he is easier to leg lock and as he defends leg locks he is easier to pass. Third, the whole idea of the leg lock revolution that my students started was to attack 100% of the human body, rather than just the traditional upper 50% of the body. When you refuse to pass guard, you simply make the same mistake in reverse - now you can only attack the lower 50% of the human body and the entire arsenal of upper body submissions is denied to you. It would be a sad thing to launch a revolution against attacking half the human body and end up doing the same thing only substituting lower body for upper body. Fourth, the most effective submission holds of them all - strangles - require you to get to the upper body. No guard passing ability means no strangles from top position. As much as I love leg locks, there are always going to be some opponents who simply refuse to tap to them and will fight in with badly damaged legs. You need to be able to pull out the heavy artillery and strangle them unconscious - so you need to be able to get past the legs to the upper body - even if you love leg locks!

Garry Tonon opens his new school and gets promoted to Second Dan: It was great going out to The wilds of New Jersey and seeing the grand opening bod Garry Tonons new school! He has amassed a fine group of students and is doing an excellent job showing them the kingly art of Jiu Jitsu at @brunswickbjj Even though Mr Tonon is world renown as the most exciting grappler on the planet he does a truly excellent job teaching all aspects of Jiu Jitsu including the more mundane but absolutely crucial fundamentals, so that all ages and body types can be effective on the mat. Joining us were Gordon Ryan, who received his first degree promotion and Garry’s first coach and mentor, Tom DeBlass. It’s a very proud moment for me to see the all round success of my students, not just personal success on the stage, but community success through teaching and mentorship which expands and improves the sport we all love so much. Congratulations to Garry and all his students on the new school!

Sometimes you just know you done f**ked up...One of the surest signs of progress in Jiu Jitsu is understanding WHY you lost. We all know that feeling of “oh no...i just f**ked up.” Its good that you have those feelings - it’s a sign of progress. The worst feeling is getting beating and not knowing why or how - then you cannot even begin to improve your performance. Losing is never a pleasant thing, but losing and NOT KNOWING WHY is completely intolerable since it takes away the VALUE OF LOSING AS A LEARNING EXPERIENCE. Whenever you lose a match or experience some form of failure that feel is important, never just take the loss and move on. The idea is to analyze it and make corrections. Losing is entirely normal and completely forgivable - but losing without analysis and modification to create a better you is not. Just as important as your training sessions are you post training debriefings, where you must go through the good and bad aspects of the session and propose changes for the next one. Only when each session is followed by analysis can one session benefit the next and progress over time be made. Your physical training training stops the moment you leave the mat, but your mental training does not.

Some areas of Jiu Jitsu are an endless ocean of moves - some have only a few: Of all the skill sets in Jiu Jitsu, the one that has the fewest options is probably OPENING A CLOSED GUARD. There are relatively few methods of doing this that work reliably in a competitive match. The same methods you learn in a beginner class will be the same methods you learn in a black belt class - just performed better. The basic demand to attain a strong working posture and get up to your feet admits only a few variations. This is a skill that you really need since there you cannot even begin to PASS a guard until you can OPEN a guard. There are not many moves to learn that are actually effective - but the skill is a difficult one as your opponent can set many traps as you try to posture and rise and so ironically the skill of opening a classed guard is among the first skills you will learn - but one of the last you will master. There may not be many moves to learn, but they are not easy to perform on a skilled opponent.

Nothing good comes from standing directly in front of your opponents feet and knees - get to your angles! The legs are the center of Jiu Jitsu. When you’re in bottom position, everything is about keeping your legs between you and your opponent. When you’re in top position it’s all about getting past his legs. Whenever you are playing top game, LOOK TO GET OFFLINE AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE AND AS OFTEN AS POSSIBLE and you will soon be much more successful. Your hands are not strong enough to move an opponents legs by themselves - so use your hands only to temporarily immobilize his legs just long enough to step to an angle. Once you get a good angle outside the legs, your opponent is now in a defensive cycle and is now primarily concerned with retaining his guard rather than attacking you - that means you can focus on passing his guard rather than defending sweeps and submissions - and that will help make you much more successful in top position!

Victory in Boston! At the BJJ Fanatics 170 pound tournament tonight junior squad members Oliver Taza and Ethan Crelinsten defeated some very tough and talented opponents to get to the finals while Gordon Ryan defeated Pat Downy in a submission grappling match via submission and lost the return freestyle wrestling match via tech fall. Obviously Gordon Ryan can quickly and easily win via submission against a wrestler and no one would be impressed by this, so instead Mr Ryan’s main mission tonight was to show that a Jiu Jitsu athlete can be very competitive with even an elite wrestler in the standing position within an ADCC/IBJJF type rule set - this he certainly did. Under ADCC rules he did not concede a takedown and took down his distinguished national champion opponent twice. Mr Downy appeared very tired (wrestling matches are a very fast paced six minutes while Jiu Jitsu matches like the one tonight have a totally different pace and look). At around fifteen minutes Gordon Ryan applied a move commonly used in wrestling, a power half Nelson and Mr Downey strangely submitted, probably from fatigue as there was no actual submission hold in place. It was an impressive thing to watch a Jiu Jitsu athlete score in the standing position against such a distinguished wrestler. In the freestyle match of course it was a different story as Mr Downey expertise in pressure and pace got him quick push out and takedown points and then turns on the ground in par terre. For Oliver Taza, this was his career best performance tonight - defeating the very talented PJ Barch and John Combs via submission en route to the final. Ethan Crelinsten was the smallest man of the tournament, weighing only 145 pounds in a 170 pound tournament and showed tremendous heart to win his way to the final against substantially bigger and stronger opponents. It was a great night for the squad and a fun mix of rules from around the grappling world! Hope you enjoyed the show!! Wishing you all the best from Boston!

On the road! Gordon Ryan (certifiably most dangerous driver in the United States - even more deadly than Garry Tonon and Renzo), Nathalia and myself on the road to Boston for the BJJ Fanatics Grand Prix tournament. Mr Ryan will compete in a fascinating combination of matches against the outstanding United States national freestyle wrestling team member Pat Downey who represented our nation with distinction at the last world championships. The two men will compete in each of their specialized domains. First they will do a no time limit submission only grappling match - which clearly favors Mr Ryan; and then a freestyle wrestling match (both athletes will have to wear wrestling shoes and singlet and follow all current rules of the sport) - which clearly favors Mr Downey. It will be fascinating to see two elite level athletes compete in both their speciality and an unfamiliar sport back to back! Hope you all enjoy the show! See you in Boston!

Your head is a heavy weight at the end of the longest lever of the human body - learn to use it effectively: The average human head weighs just over ten pounds (around 4.5kg) and is positioned at the end of the longest lever in the human body - the spine. As such it can be used to supply a surprising amount of weight in directions you need if used correctly. Look how Gordon Ryan uses head position to nullify what could be a dangerous underhook. Learning to use the PLACEMENT of your own head and the DISPLACEMENT of your opponents head is a big part of what it means to maximize the nature of the human body to advantage. Ten pounds may not seem like much, but when it’s connected to a long lever it can get very heavy indeed as that lever gets lowered over your target. Think about connecting a ten pound dumbbell to a good sized stick and then holding the other end of the stick in your hand. As long as you keep the stick vertical it is quite manageable - but as soon as you lower the weighted end of that stick it quickly becomes a very heavy burden indeed! Learn to use your head in similar ways and you can become a burden to even a very strong opponent in ways that can point you towards victory

Dual threat: Nothing creates a sense of dread in an opponent more than having to deal with multiple serious threats at the same time. Whenever you create one threat, your opponent must respond with a counter. When you present two simultaneous threats it is difficult for him to counter one because that counter to the first threat will often expose him to the second. As a result many opponents will freeze in the face of dual or triple threats and become much more controllable than usual. Here, Garry Tonon creates a dual threat - one at the upper body with Kimura and a lower body threat with inside foot position whilst facing the hips (making for a very easy entrance into ashi garami variations if he should lose the kimura). Now the opponent has to defend both at the same time resulting in a situation where he simply has to hold his arm last and feet together defensively and thus preventing movement that would actually make escape possible. The result? An immobilized opponent. In this way you can see that THREAT is as effective for immobilization purposes as pins

Open guard - off balancing forward and backwards: A distinguishing characteristic of great guard players is their constant use of KUZUSHI or off balancing skills as a precursor to their big attacks. The main directions of kuzushi from guard are forwards and backwards (there are some good off balancing moves side to side especially when wearing a gi, but most or forwards and backwards). When you go to off balance someone FORWARDS from open guard, the best methods usually involve a PULL WITH YOUR UPPER BODY AND A PUSH WITH YOUR LOWER BODY; whilst off balances in BACKWARD directions usually (though not always) involve a PUSH WITH UPPER BODY AND A PULL WITH LOWER BODY. The idea is to create a simultaneous application of two forces at two locations in opposite directions - THAT’S what knocks an opponent off balance and creates the kuzushi you will need to break through a tough opponents stance and posture and get your moves to work!

The single greatest step you can make in combat sports, and the insight that forms the core of my coaching philosophy, is to see combat as primarily A PUZZLE TO BE SOLVED WITH THE MIND rather than a frightening or exhilarating ORDEAL TO BE ENDURED AND OVERCOME WITH THE BODY AND CHARACTER.

Understanding your legs: A distinguishing characteristic of Jiu Jitsu is the tremendous emphasis out upon grappling your opponent primarily with your LEGS. The guard position in all its many variations is stressed more than any other. It is important therefore that you understand the broad principles that enable your legs to be an effective weapon in the fight from bottom position. Understand that the HIPS are the engine room of the guard position. They provide the power and position that underlies guard play. By shifting side to side and slowing you to move between seated and supine positions they can out you in a position to attack and defend effectively. The KNEES are your shield in defense - the closer to your torso the stronger your defense - as long as you present two knees in front or around your opponents waist/hips (open and closed guard) or around one of his legs (half guard ) you are defensively sound and have the possibility of offense from underneath. Your FEET solidify the connection/grip of your legs upon your opponent. They transmit the power of your hips and knees in meaningful ways to your opponents body. Don’t just touch your opponent with your feet - GRIP him with your feet - and you will be able to use your legs as you do your arms. We spend all our lives using our hands and arms for a multitude of difficult tasks without thought - Jiu Jitsu asks you to do the same with your feet and legs - when you do, you will be a very dangerous opponent from underneath.

Squad rampage: The squad went hunting for medals last night in Florida at Sub Stars grappling event. Ethan Crelinsten fought above his weight class against Enrico Cocco and came out victorious. Nicky Ryan took on MMA champion JZ Calvacante and winter with a devastating heel hook. Nicky Rod took on black belt Roosevelt Sousa and won via strangle. In the main event Gordon Ryan took on Tex Johnson and won easily with a stranglehold kata gatame. Victory over high level opponents is not the only goal of Jiu Jitsu, not the deepest goal - but it certainly is a good sign that your training program is going in the right directions. Hope you all enjoyed the show - thanks also to Garry Tonon doing a fine job cornering fellow athletes to victory when he could not compete himself due to suffering a cut in training a few days before the event.

Make sure you know the antidote to your own poisons...We all have our favorite submissions. As you get better at them you will inevitably run into opponents who see their effectiveness and want to use them against you as you have against them. It’s very important you know as much about DEFENDING your favorite submissions as you do attacking. There is an added benefit to this training. Learning to defend a submission is like learning it backwards - it offers fresh perspectives on a move you already know and makes you look at the move from different angles and points of view that often boosts your knowledge for offense as well as defense. Know your moves from the perspective of both attacker AND defender and you will gain deeper knowledge and avoid falling victim to your own poison!

What scenarios must you be effective from in open guard? The vast majority of guard play in Jiu Jitsu is from open guard. There are many variations of open guard and the sheer amount of material you need to learn can seem overwhelming at times. Rest assured however that when you look at open guard in terms of the NUMBER OF POSSIBLE SCENARIOS FROM WHICH YOU MUST BE EFFECTIVE (a rather small number) rather than the NUMBER OF POSSIBLE MOVES (an extremely large number) then things seem much more manageable. Your opponent has three options - kneeling, one knee on floor and standing (within the standing category there is a particularly important option - the split squat, often referred to as “headquarters” position (I’m not sure why). You have two options, you can be seated or you can be supine. So the number of possible general scenarios is not so big. You will need at least a couple of trusted and effective moves in each of those scenario combinations. Seen in this light you can see it’s a very manageable project. My favorite move when I’m seated and my opponent is on his knees has always been the hook sweep (essentially a ground version of the sumi gaeshi standing sacrifice throw). It works equally well gi and no gi and combines extremely well with many other moves - particularly leg locks. Make sure your training program covers all the scenarios of open guard and soon you will be able to attack regardless of which scenario you may find yourself in 😜

The easiest way to expand your repertoire of moves: As we make progress we are constantly looking to add new weapons to our arsenal. As a general rule, the more weapons were are skilled in using, the more dangerous we will be to our opponents. However, developing new skills is time consuming and as we devote lots of time to new skills, inevitably we have to dedicate less time to maintaining old skills which can be detrimental to our game. Probably the easiest way to develop new skills is to LEARN NEW VARIATIONS OF MOVES YOU ARE ALREADY GOOD AT. This requires relatively little training time, since the new skills are closely related to existing skills and complements, rather than harms existing skills. Think about the triangle. Most Jiu Jitsu athletes know it well and can perform it solidly. Yet when we say THE triangle, usually we mean the FRONT triangle - the most common variation in Jiu Jitsu. There are FIVE major variations of the triangle - front, side, rear, reverse and “back to front” (hantai sankaku). You can greatly expand your submission Arsenal just by adding the other four variations at little cost in training time. For almost any move you favor you can do similar things. Jiu Jitsu moves usually have several important variations, which are related to each other, yet different in important ways so that in practice they perform almost like different moves. Do this with all your favorite moves and in a short time you can triple your offensive arsenal! Here, Georges St Pierre works on variations of the triangle to expand his repertoire

Routes to the back: In a grappling match there is no more dominant position that getting behind your opponent. It is up to us to master all the major routes to the back if we are maximize our potential in the sport. While there are several good paths to the back, the simplest and most direct will always be that of getting past your opponents hands and elbows. There are vast number of ways to do this, and opportunity is everywhere, given that most of the time the two opponents are facing each other and trying to come to grips. It doesn’t matter whether you are standing or on the ground, top or bottom, gi or no gi - EVERYTHING GETS EASIER WHEN YOU GET BEHIND AN OPPONENT. Understand that the METHOD of getting there are PHYSICAL, but the RECOGNITION OF OPPORTUNITY is MENTAL. Until you make the mental step of seeing the opportunity, the physical act of getting there will not happen - so train your mind to see the opportunity to take the back every time it occurs - your game will never be the same.

When you can separate knee and elbow you can pass and pin: One of the main difficulties associated with passing the guard of a trained opponent is separating his knee and elbow on the side towards which you are passing. As long as your opponent keeps his knee and elbow framed together you will not have the space required to establish chest to chest contact and though you may have passed his LEGS/HIPS - you have not passed his GUARD. Learn to understand the need to separate knee and elbow as part of the guard passing process and you will have a lot more success getting to your pins. Don’t be satisfied with the superficial action of getting past the legs and hips - this has little effect on a skilled opponent. Even as you are doing that, start plotting how you lever apart his knee and elbow so that you can actually profit from passing the legs/hips and get your score. Here, Garry Tonon does a fine job of keeping knee and elbow far apart as he exerts his passing pressure and is rewards with a gap big enough to drive a truck through - result? A clean pass to a controlling pin.

Getting our Australian and Canadian students ready for competition is always one of my favorite parts of the job...

Harnessing The incredible potential power of the spine: As a general rule the human body is a rather feeble thing - it does however have two remarkable sources of power - the hips and the spine. If you wish to be capable of defeating big strong and athletically gifted opponents - you must be able to maximize your use of both. With regards the spine, it has remarkable weight bearing properties when made into an ARCH. The spine can arch in two ways. The first is forward rounding of the spine that makes your spine into the shape of the bottom of a rocking chair. The second is a backwards rounding often referred to as a back bridge. Both methods enable a smaller person to carry and move shocking amounts of weight. Here, Gordon Ryan, a master of arching the spine forwards into the rocking chairs hair that enables inversion and elevation gets a big man moving in the directions he wants so that he can enter the legs. You must make spinal training a part of your daily regimen - it’s effects will directly benefit your Jiu Jitsu. Daily inversion/folding and bridging will give you an arch that can carry a heavy load and move an opponent as you want.

Why does Jiu Jitsu put such an emphasis on passing guard? From your first lesson in Jiu Jitsu you were told that if you are in top position your first priority is to get past your opponents legs and pass his guard. The reasons for this are important. A fundamental principle of Jiu Jitsu is to seek always an asymmetry in attacking potential in your favor. We always want situations where you can attack your opponent more readily and in more devastating fashion than he can attack you. The best way you can do this is to get past your opponents legs. Almost All of the major submissions and strikes from bottom position require the use of your legs. If you get past those there is very little to be concerned with. You on the other hand, now have a vast array of strikes and submissions that you can use. Even in matches that don’t give points for guard passing it is still very much worth your while to pass an opponents guard just to be able to exploit this desirable asymmetry where you can attack at will whilst an opponent can barely attack at all. Think about a situation where you had no guard passing ability whatsoever. What kind of offense could you apply to your opponent from top position? You would be limited to leg locks - you could only attack 50% of the human body. Interestingly, when you can only attack the lower body your leg locks become predictable and easy to defend. When you can pass guard you can attack the whole body - you still have the leg lock option (even better leg locks because your opponent doesn’t know if you will be passing or leg locking) and now arms locks and strangles as well. The whole realm of strangles only opens up when you can pass guard - and strangles are the single most high percentage finishes of them all. So even if you are, as I obviously am, a lover of the leg lock game, KEEP WORKING YOUR PASSING GAME AS THE FOUNDATION OF TOP GAME JIU JITSU. Only then will you be able to fulfill my ideal of Jiu Jitsu - to attack the whole body rather than half of it.

Patience is a virtue: A very natural feeling in combat sports is that speed is the greatest virtue. In many combat sports there is a lot of truth to that. In Jiu Jitsu however, because the majority of the action is on the floor where speed is limited and in close connection to another body - an even greater impediment to fast movement - speed rarely proves to be the deciding factor in the application of a given move. Our minds however, often don’t get this message, and tell us to frantically work to apply a move quickly before the opportunity is lost. In the majority of cases however, especially those performed from a dominant position, it is usually the cases that a slower and more purposeful application of moves gets the job done better. The whole purpose of dominant position is to LET THE POSITION DO THE WORK FOR YOU. Relax and take your time - he’s not going anywhere and as long as the positions maintained it does not matter how many times you fail in the application of the next move because the position is still there to try again until you achieve the breakthrough you seek. Here, Gordon Ryan, young master of back control and finishing, characteristically works at a slow and methodical pace towards a finish

Match your strength against his weakness - the triangle: Jiu Jitsu is a grappling style focused almost entirely upon the use of your LEGS to control an opponent. The best scenarios are those that match the strongest part of your body - your legs and hips - against his upper body. This is how a smaller person can defeat a bigger person. The quintessential example of this is the triangle. It directly matches your legs and hips against an opponents head/neck and one arm. Learn to enter into the five major variations of the triangle from any position, too or bottom, and you will dramatically improve your ability to make your legs the centerpiece of your control game and at the same time, be able to submit an opponent in a number of different ways. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of the triangle, ties up an opponent and now has his choice of how and when to finish

It doesn’t matter if most of your body is in bottom position when your hips are on top of your opponents hips: A distinctive feature of closed guard is that even though your body as a whole is in bottom position, your HIPS are in top position on top of your opponents hips - and your hips are the most important part of your body when it comes to grappling. Learn to take advantage of this fact. Here, Gordon takes advantage of top hip position from bottom closed guard to threaten a sweep and play off the defensive reactions to this threat. He has come up so effectively that the whole idea of bottom position is moot at this point. The beauty of sweeping from position featuring top hip position is that any successful sweep will lead directly to a mounted pin after the sweep - greatly adding to the effect.

Can you feel the tension? Learning to read your opponents body is a key skill in all combat sports. At any given moment in a grappling match your opponent will be applying his strength at a certain INTENSITY and DIRECTION. You must be cognizant of this at all times, for this is the best guide as to what you ought to be doing as the match unfolds. Understand that as an opponent strongly resists a given move, that resistance will be applied in a direction resistant to that initial move. That tension can be exploited in two ways. The first is to continue the move and power through the resistance. If you began strongly this will often works. In many cases you will feel a rapid rise in tension in your opponents body. This is like the tension being wound up in a spring. If you successfully break through the resistance you will often find that the resistance creates a spring loaded effect that redoubles the effect of the original move and the opponent literally flies with the move. Here, Nicky Ryan awards an opponent some frequent flyer miles as the initial resistance to his sweep creates a breakthrough point with considerable energy behind it that results in an ass over head double whammy effect - very satisfying. The second way is to suddenly change to a second move that exploits the opponents defensive reaction by going in the same direction as the resistance - this too can result in some quite spectacular sweeps and throws and flying the unfriendly skies. Keep alert to that tension and watch the amplitude of your sweeps double overnight!

The only thing better than one well applied force is two well applied forces: A central concept in Jiu Jitsu is directionality of force. A force applied in the right direction at the right time can produce spectacular effects, whilst that same force applied in an inappropriate direction will produce negligible results. The greatest effects come when you learn to couple forces - to apply forces in opposing directions at the same time upon your opponent. This creates powerful turning forces that can greatly amplify the effects of submissions, sweeps and takedowns. Look for this whenever you can - Jiu Jitsu is full of examples. A scissor is a fine example of this principle in everyday life. Jiu Jitsu takes that same mechanical principle and applied it in variations of the scissor sweep. Here I use a spider guard variation of the scissor sweep to create a considerable turning force upon a training partner. Whenever you see opportunity to use this principle - and there a MANY in Jiu Jitsu - use it and emphasize it - you will like the results!

Barriers: @blondefighter Katlyn Chookagian was stopped in the third round by the great champion Valentina Schevchenko tonight here in Houston. Ms Schevchenko showed her championship pedigree with a powerful performance both on the feet and the floor, winning via TKO with strikes from a very well applied side crucifix after an excellent upper body takedown. What makes me proud of the athletes i work with is never the events result - that is never fully determined by us - but rather their preparation for the event - which IS determined by us. Ms Chookagian May not have won the championship tonight but she showed a champions mindset with her preparation. She gave her all in camp and got to the best level possible in the time available. She fought with courage, holding nothing back - there is nothing more any of us can do than that. Barriers are in front of all of us. Some we can rise over without much effort. Some can stop us in our tracks. The greatest test of who we are is our reaction to those barriers, both as we approach them and try to climb them. Ms Chookagian’s first reaction backstage was to ask when she can get back to training and start climbing barriers again. She took only superficial damage so it won’t take long for the journey to begin again soon. Whatever the outcome may have been - That’s a champion right there 😊😊wishing you all the best from Texas! Hope you all enjoyed the show! Thanks as always to the team! @mcmahon_pj @babyfacebenoit @coachmarkhenry @kycerm for all their great work in preparation

Blonde fighter ready for action!
@blondefighter weighed in successfully today in Houston Texas for her bout tomorrow night at UFC 247 against the great Valentina Schevchenko. As always she has prepared very professionally for what is without doubt the greatest challenge of her career against arguably the greatest pound for pound female fighter on the planet. There is a real big fight big show atmosphere here in Houston with a great fight card filled with MMA super stars and talent. Looking forward to working with Mark Henry, the Renzo Gracie academy Muay Thai team and Katlyn’s wrestling coach and husband Kyle Cerminara. Hope you all enjoy the big show tomorrow night!

Open guard is a four limbed beast - not two: The mistake complete beginners make when learning open guard is to grapple with their arms. This is totally hopeless. Soon they wise up and start focusing on their legs as the basis of open guard. This is MUCH better, but over emphasis on the legs alone creates an over defensive open guard - hard to pass but not very dangerous. ONLY WHEN YOU USE ARMS AND LEGS TOGETHER IN UNISON CAN YOU BE EQUALLY STRONG IN OFFENSE AND DEFENSE AND ABLE TO COMBINE UPPER BODY PULLS WITH LOWER BODY PUSHES (and vice versa) TO CREATE OFF BALANCING THAT MAKES YOU A DANGEROUS ATHLETE FROM UNDERNEATH. As soon as you engage your arms and legs together your spine will round in the shape of a banana and friction with the mat will be greatly reduced and produce a rocking motion that will creat fast motion and enable you to carry and move your opponents weight - THATS when the magic of open guard begins! Here, Nicky Ryan show a superb interplay between upper and lower body engagement from open guard.

Sometimes jiu jitsu can seem like the most complex sport in the world - so many moves to learn and master! Yet at its conceptual heart it is very simple. The entire bottom game of the sport can be summarized in a single sentence. WHENEVER WORKING FROM BOTTOM SEEK ALWAYS TO KEEP YOUR LEGS BETWEEN YOURSELF AND YOUR OPPONENT AND BE CONFIDENT THAT AS LONG AS YOU DO THIS, HE WILL NEVER BE ABLE TO CONTROL YOU AND YOU WILL ALWAYS HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO ATTACK HIM WITH SUBMISSIONS AND REVERSALS. When you can see the big picture all the myriad details fall into order and even the esoteric elements of the game makes sense

Gordon Ryan just released his new instructional video SYSTEMATICALLY ATTACKING THE TURTLE POSITION. This is an incredibly detailed and complete dissection of the postion by the best no gi back attack expert I ever saw. Like all my senior students, Mr Ryan is every bit as good at teaching as he is in competition and he shows it here in this video. I put a very high value on independent thinking and strongly encourage it in my students. All my senior students have developed their own unique approaches and details to the game I taught them and have gone beyond my teachings to develop their own personal game - Mr Ryan shows his approach to the back attack game that made him such a super star in the world grappling. If you want to become an outright assassin from the back who can take the back, hold the back and finish from the back - this is an asset that you will cherish for many years. Check out his Instagram bio for links and see if this can take you closer to your Jiu Jitsu goals! 😜😜

Start small to finish big: There was a notable moment this weekend at the Kasai Seven grappling championship that has important implications for your own development in Jiu Jitsu. Nick Rodriguez finished a champion black belt with a nicely applied heel hook to take a fine submission victory. Mr Rodriguez has not been training long in Jiu Jitsu and like anyone starting out, submission skills don’t come naturally. When he first started working leg lock skills there was the usual feeling of “this will never work for me” “there’s so much to remember! How will I ever remember all this under stress?” “My body isn’t made for this move” Understand that everyone goes through these feelings and doubts. The techniques of Jiu Jitsu and submission in particular, are not born fully grown. On the contrary, they are born just as you were - weak and in need of nurture and nourishment. But just as time made you stronger, so too, training time will make your technique stronger. When you first start working a technique start small - just get a feel for the basic movement. Experiment with different postures and angles without resistance. In sparring, start with smaller, less experienced opponents and build slowly from white belts through blue, purple brown and black. Follow this gradual path of escalating degrees of difficulty where YOUR CURRENT SKILL LEVEL IS MATCHED TO THE DEGREE OF DIFFICULTY OF THE TASK YOU HAVE SET YOURSELF. Ignore the voice of defeat in your head that will always question your ability and potential and one day that weak and ineffective technique that you never thought would amount to anything will be one of the most feared in your arsenal. Here, Mr Rodriguez battles for the legs in the gym - on the long and frustrating path that led to applying it against a champion - that same path that we must all walk.

Don’t let a fascination with one area of the game blind you to other potentially useful areas: Jiujitsu is a game of oceanic vastness and none of us will ever come close to fully exploring all the possibilities it offers. It is generally best to focus upon a small subset of moves and devote a lifetime to mastery of those - better to be a master of a few moves than mediocre at many moves. Nonetheless, there are many times when we could expand our current repertoire very profitably with just a slight addition to our skill set. I will illustrate with an example. When it comes to leg lock entries from bottom position the main categories of entries are elevating, sliding, inverting and rolling. Let’s say you were already very good at the most commonly used methods - elevating, sliding and inverting entries. A really simple and easy way to greatly increase your leg locking effectiveness would be to add rolling entries. Rolling is a simple body action easily learned by most people and opportunities to use it are everywhere. It takes you to the same finishing point as all your other favorite entries and works with already existent skills that you have, so it’s not like you are learning an entirely new skill set - but rather a valuable addition to your established skill set. That means you can probably get great results with it in a short time at little cost in effort. The game is full of such possibilities sitting right in front of you that could make a real difference to your performance if you just identified them and did a little work incorporating them. Think about your current best moves and which new skills would best work around those skills. Once you identify some of those new skills, start training them and watch your game rise in level!

Outstanding display from Nick Rodriguez at Kasai Seven this weekend: Another truly impressive performance from purple belt juggernaut Nick Rodriguez as he took on a field of champion black belts last night in Texas. The short matches of six minutes made it difficult to get a decisive result in the time available but there is no question he got the better of world champion opponents Vinny Magalhaes and Cyborg with his rapidly improving guard passing skills that put his opponents under great positional pressure. Then he showed his developing submission skills with a very nice heel hook victory over Bruno Bastos. Due to a quirk in the rules of Kasai events he did not go to the finals - He and Cyborg had accrued the same number of points and Mr Rodriguez appeared to dominate the action in their match together and Cyborg had been given a win for a match that never happened (Mr Magalhaes pulled out due to injury after his match with Nicky Rodriguez). Because Cyborg had more wins even though one of those wins was an injury forfeit, he went to the final where he showed his toughness by fighting through a nasty earlier facial cut to win the final. Nicky Rodriguez went to battle for third against Kyle Boehm and again showed his developing positional ground game - threatening the back and getting a tight mounted position to take another great win. It’s always a joy to watch improvement and positive development and the young Jersey juggernaut showed exactly that this weekend. It’s incredible how much he has accomplished in his short time in the sport and clear that his skill level is rapidly rising and he is a major threat to even the legends of the sport. There is a good lesson for all of us as we take our own journey towards self improvement and progress - hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Carrying weight: Any time you work underneath an opponent there is a real danger you will have to carry his weight for extended periods of time. This is tiring and leads to restricted movement- neither is desirable. As much as possible try to create situations where your opponent has to carry his own weight. One of the very best ways to do this is to snap his hands to the floor. Any time you do this the majority of his weight will be carried by his own hands. This will make other parts of his body feel very light. Here, Nicky Ryan snaps an opponents hands to the mat from open guard. As his opponent now carries most of his own upper body weight; his legs will become light and easy to move. Mr Ryan takes advantage of these lightened legs to enter into a variation of ashi garami. When you want one part of his body to feel light - get another part of his body to the floor so that his weight gets divided and you now only have to lift a fraction of his weight rather than all of it. The easiest and most practical part of his body to get to the mat is his hands

The old saying is that there are only two certainties in life - death and taxes. Those are certainly two things of which we may be completely certain - but let me propose a third - IF YOU EVER GET A HOLD OF BOTH OF YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS (particularly at the ankles) AND PUSH HIM IN SOME WAY - HE WILL FALL TO HIS BUTT. Whenever you have an opponent in your open guard who just seems unsweepable (not sure if that’s really a word but I’ll go with it 😜😜) - GO BACK TO THIS PRINCIPLE. Research ways to get a hold on both ankles from guard whether with hands or feet or both and push - you will bring him down every time I promise you. That doesn’t mean you will always score - you have to get up and reverse him for that - but it’s a step in the right direction!

The three things your opponent just can’t hide in a grappling match: Once you come to grips with an opponent you obviously want to hide certain vulnerabilities from each other. No one wants to expose their back obviously and most opponents do a good job reducing back exposure as much as possible. There are three things an opponent will find very difficult to avoid exposing himself to. First is the front headlock. Any time you try to tackle a leg or lower your level, an essential movement in any extended grappling exchange, you become vulnerable to a front head lock. Any time you reach for an opponent, inevitable in any grappling exchange, as you have to grip to begin any form of action, you become vulnerable to KImura. Any time you wisen your base, essential in grappling as no one want to be taken down or swept, you become vulnerable to Ashi garami based leg locks. These three families of submission- strangles from front headlock, kimura and Ashi garami based leg locks; no opponent will be able to totally hide from you in a grappling match that goes longer than a couple of minutes. Make them part of your arsenal. Your opponent can hide many things from you - but he can’t hide those three.

Don’t let opponents impose their grips upon you: All control in grappling begins with grip. Without grip and connection there is no grappling. Even a white belt on his first day can instinctively feel the danger of a powerful and well directed grip that allows an opponent to dictate his movement and will intuitively resist it. As you gain in expertise you will learn to distinguish between ineffective grips and highly effective ones - it’s simple to tell the difference- any grip that gives his control over your ability to hold a stance and move is effective. Any grip that doesn’t do this can be safely ignored or even exploited; but grips that DO feel effective cannot be ignored - in these cases it’s usually wise to defend or negate such grips immediately, or if the danger is high, break them completely and start again. DON’T TOLERATE OR IGNORE GRIPS THAT PREVENT YOU HOLDING A STANCE OR MOVING AS YOU WANT - this is simply surrendering too much advantage to your opponent. Negate them or break them. You don’t want to become an overly defensive player who simply breaks an opponents grips and continually disengages without ever playing a positive attacking game, but on the other hand, you don’t want to be naive and get crushed because you tolerated grips that made it almost impossible to succeed. Finding the right middle ground between defending and opponents grips and imposing your own so you can get in with your attacks is a big part of your path to grappling maturity. Here, Georges St Pierre defends the dangerous grips of Gordon Ryan - one of the best grip players in the game - so that he can work effectively from open guard

A big part of your confidence will come from having a plan of WHAT YOU WANT TO DO in the match; but an even bigger part of your confidence will come from knowing you can handle anything THAT YOU DIDN’T WANT TO HAPPEN in the match. When you’re not scared of the worst case scenarios, you won’t be scared of anything.

Two approaches to submission: Submissions are the soul of Jiu Jitsu. All of the skills of Jiu Jitsu are designed to take you in that direction. When it’s time to enter into submission there are two clear paths. The first is to use a fast entry that gets you so quickly into a winning position that an opponent simply does not have the time necessary to create an effective defense and must submit. The second is one where you use relentless pressure and control break through an opponents defense over time and force a submission. Both methods are highly effective, but I think it’s fair to say that the control based method is responsible for more wins than the speed based method. In addition, control based methods work better for a broader range of athletes and give better long term results because speed based methods tend to work in conjunction with surprise. Once an opponent has seen the move a few times the surprise is lost and you will need more than speed to keep succeeding. Nonetheless as students we all ought to strive to be good at both, even if we tend to favor one over the other. Sometimes it helps to divide your submissions up into your speed submissions and your control submissions based on situations. For example, entries into submission from standing positions make for much greater use of speed (humans move at their quickest when standing rather than on the floor), where as ground grappling permits much greater control, but a much slower pace. So for example, you might train your juji gatame arm bar from standing and knee on belly positions as a speed move, while your arm bars from mount, side position and closed guard as a slower control based move. However, you do it - leave room for both approaches in your training as both are proven pathways to the highest goal of victory by submission

Divide your goals into long term and short term: In order to make progress you must have goals. Without goals we are like ships adrift on an ocean without a compass or star to guide us. Not all goals however, are to be achieved at the same time. It is important that you divide the achievement of your goals by time. Some goals are easier to achieve, perhaps for example you just want to improve a skill that you are already quite good at. This won’t take long and so this might be a goal you aim to achieve inside a month. Other goals might involve entirely new skills completely outside of your current skill set. This might be put into a three to five year category. It is important that at any given moment you have a clear sense of your goals divided by time. You should have a goal for your next workout. A goal for the coming week. Several goals for next three months to a year. A few big goals and many smaller goals for next three to five years. The fastest learners I ever coached were generally the most goal oriented athletes. NOTHING SPEEDS PROGRESS BETTER THAN A STRING SENSE OF DIRECTION - and the best way to ensure that sense of direction will work for you is goal setting. Set your goals and divide them by projected completion time and work on them every time you step on the mats. Here, Nicky Rod works on his long term goal to become a strong leg locker in between his short term goal to better integrate his wrestling skills with Jiu Jitsu skills. Sustained progress over time needs diversified goals, some short term, some long term, determined by how your current skill set will influence expected completion dates. Only in this way can you achieve you longest term goal - to be the best Jiu Jitsu player you can be

Angle: The human body is set up very well to defend attacks coming from directly in front and very poorly adapted to deal with attacks directly from the rear. As a result, opponents will do everything they can to prevent you getting the preferred rear positions. A good substitute when you can’t get directly behind an opponent, but still don’t want the difficulty of direct frontal attacks, is ANGLE. getting to an angle on an opponent gets away from strong frontal defenses and is a lot easier to get to than all the way behind. In the case of most submissions entry from bottom position you will need some degree of angle on your opponent to get a good entry and a sting mechanical finish. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of going perpendicular to an opponent from underneath and as a result, enters easily into a strong leg attack. Don’t fight your way in from the front when you can halve your difficulty by entering in from the side. Take the take to find angle first and attack second. You will get twice the success with half the effort.

Jiu Jitsu is not about perfection. Not even the best among us have perfect Jiu Jitsu - nor has anyone in the past and neither will anyone in the future. Jiu Jitsu is about the PURSUIT of perfection through the use of rational thinking in response to the myriad problems we encounter and testing these thoughts physically through trial and error and edging just a little closer every day towards the unattainable dream of perfection. Take confidence in the fact that if victory is all you seek - your Jiu Jitsu doesn’t have to be perfect - it just has to be better than the person in front of you. The real battle however, is not with the person in front of you; but rather with the distant dream of perfection within you and the growth of character and skill required to push yourself daily towards that shimmering dream you know you will never reach but whose pursuit will make you a far better person than those who live without a dream and an ideal.

Heels or toes? A lot of what determines the effectiveness of a given move is unseen by bystanders. This gives rise to the notion of “invisible Jiu Jitsu” which captures well the idea that the success or failure of moves sometimes can’t be seen by spectators. One of the most significant determinants of whether certain moves will work is our opponents weight distribution - in particular, whether his weight is currently located on his heels or toes. The difference may well be invisible to an onlooker but it is of great importance to the action. When the weight is on the heels, sweeps and takedowns to the rear will prove highly effective with minimal effort. When the weight is on the toes, sweeps and takedowns to the front will work very well. Trying to force a rear sweep/takedown when the opponents weight is on the toes takes a lot of effort and will likely end in failure. As you rise in experience you will soon learn that you can manipulate an opponents weight on to toes or heels as you desire. When you want weight on the toes, push, and as the opponents resists and pushes back, his weight will gravitate to the toes - just as you desired. Here, Gordon Ryan senses an opponents weight is momentarily on the heels and immediately takes advantage with one of his favorite sweeps to the rear!

One of the great balance breaking methods in Jiu Jitsu: Pull the upper body with your arms and push the lower body with your legs - they will stumble every time - and if you can stumble the man then you can sweep the man! When you look at the photo you will see lines of tension running through my training partners gi jacket - indicating a pulling action on my part. In addition you can see tension in my right leg as it extends - indicating a pushing action on my part. Performed at the same time on a vulnerable spot you can see the inevitable result - a stumble and fall on my training partners part. When it comes time to break balance, only the COMBINED action of push and pull will have the effect you seek. Pushing on the legs without pulling on the head and upper body is worthless. So too, is pulling on the head without pushing on the legs. However, when you combine the two - magic can happen and you can stumble the biggest men in the gym.

Figure out where the threat is coming from and position your defense accordingly: you only have so many resources available for defense - so it’s important to use them wisely. You must learn to make on the spot assessments of where the next threat will come from based upon your opponents current positioning. Here, Garry Tonon has taken a good attacking position behind Georges St Pierre. Normally if someone is out to your right hand side, the LEFT hand is your primary defensive hand to strangles and head control as it is well positioned to intercept your opponents dangerous right hand. However, in this case Mr Tonon has cunningly taken his right hand to the far side of Mr St Pierres neck - the new emerging threat is thus the front headlock/guillotine - a move that Mr Tonon excels in. With equal cunning Mr St Pierre has put up the RIGHT hand as his primary defensive hand to stop this new threat. Being observant of the encroaching threat and placing your defensive resources accordingly is a big part of what makes you a defensively sound grappler. Take the take to observe where the threat is coming from at the start and the amount of effort you will have to expend to take care of the threat will be greatly reduced!

If you can make an opponent involuntarily put his hands to the mat to recover balance from open guard - you can make magic happen. If not, everything you try will be a fight. Remember, if his hands are on the mat - they aren’t on you - and if they aren’t on you, he can’t pass your guard and he is open to whatever attacks you initiate. SO GET THOSE HANDS TO THE MAT WHENEVER YOU CAN - a whole world of offense that was previously denied to you will soon open up!

I’m very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video GO FURTHER FASTER: OPEN GUARD. This covers the main skills and tactics you will need to excel at this crucial element of your Jiu Jitsu game. My students are well known for their deadly open guard game - here I teach the technique and tactics that underlies so much of their competition success. Open guard is the most exciting part of the bottom game and allows you to use all four of your limbs against an opponent who is often limited to using two against you and thus enables a skilled smaller opponent to take on and defeat larger opponents. Hope you enjoy it! If you are interested there is a link in my Instagram Bio

There aren’t many certainties in life - but there is one certainty I’ve learned in Jiu Jitsu that I would bet my life on and which can help you become very effective from open guard - IF YOU CAN GET A GRIP ON BOTH OF YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS AND EXERT A PUSHING FORCE BACKWARDS THAT GETS HIS CENTER OF GRAVITY BEHIND HIS HEELS - Then I don’t give a damn how fast, strong, heavy, flexible, acrobatic or athletically talented your opponent is - HE WILL FALL TO HIS BUTT - GUARANTEED. That does not guarantee you will score - a tough opponent may well scramble back up and recover before you can score - but I promise you he will fall - and that gives you an EXCELLENT scoring opportunity that in time you can exploit every time you’re on the mats. Here I am using ashi garami to control one leg whilst holding the other - both ankles controlled and a simple push with the ashi garami - KNOCK DOWN! Every time - now it’s up to you to work for the score/top position from there. Make this simple insight part of your open guard game and I promise you that you will start sweeping people you never previously swept 😜

The fundamental choice in Jiu Jitsu - inside control or outside control: When it comes time to control the human body the fundamental choice you will have before you is whether to control your opponents body by gripping outside/over his limbs or inside/under his limbs. They represent very different methods of control with different goals. As a general rule, inside control is best suited for opening an opponents limbs out and away from his torso, whilst outside control is typically best suited for pushing limbs across the center line and exposing an opponents back - but these are generalizations with important exceptions. When it comes to open guard, probably the most well known and proven method of outside control is DE LA RIVA guard, where your leg entwines the opponents lead leg from the outside. There are many variations utilizing different grips. This is an excellent position from which to launch your open guard offense, or, if you prefer inside position, to transfer to guards based upon inside position, such as ashi garami, X guard, reverse De La Riva etc. Train yourself to tie up your opponents lead leg with your de la Riva hook and get whatever grips you want from there - then it’s time to decide whether you attack directly from there or switch to another guard - either way, De La Riva guard will prove an invaluable means of initial control and a fine staging point from which you can direct an opponent into any kind of open guard that you favor

When you can put a strong mans hand behind his back you make him into a weakling: There is a massive difference between the strength of a man whose hands are in front of him and a mans whose hands have been out behind him. There is a reason why police officers cuff dangerous felons with hands behind the back rather than in front - you should adopt the same policy whenever possible as you grapple. Probably the most well known way to do this is through the Kimura lock. Here, a Gordon Ryan does a great job of getting the hand behind the back into a position where effective defense becomes almost impossible. If the hand is allowed to stay in front, you will have to find ways to incorporate your legs into the move or it will degenerate into a contest of strength. The earlier you get the hand behind the back the better. Your opponent will find it very difficult indeed to recover from such a position as this!

Removing a potential base of support prior to a sweep: Sweeping tough opponents from open guard is never an easy thing. You can however, make it a lot easier by first taking away an opponents base of support in the direction of the sweep. This usually means trapping an arm on one side of the body and sweeping towards the side of that trapped arm. Here I have my partners right arm trapped between our bodies. This will make a sweep to my left much easier. This comes at the price of additional hand fighting prior to the sweep so that you can trap the arm - however a little extra work at the start of an enterprise usually leads to easier work down the line - and that’s exactly the philosophy of arm traps as a precursor to sweeps. Use them whenever you can and watch your open guard sweep game make some serious progress!

Approach what you really want indirectly: We are involved in a sport where all the main moves and all the best counters to those moves are known by both parties - so how the hell so we ever get moves to work? One of the main methods is subterfuge - concealing your real intentions until it’s too late for an opponent to stop them. Whenever you want something in Jiu Jitsu it’s often a good idea to convey to your opponent that you want something else and as he pulls away from that false advance, you take what you really want. This principle must underlie most of your game. You can get away with direct approaches in beginner class, but as you go with better people you will find a much greater need to make use of indirect attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan comes to grips with the very talented Roberto Jimenez. Even in this early exchange you should be thinking in terms of indirect approaches. If you want a collar grip, fake a sleeve grip - as your opponent pulls his hand away to thwart you he leaves open what you really wanted all along - his collar. Let this kind of thinking permeate your game from start to finish and you will find yourself getting past resistance that used to stop you.

Helping where you can: I am sure many of you have been reading as I have of the terrible damage being done by the bush fires in Australia. The squad, myself, Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon, Craig Jones and Nicky Rod will be selling all of our videos and money from the sale will be collected by @bjj.fanatics go to rescue efforts. Wishing all our friends in Australia safety from this terrible conflagration and the sad aftermath for both people and wildlife. 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺

Work in pairs, triples and quadruples: Having a strong offensive move is a wonderful thing, but not nearly so wonderful as having a strong complimentary move that goes in the opposite direction to overcome resistance to the first move. Better still when you have a third or fourth move (I don’t recommend going beyond four shot combinations as typically by that point control and connection has been lost to a degree that follow up attacks are unrealistic). Remember that the fundamental feature of sparring and competition is RESISTANCE TO WHATEVER YOU ATTEMPT, so having moves that feed off that resistance is one of the keys to success. Here, Gordon Ryan is threatening with one of his best weapons, a strong hook sweep (sumi gaeshi) off a shoulder crunch grip. His opponent is contorting himself to avoid the sweep, but in doing so is exposing himself to two submission follow ups - one upper body (straight armlock ude gatame) and the other lower body (ashi garami based leg locks). Mr Ryan chose lower body and easily entered the legs (unfortunately time ran out just as he got the position). Never think in terms of single attacks but rather, always go the extra distance and conceive of a complementary follow up that follows the lines of resistance to the first move - you will soon be rewarded with breakthroughs against even the toughest resistance.

A Jiu Jitsu player can learn to live with many things, a broken arm, a broken leg, hell, even a broken heart - but one thing he or she can NEVER learn to live with is a broken POSTURE. Your stance and posture is the basis of everything you do in this sport. Almost every failure on our part in Jiu Jitsu can be traced back to an earlier failure in stance and posture. For all the main positions and moves there is an ideal posture to get the job done efficiently. The further you stray from that ideal the harder you will have to work to make up for it and the more likely you will be countered. Take some time to study great players and switch your attention from the MOVES to their STANCE/POSTURE THAT PRECEDES THE MOVES. You will see patterns that are easy to learn and easy to bring into your game and then the game itself may become a little easier for you.

Head position: Most humans are four limbed creatures - but grapplers must learn to use their head as a fifth limb in order to maximize their grappling potential. Your head is an excellent pushing device (and can even be used sometimes to pull). If you can get your forehead tucked into inside position it becomes a formidable barrier that will confound an opponents movement and position whilst setting up your own. One of the more common scenarios to begin implementing it into your game is seated butterfly guard. By tucking your forehead into an opponents collarbone you can negate his underhooks and create and maintain sufficient space to steal your own. This is just one simple example of using your head in grappling among myriad other uses both on the floor and on the feet. Make a serious study of how your head can give you an extra limb to dictate terms in a grappling exchange. Your opponents will always be trying to use your own head head as a weapon against yourself by controlling it as much as possible - take the initiative from them learning to use your head as a weapon that works in YOUR favor, not theirs.

Where is his energy going? When you get a grip upon an opponent there two possible reactions - the first is that simply doesn’t react. In this case go straight into your offensive move and win. By far the common reaction is to resist whatever force you apply to the opponent through your grip. If you pull, the majority of your opponents will pull back. If you push, the majority will push back. Sometimes this reaction manifests itself as movement, sometimes the opponent will be static - it does not matter - in either case there will be an energy in a given direction. LEARNING TO READ WHERE YOUR OPPONENTS ENERGY IS GOING AT ANY POINT OF TIME IN THE MATCH AS HE REACTS TO YOUR GRIPS IS ONE OF THE MOST CRUCIAL COMBAT SKILLS YOU CAN EVER DEVELOP. When you can read the direction their energy is going and quickly decide which move to apply that complements that direction - you can defeat opponents with relative ease. Most people decide FIRST what they want to do and get a grip that allows them to do it. That’s fine and works very well in many cases. However, the ARTFUL players get a grip and push and pull and THEN decide which move they will employ based not upon what THEY want, but rather upon what their opponent OFFERS. Learning to play with this mindset is one of your deepest goals in Jiu Jitsu and elevates you into the ranks of those artful players who seem to get more done with less effort. This is not something that comes quickly. Initially just okay with the skill of getting a grip and pushing and pulling and feel your opponents reaction every time you grip up. In time you will learn to smoothly apply a well chosen move to their reaction but you have to start somewhere, so start with the empty minded grip and push/pull. As your repertoire of moves increases so will your ability to correlate a move to their reaction.

Where should I start from open guard? One of the problems associated with open guard is the sheer number of options available to you as you play the position. You can be seated or supine, inside control or outside control, a large number of different grip variations, many different types of guard to play and a seemingly infinite number of moves. The number of options can soon expand into a dizzying number and in the heat of the action you can end of hesitating as you make choices. Whenever the choices seem to too confusing I recommend you use the cross collar, sleeve cuff and foot inside bicep guard you see here. It is in my opinion the single most versatile open guard and has exemplary defensive and offensive properties. It leads equally well into both positional sweeps and submissions on both kneeling and standing opponents. When it all seems confusing - USE CROSS COLLAR, CUFF AND BICEP GUARD AS YOUR DEFAULT OPTION and you can’t go wrong. The good news is that this form of open guard allows you to enter seamlessly into just about any other form of open guard so as your skill level grows you can keep using it as an entry into all the new guards you learn as you progress. If you are making open guard your field of study - make this one your first stop and it will give you a powerful and versatile start that will never let you down!

Um...Garry...you’ve trained brilliantly for this match...your technique looks razor sharp and you are in tremendous shape...but...um...you might want to close your zipper before you head out on the stage...

A test for yourself: Next time you are inactive due to injury or travel or isolation, engage in the following mental training. Watch people of different levels as they spar. Make it your job to anticipate what their next move will be. Try to reduce the time it takes to make the prediction. Ultimately you should be able to read even the smallest moves they make - a subtle shift in grip or stance - not just the big moves. Understand that the whole purpose of Jiu Jitsu at the higher levels is to FORCE AN OPPONENT DOWN A DIMINISHING DECISION TREE WHERE YOU KNOW ALL THE POSSIBLE DECISIONS HE CAN MAKE AHEAD OF TIME AND ARE THUS READY TO COUNTER EACH ONE AS THEY OCCUR UNTIL HE HAS BUT A SINGLE DECISION TO MAKE - Should I submit or let myself break/pass out? Learning to train your MIND to see the immediate future is probably the single best Jiu Jitsu exercise you can do whenever actual training is not a possibility. There is nothing esoteric or mysterious about it. Whenever you know the possible options you can make rational predictions of a future choice. Interestingly it is easier to do this exercise when watching experts rather than beginners since they tend to make more rational/sound decisions and are thus more predictable. Try it! I promise you will become a better physical Jiu Jitsu player as you work this critical mental skill.

The triangle - among the most remarkable of all techniques in martial arts: The triangle, which uses the power of the legs to strangle an opponent was one of the last great martial arts submission techniques to be invented. Most submissions go far far back into history. You can see drawings of strangleholds, arm locks and leg locks carved into walls and drawn in old manuscripts - but you won’t see a triangle. To the best of our knowledge, the triangle appears to have been discovered around 1913 in the old Japanese Kosen schools of judo. There are some likely candidates for the actual inventors but we can’t really be sure. Think about that. THAT MEANS MANKIND INVENTED POWERED FLIGHT, MACHINE GUNS, SUBMARINES, TELEPHONES MODERN ARTILLERY etc BEFORE WE INVENTED THE ABILITY TO STRANGLE SOMEONE WITH OUR LEGS!!! Every time you step on the mats you get a chance to use this pinnacle of martial arts ingenuity that took humans MILLENNIA to arrive upon! Take that opportunity every chance you get! And when you finish it, take a moment to thank those incredible old masters who thought outside the box and changed the grappling world with this incredible technique. (Bonus question for the history buffs out there - what are the implications of this for the history of Maeda and his teaching of the Gracie’s )

Where will you focus your connection from open guard? When you work from your back in open guard, it is crucial you form a solid connection to an opponent so that defensively he will find it difficult to create angles that lead into guard passes and offensively, you will be able to break his balance and attack with sweeps and submissions. One of the major choices you will make in forming this connection is whether you should entangle your legs into the opponents ARMS (spider guard and lasso guard) or LEGS (De La Riva, Reverse De La Riva, ashi garami, x guard etc) or employ a mixed strategy and entangle both arms AND legs (eg ashi garami on one side at legs and spider guard on the other side arm). All of them are tremendously effective and you can find many champions who specialize in one of these three choices. It is natural to favor one of the choices and develop it as a specialty, but don’t ignore the others. In truth the overall game is the same - form a strong connection using all four of your limbs and get the opponent out of balance as a precursor to your sweeps and submissions - they just employ different ways of doing it. Using all three entanglement strategies makes you a very tricky opponent and a versatile one - even if you are noticeably better better at one type of entanglement than the others. Understand also that it is easy and natural to go from one to another - when you do so you maximize your potential from open guard.

Happy New Year from NYC!! I wanted to wish you all the best for 2020 🤗😜😜🤗 It has been an amazing year with the squad having the most successful performance in ADCC history and Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon, Nicky Rod and Craig Jones releasing more instructional videos to show how their way of playing the game can become part of your training and push you towards the same game changing methods they employ so successfully on the big stage. We all have three duties in Jiu Jitsu - to make ourselves better, to make the people who train around us better and to make the sport itself better. I hope 2020 allows you to do just that! I hope you all have a crazy fun New Years Eve with lots of wild stories to tell on New Year’s Day 😜😜and make 2020 your beat year of progress and growth in all the aspects of life that you care about 🤗🤗 Have fun and train hard!

He who controls the head...the human body is essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything else hangs off that. As such, if you control the head, you control the movement of the rest of the body. Now when someone puts on a gi, that lapel is functions like a noose around the neck and head - so if you control THAT, then you control the head. So one of the best skills you can develop are good lapel/collar grips. From open guard, these collar grips, in particular the CROSS COLLAR grip, are your single best means of getting quick and powerful control of the head in ways that make a real difference to your effectiveness on the mat. Learning to attain, maintain and exploit the great value of this grip is a BIG part of your open guard journey. Use it whenever you can to enter and control open guard.

If you can get an opponents hands to the floor whilst working from open guard - the attacks come easy: One of the surest signs that the bottom guard player is in command when working against a top passer is when he can consistently snap the top players hands down to the mat as a result of breaking his balance. While this not does score in itself, it is a great set up to score either with sweeps or submissions. Consistently look to snap your opponents hands down to the mat when working from open guard and then launch your attacks in the time between his hands hitting the mat and the time he can recover back to his stance. Here I have chosen cross ashi garami as the attack from open guard, but in truth, when you can get hands to the mat, you can attack with pretty much whatever you want!

Filming the upcoming open guard video with BJJ Fanatics here in Boston!! Getting a solid five days of filming here in Boston for upcoming videos - it’s always a pleasure to come up to New England and work. It’s a beautiful train ride up and filming the videos is always a great way to get our approach bro the game out there to a wider audience. Always my belief was that knowledge translated into skill is the single most important determinant of the outcome of a match, more than strength, size, speed mental toughness etc (these other things are still very important but not as much as knowledge/skill). The videos are a great way to get that knowledge to a wider audience in a way that will give people insight into a rapidly changing game. Wishing you all the best from Boston!!

When you master both upper body grips to maintain chest to back contact and lower body hooks to maintain hip to back contact, you can follow an opponent through hell and back to get to your strangle!

The single biggest determinant of your success or failure from open guard will be your ability to break an opponents stance and balance (Kuzushi). If you can do this at will, you will be highly successful from open guard. If you can’t, even the simplest moves will be a struggle to apply and often subject to strong counters from a skilled opponent. I would rather have five moves from open guard plus the ability to break an opponents stance and balance at will than to have a hundred moves without that ability. ANYONE CAN APPLY THE MOVES OF OPEN GUARD ON AN UNRESISTING TRAINING PARTNER, BUT ONLY AN ATHLETE WHO CAN BREAK AN OPPONENTS STANCE AND BALANCE CAN APPLY THEM ON A FULLY RESISTING OPPONENT IN A COMPETITIVE MATCH. Make the study of Kuzushi your biggest concern when working from open guard - if you can break a mans stance - you can break the man!

When there are ten thousand possibilities the smart thing is to focus on a few good one: One of the great problems of open guard is that there are a vast number of possible guards you can employ, each with many grip variations and myriad different moves that are possible from each. You can rapidly get to a situation where the sheer number of options makes you LESS effective rather than more effective in sparring and competition. WHEN OPTIONS MULTIPLY, RESPONSE TIME TENDS TO INCREASE. This is not a good thing in combat sports. Accordingly it is wise to focus on a few things that you do very well rather than attempt to learn many things you perform in a mediocre fashion just because there is not sufficient time to master them all. The obvious question is - well then, which ones should i focus on? Part of the answer will be determined by your body type, part by your personality, but save some consideration for observation of high level competition and see WHICH MOVES OFTEN AND REPEATEDLY SCORE SUCCESSFULLY FOR A WIDE ARRAY OF BODY TYPES, WEIGHT CATEGORIES, BELT LEVELS, AGES AND RULE SETS. These are usually the ones you want to focus upon. Better to be extremely good at two such moves than average a twenty moves that rarely figure successfully in competition. Let the evidence of competition have a say in the direction of your training and you will soon have a focus upon a few proven techniques that really make a difference in your performance.

Technical skill, tempo and movement quality are far more important considerations than size when choosing training partners - we would all rather train with 100kg athlete who moves well than a 60kg klutz. Refine your movement and you will never have a hard time finding training partners.

Controlling the Action/reaction reflex is the single most artful aspect of Jiu Jitsu: It is not difficult to perform most of the moves of Jiu Jitsu in an unresisting drilling partner. It is much more difficult to apply them in a competitive sparring session against an opponent. As the skill level of the opponent rises so to does the degree of difficulty of applying moves. What will make the make the difference is your ability to get past his knowledge and ability to anticipate your moves and counter them. This is where Jiu Jitsu becomes truly artful. You want him to move a certain way and he knows that and so resists strongly. The only way for you to win is to use his defensive reactions in your favor. This is a lifetime study, but a great way to start this project is the simple rule of opposites so often mentioned by the old masters. IF YOU WANT AN OPPONENT TO MOVE AWAY FROM YOU - BEGIN BY PULLING HIM TOWARDS YOU. IF YOU WANT AN OPPONENT TO MOVE TOWARDS YOU, BEGIN MY PUSHING HIM AWAY FROM YOU. As your opponent resists the initial force, take him is the same direction as his resistance - which of course is where you really wanted him to go all along. Here, I want to knock a standing opponent backwards with a sweep from open guard. I begin with a pull on his arm courtesy of a two on one grip. He digs his heels into the mat and resists - NOW is the time to knock him backwards. Most of the impetus backwards actually comes from my opponents resistance to the initial pull. I just have to complete what he has started. Learn to think this way in all of your Jiu Jitsu and you will defeat people through artistry and skill rather than strength and power.

Better to have the floor on your back than an opponent on your back: The worst situation in a grappling match is to have an opponent on your back. From there he has many of the most high percentage submissions in the sport available to use join you whilst you have only a few very low percentage submissions to fire back with. He has a powerful and robust position that is very difficult to escape from when well applied. Thus we must do our best to avoid back exposure as much as possible. When it does happen that your back is exposed to a dangerous opponent, the safest general strategy it to GET YOUR UPPER BACK TO THE FLOOR. The logic is simple - if the FLOOR is on your back, then there won’t be space for an OPPONENT to be on your back. Accordingly most of the back escapes of Jiu Jitsu favor the strategy of upper back to the floor - this is the one that minimizes back exposure to an opponent. There are other strategies. You can stand up, threaten kimura etc etc and these can definitely work, but they do result in a degree of back exposure such that if they DON’T work, they can get you in deep trouble. So when you feel the danger of back exposure - try getting your upper back to the floor as a first reaction

If you can get both your opponents feet to leave the mat - he will be very hard pressed indeed to stop you scoring: Tomoe nage is not only a wonderful throw from standing position when using the gi, it is a truly superb sweep from open guard as well. Due to the fact that it fully uses the vast strength potential of the legs, it is truly one of the best moves to use against heavier, stronger opponents. The main thing is to break the opponents balance forward and get him up on his toes. The good news is that there are many forms of open guard that make this possible. Here I am using lasso guard to get the man up in his toes and in position to be swept overhead. Every Jiu Jitsu player needs a strong Tomoe nage attack both on the feet and on the floor. Some moves drift in and out of style - but Tomoe nage will always be among the main weapons of a ground grappler 😜😊

From open guard the game goes to the man who controls the head and shoulders: The old cliche in grappling is “he who controls the head controls the whole body.” There is a lot of truth to this. A big part of our approach to open guard is based around head control. When you can lock on to the head and one arm you can really subvert the opponents movement whilst at the same time setting up your favorite upper body attacks. Look how Nicky Ryan, young master of open guard, completely dominates his opponents head in a way that sets up strong sweep and submission opportunities on both sides. Whether you favor inside position (underhooks) or outside position (overhooks) use this principle of control whenever possible and watch your open guard game take off!

Attacking the back - Prioritize chest to back connection over the lower body hooks: When you get behind an opponent you SCORE when you hook both your legs into your opponents hips. This tends to create a mindset where most people prioritize the hooks - that’s natural since they are the means of scoring. In fact you are usually better off prioritizing the chest to back connection locked in place with your arms. AS LONG AS YOU HAVE THIS - YOU CAN ALWAYS GET THE HOOKS LATER. The upper body connection almost always proves more valuable in regaining back position, since most escapes involve getting the upper back to the floor. Solid Chest to back connection makes this extremely difficult and thus nullifies most escapes. Hooks by themselves do little to control an opponents movement and often allow escape. Here, Georges St Pierre has done a good job of retaining solid chest to back connection through his arms and thus can now choose when and how he can follow with his hooks to score and strangle.

Where would you go from here? You enter ashi garami - your opponent immediately begins to contest your foot position to weaken the hold - what would you do? Remember this - it’s easy to learn a move. It’s pretty easy to apply it successfully against untutored resistance - but it is difficult to apply a move against knowledgeable resistance. Unfortunately this difficult task of applying known moves against knowledgeable resistance is exactly what you will have to deal with for the rest of your time in Jiu Jitsu. The higher you go, the more this will become your biggest problem to overcome. It is absolutely crucial therefore, that for all your favorite moves, you have pre-planned ways to circumvent the more common lines of resistance as fluidly as river water moves around rocks and boulders on its path downstream. There won’t always be time to think and puzzle things through, so having the major routes worked out in advance is a big help. You already know what your favorite moves are - now you need to go further and know what the main forms of defense to them are and what you will do to bypass them. As you mature this can lead to long decision trees starting with each of your favorite moves and ending with what we can’t be sure - this is the path to victory.

It all begins with measure of distance: When you begin in open guard with an opponent in front of you, one of the first considerations in your assessment of what you need to do to get your game started on the right track is that of DISTANCE. If your opponent is nervously backing away, you must be able to CLOSE distance. If he is aggressively coming forward, you must be able to MAINTAIN or MANAGE distance. This requires skills of movement and framing. A common error is to REACH with arms and legs to close distance. Be wary of this as reaching limbs are easy to pass and submit. Use MOVEMENT rather than REACH to get to your opponent. Use your outstretched feet and knees as the fundamental measuring stick. If he is at the line of your feet you are ready for offense; if he is at the line of your knees, be ready for defense. Just as a good boxer is keenly aware of the importance of distance in fisticuffs, so too a good grappler is keenly award of the importance of distance in grappling.

There is ALWAYS a possibility right there in front of you: Once you lay your hands on someone in a ground grappling scenario there is ALWAYS some possibility for submission right there in front of you. It’s up to you to SEE that possibility and then ACT upon it. That’s why I Have my students focus upon a relatively small set of high percentage submissions (back strangles, strangles from front headlock, kimura, juji gatame armlocks, triangles and ashi garami based leg locks). When there are too many possibilities you will suffer from paralysis caused by over abundance of options. Too few and you won’t cover the entire body and thus miss golden opportunities. Here, Nicky Ryan finds himself in an awkward passing entanglement but immediately seizes the initiative by taking a kimura opportunity that arose as his opponent reached for a new grip. This takes him immediately from an awkward deadlock to a a powerful means of attack. You must train your mind to see these myriad opportunities that exist right there in front of you every time you come into close contact with an opponent. There are a thousand distractions and concerns as you grapple - victory often goes to the athlete who can cut through all that and see the shortest route to a finish.

It ain’t a pin if he’s out of balance: Pins are one of the foundational skills of Jiu Jitsu. There’s nothing better than a solid pin that sticks an opponents head and shoulders to the mat and shuts out his legs - it’s a great pathway to upper body submissions. Understand however, that a pin is only as good as the degree of control it confers upon an opponent. It’s worthless to be in a “dominant” pin such as the mounted position of you are not able to control an opponents movement. As such, when one finds oneself at the bottom of a pin in Jiu Jitsu, a good place to start your escape is with your opponents balance. ANY MOVEMENT THAT UNDERMINES YOUR OPPONENTS BALANCE AS HE PINS YOU IS MONEY IN THE BANK. Bridging, shrimping, kipping are the foundational body movements that unbalance the top player and create the space and movement that can totally destroy the value of the pin and lead to an escape. Look at this fine example of Garry Tonon off balancing an opponent from bottom mount. Like many of my students, Mr Tonon will often let an opponent into “dominant” position of the rule set suits such a strategy, knowing full well that he can easily create the kind of off balancing that makes the pin worthless and even a LIABILITY, as often there are excellent submission opportunities as a pin is broken. Here he effortlessly kips out of a mounted pin and I am sure you can guess - will soon go into a match winning heel hook from the easy entry into ashi garami from this situation. Constantly practice this critical skill of disturbing your opponents balance from the bottom of a pin - all your escapes will benefit.

Victory in Las Vegas!! Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones were on fire last night in Las Vegas at the Quintet Ultra grappling tournament. The show featured some very interesting match ups. Mr Ryan took on the fascinating MMA grappler from Russia, Sambo expert Aleksei Oleinik - master of the no gi Ezekiel stranglehold. He quickly entered the legs and back stepped into a nice leg lace. Normally we would finish with an inside heel hook from this position, but heel hooks were illegal in this tournament so he opted for a knee bar finish instead - an easy conversion from this extremely controlling and versatile position. Craig Jones took on old school Jiu Jitsu legend, Fredson Paixao - master of wristlocks. He showed the incredible gains he has made in back control/hand trapping training with the squad and quickly secured a fine stranglehold for the win! It is interesting and beneficial for us all to experiment with variations in rule sets as this forces us to emphasize different aspects of the game that we might normally pass over and as a result, continue to make technical progress. Ask yourself tonight what would you do if you were not allowed to use your favorite finishing move for the next week? What alternative would you play from that same position? I promise you that if you experiment with this you will be a more knowledgeable martial artist by the weeks end 😜🤗

Mastery of the hook sweep (sumi gaeshi) - an essential part of my approach to the game: Very often I am approached by people who have visited the blue basement and they recount their training experiences to me. A very common theme that I hear many many times is this - “Man, I was expecting everyone to be good at leg attacks and back attacks and all the other submissions - but the one thing that really caught me by surprise was how easily and often everyone swept me from butterfly guard.” There is a reason for this. I PUT AN EXTREMELY HEAVY EMPHASIS ON EXCELLENCE WITH THE HOOK SWEEP (SUMI GAESHI) IN ALL ITS MANY VARIATIONS AS THE BASIS OF OUR BOTTOM OPEN GUARD GAME. No other sweep is performed as often and in so many forms in my coaching program. It is equally effective gi or no gi. It Can be used from any grip, in both left and right directions, standing or on the floor and creates defensive reactions that set up all our favorite entries into lower body and upper body submissions. Development of a strong sumi gaeshi game is one of the first signs I look for when assessing the progress of a developing students bottom position skill level. All of my senior students excel in this move - no exceptions. There aren’t many moves that I tyrannically enforce upon my students, generally I liked to let them pick and choose their favorites past purple belt - but sumi gaeshi is one of them. Make sure you devote time to this classic and powerful move. It will benefit every aspect of your bottom game both position and submission.

When you can break your opponents stance you can dominate from anywhere - even underneath an opponent: One of the most essential principles of good Jiu Jitsu is this: EVERY ATTACK UPON YOUR OPPONENT, WHETHER IT BE A POSITIONAL ATTACK OR A SUBMISSION ATTACK, SHOULD BEGIN AS AN ATTACK UPON HIS STANCE. Your stance is the foundation of your strength and ability. If it is broken your effectiveness will be severely curtailed. Knowing this, you must make the undermining and breaking of your opponents stance your first priority. This is particularly important when working from bottom position. Use trips, blocks, foot sweeps etc to constantly break his balance and force him to base hands on the floor in a compromised stance. If you can do this all your attacks will be MUCH more successful. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a classic X guard to drop his opponents hands to the floor and break his stance. His opponent can do nothing offensive until he recovers his stance - and in that time Mr Ryan can launch attacks uncontested. This basic insight is the key to success in the sport. Remember always - your first target is your opponents stance - after that the other targets will be easy to hit

Freaking out isn’t going to help: It is natural when you find yourself in a bad situation in Jiu Jitsu to feel some degree of panic - no one likes losing, even in the gym, and so the intensity always goes up as the danger of losing increases. Now, as this feeling of foreboding starts to escalate into genuine concern, the danger of it degenerating into total panic increases. It’s at this point that one starts to see chaos break out. Students will start exploding in various directions in order to affect a breakout. This can definitely work in many cases at beginner level, since most beginners lack the ability to control and immobilize a wildly thrashing opponent. It can also work if you are bigger and stronger than an opponent. However, as size discrepancy decreases and skill levels rise, this will work less and less. If you were given a complex math problem, would it help you to solve it if you began by freaking out? No. In fact if we look at almost every daily problem we have to overcome, from flat tires, to navigating through an unfamiliar part of town, to paying bills over the phone, we see that it is almost never the case that wild emotional or physical reaction aid our ability to solve and overcome the problem. Jiu Jitsu is no different. Just as the solution to any complex math problem is best found with a calm mind that calmly and methodically searches for the solution, so too in Jiu Jitsu. Make your first reaction to a difficult hold in Jiu Jitsu be a grounding breath, and then a mental commitment to the idea of staying as calm as you can and THINKING your way out rather than FREAKING your way out. Look how calm Nicky Ryan as he works from a particularly tricky leg lock situation. This is the spirit you want to operate in whenever you find yourself on the defensive. This will ensure you prevail in all situations rather than just against smaller or less experienced opponents

The great challenge of open guard - reconciling your desire for offense with your need for defense: Open guard play is probably one of the most frustrating elements of Jiu Jitsu for most players. It offers almost limitless possibilities for attack with sweeps and submissions, but it also offers our opponent limitless opportunities for positional attacks of his own - guard passes. As we are thinking about our offensive possibilities it takes only a fraction of a second for an opponent to blast past our legs and in a flash we have gone from pondering offense to scrambling desperately for defense and preventing an opponent scoring with a guard pass. Everything we do from open guard has to be done with a sense of defensive responsibility. The main thing that prevents an opponent gaining the distance, angle and level change he requires to get past our legs is our connection to his body. If we are well connect to him, we will follow his movement easily as he tries to out flank our legs. If we lack sufficient connection he can pass your guard in a heartbeat and put you under great pressure. Whenever you begin to feel your connection to an opponent is failing, you must begin to shift from PULLING connection (offensive) to PUSHING connection (defensive) and thus create frames that prevents an opponent getting chest to chest contact and control of your head that will enable him to solidify a pass. Learning shift seamlessly from offensive grips to defensive frames as the second by second dynamic of the match unfolds is the key to reconciliation of your desire for offense and your need for defense from open guard. Here, Nicky Ryan shows excellent defensive responsibility as an opponent threatens to pass his legs. His frames are quickly set in place and this will prevent further advances long enough to recover the position of his legs and the integrity of his guard.

Victory in Texas!! Gordon Ryan won a great match here in Houston tonight against the great wrestling champion, Bo Nickal via stranglehold - as he predicted - using a well applied triangle from bottom position. Most of the match was spent on the feet in Mr Nickals domain. He showed his mastery of hand fighting and takedown defense against conventional takedowns. However, Mr Ryan was able to take him down three times in standing position with the scissor takedown - kani basami - and took it to the floor and scored a sweep from the ashi garami position (leg locks were not allowed in this match otherwise it would have been over with the first kani basami). Mr Nickal intelligently timed his first genuine takedown attempt until late in the match to minimize the time spent on the ground - Mr Ryan’s domain. With around three minutes left he performed a beautiful belly to back suplay and then had to survive three minutes on the floor. Unfortunately he was facing the best submission grappler on the planet and quickly got locked up in a triangle. As the triangle tightened he stood to try to pull out. Mr Ryan employed a classic squad dilemma - he attacked an arm lock from the triangle, forcing Mr Nickal to go forward to relieve pressure on the arm. Mr Nickal intelligently went forward with a heavy slam, hoping to loosen the triangle. Mr Ryan curled his body to reduce the impact and tightened the strangle as they landed getting a dramatic finish to a great match. It was great to see this cross over match between two great athletes from two separate, but closely related sports in a rule set that gave both a good chance. Congratulations to Gordon Ryan for another fine performance in what has been an incredible second half of the year after a disastrous start with a severe knee injury and surgery. Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Now it’s back to NYC to get everyone ready for more challenges! Wishing you all the best from Texas!

Weigh in completed in Houston Texas: Gordon Ryan weighed in with the great wrestler, Bo Nickal tonight here in Houston for their hybrid wrestling/Jiu jitsu match tomorrow night. This should be a fascinating encounter as both men are at the top of their respective sports and both have a dynamic and exciting attacking style. Both men will have to wrestle for the takedown (no guard pulling allowed) or at the least, employ a submission attack to take it to the floor. Leg lock finishes are not allowed and both athletes must engage on both floor and ground or risk DQ. Mr Nickal has an extremely impressive and dynamic wrestling game and we were told has done very well against very good Jiu Jitsu players in training. This should be a great match!! Really interesting and very different from the usual. Now it’s time to do some drills and get ready for the show! Wishing you all the best from Texas!

Plotting your next move: as much as we all aspire to have a high success rate for the performance of our favorite moves, the reality is that THE MAJORITY OF THE ATTEMPTED APPLICATIONS OF YOUR MOVES AGAINST SKILLED OPPONENTS WILL FAIL. That’s the bad news. The good news is that the general slow pace of ground grappling means that in most cases YOU WILL KNOW WHEN THEY ARE LIKELY TO FAIL BEFORE THEY ACTUALLY DO. As a result you can have a follow up move prepared to work even as the first fails. Here Garry Tonon has a good bite on his opponents heel, but the ashi garami control is lacking. As a result he is rapidly losing control of the knee - the benchmark of control for these cases. THIS THE TIME TO BE THINKING OF YOUR NEXT MOVE - BEFORE failure is complete, not AFTER. This will make you a dangerous combination fighter who can seamlessly go from attack to attack and ensnare even very good opponents, rather than a one shot at a time fighter who must rely on surprise or strength to catch people. Every time you find yourself on the cusp of failure with your moves, practice the mental skill of searching for an appropriate second attack BEFORE the total collapse of the first and watch your success rate double!

Don’t worry about the speed with which you move - concern yourself with the distance you have to cover: Very often I am asked by students if they are too slow to be effective in Jiu Jitsu. Certainly it’s an impressive thing to see an athlete with blazing speed in the mats. In truth however, most of the finest players in the sport work at a rather slow pace for the majority of the match and many more never really use speed at all in their game. Clearly then speed is not essential to success, though it definitely can be useful at times. Understand that because Jiu Jitsu is predominately a ground sport, speed will always be limited. A much more important consideration than top speed is the DISTANCE YOU HAVE TO COVER TO GET TO YOUR OBJECTIVES. If I have a speedy opponent who moves twice as fast as I do, but through inefficient positioning and course setting, always has to move twice as far to get to his objectives we will be working at effectively the same mat speed. Indeed, I will be able to sustain that mat speed longer since I am doing less work and may end up being faster as fatigue becomes a factor. The first step to becoming faster on the mats is to become more efficient at covering distance to get to an objective. THE MORE DIRECT YOUR PATH THE SOONER YOUR ARRIVAL TIME. Practice the skill of minimizing wasted motion in getting to the next position every time you move. Soon you will find yourself beating faster (but less efficient) opponents in the race to get to the next position!

Exciting news from Garry Tonon! This Friday @garrytonon and @bjj.fanatics will release Mr Tonon’s first instructional video EXIT THE SYSTEM. This will cover one of the most important elements of Jiu Jitsu - escape - in particular the link between submission holds and escapes. One of the most distinctive features of my coaching program is the heavy emphasis on escape skills. Only when you believe in your power to escape will commit fully to your attacks and hold nothing back. There is a reason why Garry Tonon is the most exciting grappler in the world - it’s because he has no fear of being held down and controlled. As a result he can take risks that would make anyone else hesitate. All of my senior students bare innovators who develop their own moves and variations that gives them a strong personal interpretation of my program. You can benefit enormously by learning escape skills from one of the absolute best escape artists in the world. Learn the crucial interface between defense and offense and watch your confidence on the mat rise as never before. My students are all truly excellent teachers - I teach them to teach as well as they compete - you will see this in the video. Georges St-Pierre nick named Garry Tonon “The slippery salmon” for a reason - he is almost impossible to pin down and control - learn his secrets and soon you will be too! 😜😜Get ready for the big launch Friday @bjj.fanatics

Shields up...wedges set...phasers set to stun...open fire!

Protect your position first, but keep your eyes open for the possibility of submission at all times: We humans are prone to tunnel vision, particularly in stressful situations. Very often we get to a good position and remember our mantra to protect the position first and everything else second and as a result, we blind ourselves to great opportunities to enter a submission hold that were there right in front of us. Look at this photo of Gordon Ryan - master of back attacks - attacking from his favorite position. His body has contoured perfectly to his opponents, forming a tight connection and his head and hip position will enable him to easily follow an opponents movement. However, notice that his eyes are focused entirely on the neck - the target of submission. So though his body is set upon maintaining position, his mind is set upon submission - indeed, he has unlocked his hands already to take advantage of the open neck he is looking so intently at and a few seconds later he will be locking in a powerful strangle. Condition yourself to think the same way. Let your body protect the position, but keep your mind focused like a laser on the next step - submission!

Big win for juggernaut Nicky Rod! Nick Rodriguez had a barn burning grappling match over the weekend with UFC legend Luke Rockhold. Mr Rockhold is one of the best grapplers in MMA. He is a superb athlete with great flexibility and strength along with excellent technique - I know numerous grappling specialists who were shocked at his abilities when they grappled him in the gym. Nicky Rod used his inimitable fusion of explosive wrestling and back attacks to get a well deserved win and show his continued development. He continues to impress everyone with the speed of his progress - his propensity to get to the back out of scrambles created by his wrestling skills makes him a very dangerous opponent even for the best out there. This coming week sees another fusion of wrestling and Jiu Jitsu skills as Gordon Ryan takes on the great American wrestler Bo Nickal in a hybrid Wrestling/Jiu Jitsu rules match in Houston Texas this weekend. It’s great to see the merging of the skills of these two great combat sports and the growth and development it can create!

Break them down to a hip: One of the distinguishing characteristics of the revolution in leg locking that the squad brought in was the heavy emphasis on leg locking from bottom position. In the old days the vast majority of leg lock entries were from top position. Indeed, leg locking was largely seen as an alternative to guard passing. This created a lot of naive criticisms of leg leg locking that seem almost quaint nowadays. Students were told that leg locks were a bad idea because if it didn’t work you would lose top position. Well - what if we entered from bottom position? Then there was no danger of positional loss - so that’s where I put my emphasis. There are MANY great entries from bottom position into an opponents legs - but be sure to realize that though your ENTRIES into the legs will be on a standing or kneeling opponent in your guard - be sure to knock your opponents down to their hips/buttocks (or at the very least one knee) before you start working for your FINISHES. It is quite difficult and risky to try finishing as a skilled opponent stands over you. Much safer to off balance him down to a hip first and THEN start working for the finish. Remember always that the magic of ashi garami is that it has a dual nature - IT IS JUST AS GOOD FOR OFF BALANCING/SWEEPING AS IT IS FOR BREAKING PURPOSES. Use BOTH aspects of ashi garami from bottom position and your success rate from under tough opponents will start climbing in the directions you want!

Let the other guy feel the stress: A common problem i observe is that of athletes doing a good job getting to a dominant position and then trying too hard too quickly to get a submission and losing control of the position they worked so hard to attain. Unless there is limited time left on the clock, relax, the other fellow should be the one in panic mode - not you. Use the superior position to recompose yourself, recharge your lungs if necessary and formulate a plan to finish. If at any point you feel the danger of escape - PROTECT THE POSITION FIRST AND WORRY ABOUT THE SUBMISSION SECOND - you can always come back to that later. Here, Garry Tonon anchors himself in place on the back at the ADCC World Champions after a long period in standing position fighting for a takedown. Now it’s time for him to take a little time and use the body triangle to both hold position and put his opponent under duress while he is relatively relaxed. Using this simple pattern of exertion to gain a position followed by active rest and recomposing in that position to gather resources into a final push for submission allowed him to secure the stranglehold soon after this photo was taken.

That look when you get to the Thanksgiving dinner table after Gordon Ryan and find the discarded bones of two turkeys, a cow, several chickens and something that could be anything from a fur seal to a small dolphin...all that’s left is an apple and some crumbs of stuffing...
Happy Thanksgiving to all of you! Wishing you all the best from NYC! 🇺🇸🇺🇸

A master of position must perfect chest to chest and chest to back pins, but a master of SUBMISSION must go behind this and actively seek LIMB ISOLATION as the basis of his craft: The basis of offense in traditional Jiu Jitsu is position. Typically this is understood in terms of getting past your opponents legs and pinning him down either chest to chest or chest to back. However, the ability to submit an opponent requires you to go further and isolate a limb - to draw a limb away from the torso and away from the other limb. Only then can you break an opponent. Ultimately this will require you to develop subtle methods of wedging around a limb and trapping it in place long enough to apply the various submission holds of Jiu Jitsu - but your first step is MINDSET. Don’t be satisfied with simply getting the chest to chest or chest to back positions. Train yourself to always think of going the extra step of LIMB ISOLATION after you get to a pin. Initially you will have some frustration here, as the act of isolating a limb often requires movement that can lessen control momentarily and result in an opponent escaping when performed poorly. However, only by persisting and developing this crucial skill will you make the jump from being a pinner to a finisher - the highest ideal of the sport. Look how Gordon Ryan uses an underhook to wedge an opponents arm in place and move his elbow away from form his torso to isolate and weaken the arm. He has moved beyond the safety of chest to chest into the world of isolating wedges that lead to the possibility of submission - this is why his finishing percentages are so high. With patience and practice - so too can yours.

“Danaher, next match coming up soon - should I start my warm up now?”
“No...no...not yet...I’m just just going to stand here and look extremely sinister for a few more minutes first...”

It natural to think that justice would decree that the skills you worked so hard to develop in the dojo would stay unblemished with you for a lifetime once you gained them - given that ownership came at such a steep price in sweat and effort. This is an illusion. Of all the things you own - your skills are the most perishable. Against an opponent of similar skill and experience - you are only as good as the last one hundred and fifty days of your training. Gaining skills is only the first battle - keeping them is a much longer and lonelier one.

Heading back to NYC! I’m sad to leave beautiful Hawaii - this small Island group has a very strong Jiu Jitsu community and is an absolute pleasure to visit. It reminds me a lot of the land of my upbringing - New Zealand - both housed deep in the heart of the mighty Pacific Ocean - with Ocean breeze, sun sets and maritime air that I never see in NYC. Now it’s time to return across the ocean to the big Apple. Some great upcoming projects with Gordon Ryan so it’s back to the basement where the body and mind are tested and the spirit challenged and work fulfills dreams. Wishing you all the best from Hawaii. To my long suffering students - let’s get ready for action! See you soon! 🤗😜

Victory in Hawaii!! Garry Tonon took on the great Davi Ramos, ADCC champion here in Honolulu tonight in an epic fifteen minute battle between two masters of submission. Both men came out firing their big guns - leg attacks, arm attacks and strangles - all in combinations. The match went from floor to standing and back again at a furious pace. Around the ten minute mark it was becoming clear that the pace was straining the bigger man and Gary Tonon began to take over. As time narrowed, Mr Tonon hit a beautiful go behind to take the back and locked in a full strangle hold just as time expired! It was an amazing match that showcased how pace, movement and tactical threat can exhaust bigger and stronger opponents - even those of the highest quality. Now it’s back to NYC to get Gordon Ryan ready to face the great Bo Nickals in a hybrid jiu jitsu/wrestling match that should be another spectacle!! Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Superb win for Craig Jones! International student extraordinaire Craig Jones won a beautiful submission victory over the very talented Polish grappling super star Adam Wardzinski with a flawless Kimura into side triangle (yoko sankaku) combination attack in Liverpool England. Mr Wardzinski has a very strong butterfly guard game, but Mr Jones bypassed that with a rolling kimura attack and capitalized upon his opponents defensive turn to seize a side triangle and take a good situation into a great situation. A second defensive turn created an inverted variation of the same side triangle that only served to make it tighter and the win was complete. Great work again by Mr Jones as he shows his ever increasing submission repertoire against some of the best Jiu Jitsu players in the world!

Maximizing connection: Grappling is the business of controlling the movement of a resisting human being who is actively trying to control you as you try to control him. The means of control is PHYSICAL CONNECTION TO AN OPPONENT. Understand that connection comes in DEGREES. You can be more or less connected to an opponent. The more connection - the more control. As such, when it’s time to control a limb to set up a submission, the onus is on you to make sure you maximize the contact and connection between his limb and your body. This will prevent the slippage and space that defeats so many submission attempts. You want focus upon getting the highest possible percentage of the surface area of his limb in contact with you and then to solidify that contact by setting wedges around that limb and using your hands and feet to set those wedges in place. Note how in this photo my hands work at the joints and my head provides supplemental wedging while my feet lock into the opponents legs - maximizing contact and locking it all in place to form a sound connection that will endure long enough even against strong resistance to get the job done

On the road again: This weekend in Honolulu, Garry Tonon takes on the great ADCC Champion Davi Ramos in Fight 2 Win grappling event. I am at JFK getting ready to fly out as we prepare for the big show this weekend. Lots of very interesting shows coming up as Gordon Ryan prepares to take on the great wrestling champion Bo Nickel in around two weeks and Nicky Rod takes in MMA great (and very talented grappler) Luke Rockhold. Keep an eye on these great match ups! Wishing you all the best from JFK Airport - keep learning - keep training - make every day an opportunity to get a little closer to your Jiu Jitsu goals!

Fascinating match: Gordon Ryan was scheduled to do a bout with the great Rodolfo Viera at the third coast grappling championships but Mr Viera ended up pulling out. So did his replacement Erbeth Santos. Now he will face one of the very best wrestlers in the world today - the great Bo Nickal - three time NCAA champion who is transitioning to International freestyle wrestling - winning the U23 World Championship. Mr Nickal also has a strong interest in grappling and MMA and asked for a match with Mr Ryan. Finding a rule set that gave something to both athletes was interesting. Mr Nickal is apparently not so familiar with leg locking - one of Mr Ryan’s strengths, so we agreed no leg locks. Obviously he is a truly gifted wrestler and his best chance of victory is through takedowns - if Mr Ryan simply sat down to guard position he could not use his best skill set - so Mr Ryan agreed to no guard pulling. Even so this match is still predominantly a Jiu Jitsu match - so Mr Ryan has offered to do a second match at a later date (probably after the Olympic Games of 2020 since Mr Nickals main focus next year is the Olympics) in which they do a match that is almost all standing grappling with little ground work so that both athletes get a match that is predominantly in their domain. This should be a really interesting cross over event between two athletes at the top of their respective sports that allows them to showcase the interface between grappling and wrestling. It’s just two weeks away now - Mr Ryan has been inactive due to a rib injury but is now back in training to get ready for what should be a really interesting match!

Every attack from guard position should begin as an attack upon your opponents posture and balance: To be effective from top position your opponent must work from a strong efficient posture and must be in balance. Your goal always is to take these two essential prerequisites away from him as soon and as often as possible. EVERY ATTACK YOU CAN MAKE FROM BOTTOM POSITION IS SIGNIFICANTLY EASIER WHEN YOUR OPPONENTS BALANCE AND POSTURE ARE BROKEN. You can break an opponents balance forwards and backwards and side to side. Develop the skill of kuzushi (off balancing/posture destruction) and make it the basis of your guard game. Here, I demonstrate the value of keeping your opponents head below his hips as he stands in a closed guard - making many of the major submissions and sweeps much easier. Practice and refine the skill of knocking your opponents hands, knees and hips down to the floor. As he tries to recover balance and stance your attacks will break through easily during that momentary distraction.

Great match up! This weekend in Honolulu Hawaii, Garry Tonon will take on the great ADCC Champion Davi Ramos at Fight2Win @f2wbjj in a fifteen minute match allowing all submissions. Mr Ramos won ADCC in highlight reel fashion and has superb upper body and lower body attacks. He is quite a bit bigger now than he was then, so the match will be contested at 185 pounds rather than the 170 pounds he won ADCC and UFC events. Mr Tonon has a long history of taking on bigger and stronger opponents but this will doubtless be the toughest grappling match up he has ever faced. Both athletes are focused on MMA now, but both are Jiu Jitsu centered MMA fighters so have kept their grappling skills high even as they made the transition. These are two of the most dynamic and exciting grapplers on the planet - keep your eyes out for this match!!

The majority of what we call elite performance is simply the degree to which some athletes take the fundamentals of our sport closer to the limits of their potential - the depth of your progress in Jiu Jitsu is entirely based upon the depth of your knowledge and the perfection of your expression of the fundamentals. Make the fundamentals your lifetime study and understand that you will never exhaust their potential even in ten lifetimes

The mount: The mounted position is, along with the rear mount, the highest scoring position in Jiu Jitsu. The reasoning behind this is that in a real fight with blows being thrown it is a devastating position from which to throw fists and elbows into a helpless pinned opponent. In grappling without strikes, I definitely prefer rear mount as it does not require strikes to opponent up a defensive opponent (I also slightly prefer rear mount even in MMA and self defense contexts too, but that’s a different topic and there are many people who would disagree with this opinion). Understand that when you first get into the mounted position and you are looking to establish initial control, you typically begin in a position with your hips over your opponents hips. This creates good stability and let’s you use your arms to post out wide on the floor for base. Realize however, that the hip over hip position whilst excellent from a stability viewpoint, will limit the number and type of submissions you can attack from mount. To expand your attacking arsenal from mount and start incorporating your legs into the attacks (armbars and triangles for example), You must now go the extra distance and start progressing up to your opponents chest and shoulders with your hips. In addition you will need ANGLE. Your body must be able to pivot around your opponents shoulders. Gaining the confidence to CLIMB UP FROM HIP OVER HIP TO HIP OVER CHEST and begin forming PERPENDICULAR ANGLE is the key to going from someone who can HOLD someone in the mounted position, to becoming an athlete who can FINISH someone from mounted position. It’s a difficult thing to learn as you have to sacrifice a stable and secure pin for a less stable and less secure alternative, but which enables you to attack far better. Here, Garry Tonon climbs high up on to the chest to get into a devastating mounted triangle position - the result of the position and angle he achieved- and can now go into a very strong submission attack. Getting to mount is great, but your route to mount mastery must involve moving HIGHER UP THE TORSO AND GETTING ANGLE.

Take your time with your back strangles: Most if the Jiu Jitsu is a battle against the clock. We have to make decisions and perform moves in less time than our opponent if we are to put him under the kind of decision/action pressure that breaks people and let’s us finish decisively. Strangling from the back is a different sort of affair. Unless there is limited time left in the match, you will generally get better results focusing on maintaining chest to back position and making sure you are securely hooked into both sides of his body first and only when these are preconditions met, switching focus towards the strangle. Understand that often position and control are partially lost as you attempt a strangle. Should this happen, STOP THE STRANGLE ATTEMPT AND RE-ESTABLISH CHEST TO BACK CONTACT AND CONTROL OF BOTH SIDES OF THE OPPONENTS BODY. Quite often there will be an extended period of time where you have to fight for position and control on multiple occasions until finally you get the strangle opportunity. This is normal - TAKE YOUR TIME. Nothing is more heart breaking that getting all the way to the back and losing the position due to over zealousness. Here, Craig Jones shows admirable poise and calm as he positions himself for a strangle. Note that he has established the two main prerequisites - chest to back position and is hooked into both sides of his opponents body (a leg on one side, arm on the other). You can see he is in no rush to strangle - there is no reason why he should be - WHEN YOU ARE IN A WINNING POSITION - LET THE POSITION DO THE WINNING FOR YOU. Let your position be the main focus and your strangle merely an afterthought.

“Yo Nicky...check out Spazzy McSpazz over there...he looks as stiff as a hard on overdosed on viagra that got hit by a f**king taser...”

Get outside your opponents elbows and you have a direct route to the back: There are many highways to an opponents back - all of them are important - but the simplest and most direct and the one you need to master first - is to get outside your opponents elbows. This can be done from standing, from top and from bottom. It can be done in many ways - arm drags, elbow posts, kata gatame etc. Make it a habit to constantly fight to get outside your opponents elbows and you will always find yourself in an advantageous angle that will give you access to the back. As an added bonus, if the opponent defends his back by squaring up to you, he will make himself vulnerable to many submissions performed from frontal positioning or attacks on the other side of his body - all because of that initial threat you created by clearing his elbow. The elbow will always be the clearest and simplest demarcation line between frontal and back positions. Remember always that the back is the single best attacking position in all of grappling - learn to navigate your way there from everywhere and by every means - but understand that beating the elbow will be the most direct path you can take. Here, Gordon Ryan - master of back attacks - beats the elbow of Lachlan Giles from a frontal mounted position and opens up a simple and direct avenue to the back that will result in a finish from back position at ADCC 2019.

You aren’t going to be the hammer every time - spend some practicing to be the nail: Jiu Jitsu is a sport with two main elements - OFFENSE and DEFENSE. Only by practicing BOTH will you reach your potential in the sport. Of course practicing offense is a lot more fun, but the fun ends abruptly when you run into a tough opponent who puts you in a defensive situation and you realize you haven’t trained for this at all and you don’t have the skills to hold him off. Set time every session to practice the crucial skill of defense. This sport is full of can crushers who look amazing going against easy opponents but who fold badly against studs. Only by regularly training the less pleasant aspects of the sport do you get the rare and wonderful ability to survive a bad situation against a talented opponent and fight back to victory.

Get ready for the next Gordon Ryan video!! Later this week @bjj.fanatics will release the new Gordon Ryan video MY EVOLUTION: YOUR REVOLUTION - 2019 ADCC WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS. This is an instructional video based upon one of the greatest grappling performances in history - double gold in just his second world championships at age twenty four. This video will feature actual footage of the his matches and provide incredible breakdowns of the action - the WHY and HOW of every move and decision he made - along with detailed expositions and explanations in the gym. On the surface it looks like the video is about a great grappler showing his moves - but it isn’t. The real subject of this video is not Gordon Ryan - it’s YOU. He describes his EVOLUTION from the most successful ADCC debut of all time in 2017 to one of the most dominant ADCC performances ever in 2019, resulting in double gold without a single point being scored on him and a seventy five percent submission rate. However, the real subject matter is the REVOLUTION that this can create in YOUR game. This is a master class in technique and tactics at the highest level by the best player in the game taught in ways that can make a concrete difference in your performance in a very short time. Watching this performance from the coaches chair was one of the greatest experiences of my life - now you get a chance to watch from the students chair and I promise you that you will be a significantly better Jiu Jitsu player as a result! Keep your eyes open for this drop later in the week and get ready to put a revolution in your performance! The game is changing quickly - stay current, keep learning from the best and start winning!

The remarkable powers of the cross lapel grip: There are no universal panaceas for the myriad problems and scenarios of Jiu Jitsu - we have to be adaptable and look for individual solutions to every problem. Nonetheless there are some moves and concepts etc that have incredibly wide applications and come as close to a panacea as we can get in this sport. One of them is the cross lapel grip. This is probably the single most effective and versatile grip we can employ from guard position and many top pin scenarios as well. It is a grip that gives excellent and immediate control of your opponents HEAD, arguably the most important part of the body to control. In addition it creates an immediate danger of STRANGULATION to harass, intimidate and even finish an opponent. It gives a bottom guard player good distance control for both offense and defense. Perhaps most important it enables a bottom player to constantly BREAK AN OPPONENTS POSTURE and thus create strong action/reaction attacks as an opponent tries to resist and recover. Experiment with different ways of holding the grip based upon what end you want to achieve. Learn to switch hands and grip and re grip side to side so as to lead actively into attacks rather than just holding on with a death grip without purpose. Create a sense of push/pull and action/reaction - this is the element that makes Jiu Jitsu interesting and artful rather than a slogging match. There is a reason why so many great athletes made this simple yet devastating grip the basis of their attacking grip game - make it part of yours too!!

Inside position: Jiu Jitsu is a game of control - my ideal is that it be in particular a game of control that leads to submission - nonetheless it all begins with control. The most commonly talked about means of control is POSITION. When people talk of position in Jiu Jitsu they typically are referring to TACTICAL position ie how the two athletes are positioned relative to each other as defined by the scoring system of the sport - side position, mount position, rear mount position etc. But there is a an entire different class of position that is just as important for control purposes - LIMB POSITION - ie how are my limbs positioned relative to my opponents limbs? The fundamental choice here is between OUTSIDE position (my limbs outside his limbs)and INSIDE position (my limbs positioned inside. Each has their good and bad points. When working from underneath a heavier opponent I generally recommend an emphasis on inside positioning. This makes it very difficult for an opponent to pin you by wedging his limbs around your torso and reinforcing those wedges with body weight for the simple reason that you are inside any wedge he can create. This enables you to create effective movement underneath an opponents body weight - the basis of being effective from bottom position. Here, Garry Tonon works from underneath an opponent and has secured all the inside real estate. His feet dominate the space between his opponents knees and both his arms are under hooked to out his elbows inside his opponents elbows. As a result, even though he carries his opponents weight, the inability of the opponent to form immobilizing wedges around him means he can move very effectively from here and launch into a wide array of upper body and lower body submissions. Don’t fear your opponents weight - fear his ability to create immobilizing wedges around you - and inside control is a powerful antidote to this danger that has the added benefit of facilitating your own attacks.

Dealing with the big men - get behind them: Probably the most common question i am asked is - how do i defeat people bigger and stronger than myself. Here is my general advice. When matches against bigger people MAINTAIN INSIDE POSITION UNDERNEATH THEM AND CARRYING THEIR WEIGHT. IN OFFENSIVE SITUATIONS, FAVOR LEG ATTACKS AND MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE - GET BEHIND THEM. Inside position is the key to managing greater body weight from underneath. The legs are the hardest thing for heavyweights to hide from a smaller and more agile player and once locked, a heel hook will break anyone regardless of size. Also, the bigger the foot, the longer the breaking lever and the less chance of slippage. And the back - i don’t care how big and strong they are - they can’t push or pull someone who is behind them - so get there soon and stay there to beat the big men! Nick Rodriguez is the biggest and strongest athlete in the blue basement by a landslide, but in ADCC World Championships he was rather small compared to some of his opponents. He took on the massively powerful two time ADCC Champion Orlando Sanchez in his second match - gameplan? GET BEHIND HIM! He did exactly that and got the win! So remember the basic strategy when fighting bigger, heavier and stronger people. Inside position when underneath, focus submissions on the legs and position on the back!

Lacing your opponents legs: A very distinctive part of our leg lock system is preference for using the principle of DOUBLE TROUBLE whenever possible. Double trouble is the general principle that whenever you go to attack one leg, whether it be with a leg lock, a takedown or a sweep, ninety percent of the resistance comes from the OTHER leg. One of my favorite manifestations of this principle and one which all my students excel at - is a leg lace from cross ashi garami that binds and opponents two legs together and offers a tremendous degrees of control that can be used to hold, sweep and break an opponent who is considerably bigger, stronger and more athletic than you. Understand that almost all expressions of human athleticism require the unified work of both legs. When you shackle a mans legs together you rob him of all athleticism immediately - and a leg lace from cross ashi garami does exactly that. Here, Garry Tonon shows the control that is possible from this devastating leg locking position as he goes hunting for the secondary leg to solidify his position. Look to utilize double trouble whenever you can - not just in leg kicking but across the board. You will be impressed how adherence to this principle can lower your workload whilst increasing your success rate.

“Danaher told me I’m way better than you were at my age.” “F**k you, you little f**k! If I get out of this triangle I’m gonna squash you flat.” “You won’t be getting out...”
Another day training in the basement 😂😂😂 photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Denial: All the techniques of Jiu Jitsu are divided into two camps. First there are the positive offensive movements which involve our attempts to impose our moves upon an opponent. Second, there are the negative defensive movements where we try to deny our opponents ability to impose his moves upon us. Excellence in Jiu Jitsu is about mastery of BOTH types of technique. A big part of our opponents ability to impose his moves upon us is bound up with his ability to get effective HANDLES upon us. If he can do so, then he can moves us around, disturb our balance, work to a dominant grip etc etc. Whenever you are in defensive situations then, BEGIN BY DENYING EFFECTIVE HANDLES ON YOUR BODY TO YOUR OPPONENT. There are certain points of the human body that give excellent handles to a skilled opponent - YOU MUST PROTECT THESE IMMEDIATELY WHEN PUT IN A COMPROMISED POSITION. learn to use your hands and elbows to cover up these handles early and you will soon find that subsequent defensive moves are MUCH easier than usual. Here, the inestimable Brian Glick shows his defensive master by covering one of the very best handles on the human body - the hip - with his elbows in order to deny his opponent, Nick Rodriguez, a dangerous back attack specialist, a solid purchase on his body that could lead to serious problems. The more you deny the main handles of the body to your opponent and the earlier you do it - the more effective your defensive game will be!

Closed guard instructional video release! I am very happy to announce the release today of the latest chapter of my GO FURTHER FASTER - BJJ FUNDAMENTALS instructional video series - CLOSED GUARD. Closed guard is invariably the first position that Jiu Jitsu students are taught when working bottom game. It always figures heavily in competition and gym sparring success in Jiu Jitsu at all levels and in all weight categories both with and without the gi. Many great athletes have excelled at it and made it the foundation of their bottom game. The high hip position it offers makes it capable of being a devastating attacking position from underneath if used well. The main theme of this video is built around the idea that ostensibly closed guard is a NEUTRAL position - but if we can maneuver an opponent into one of six easily attainable vulnerabilities within closed guard - we can convert it to a DOMINANT position even whilst underneath a tough and knowledgeable opponent - and that’s when the fun begins! Though I am mostly known as a coach of high level athletes and technical innovations - nothing pleases me more than teaching the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu - for without them none of the other material I teach would be effective. The fundamentals are the heart and soul of the game and closed guard is the most fundamental of the entire bottom game. Keep working your closed guard!! That’s one position that will never go out of style 😜 If you are interested in my video there is a link in my Instagram bio.

Victory in NYC!! Katelyn Chookagian won a unanimous decision with a spirited bout mostly fought in standing position where she took the first two rounds and kept her status as number one contender in her division here at UFC 244. Late in the third round she got a chance to show her developing ground skills with a nice ashi garami entrance starting from bottom half guard that forced a defensive reaction into an escape as time ran out. An excellent reward for a great camp between RGA in New York and Mark Henry in New Jersey. It was a pleasure working with Mark Henry and PJ McMahon in the corner and watching this talented young athlete duke it out here at the greatest fight palace of them all - Madison Square Garden in NYC! Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Lots more great fights going on tonight! The garden has a great atmosphere tonight - so much epic history of combat sports here - it’s wonderful to see MMA entrenched now as the leader among those combat sports!

If you can get past your opponent’s elbow while your hips are above his - you have his back every damn time! A simple default option that will greatly improve your effectiveness on the mat is to get outside your opponents elbow. If you can do this while your hips are higher than his - you will have exposed his back - the king of attacking positions. Make this simple sequence one of your go-to methods of generating effective offense. It costs you almost nothing and the potential rewards are great. There are a plethora of methods of getting past an elbow - arm drags, slide bys, duck unders, limp arms - they all work very well and they all get you easily to the best position in the sport from almost anywhere. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of back attacks slips outside an elbow and immediately starts climbing for height with his hips - generating immediate back exposure that takes him from a neutral position to the strongest position in the game in the blink of an eye.

Put some venom in it! Most of my job is getting performance increases in Jiu Jitsu athletes. By far the biggest part of that job is increasing skill levels and improving tactics. As such I put a high value on technical nuance and sophistication among the people I teach. This is reflected in class where praise is usually directed to the pupils making the gains in technical performance. Most of our sparring tends to be very controlled with a big emphasis on excellence of execution. Nonetheless when it’s time to shine on the big stage one has to go beyond technique and start talking about INTENTION. When you have to derive maximum performance from a given move there is an ineffable element that comes from the intensity of intention that you bring into the move. There is a BIG difference between sparring with someone who is calmly going through the mechanics of a heel hook versus someone who comes at you with the real intention of breaking your leg. Mental intention creates a unity of purpose in your body that creates a more powerful physical action. You don’t want to train all the time with this, since training is more about physical refinement, but it’s nice to add it into the mix periodically to see how much more more venom you can add to the moves you practice every day. Here, Garry Tonon puts some venom into an arm drag - a move he practices every day in a relaxed fashion, but the extra spice added here turns it into a powerful vortex that took his opponent to the mat in the blink of an eye. Technical perfection plus hard intention creates an unstoppable and intimidating move.

Who is on top of who? If you look at this picture it seems obvious that Jake Shields has top position on Gordon Ryan. A deeper look at closed guard reveals that in fact, the bottom players HIPS are actually on top of other fellows hips and legs. The top player certainly has UPPER BODY top position, but as long as the top player remains on his knees, the bottom player has LOWER BODY top position. This has tremendously important ramifications. It means that any sweep from this position will result not only in a reversal, but a reversal to MOUNT, since closed guard is simply an upside down mounted position. It also means that any submission you can apply from mount, can be applied from bottom closed guard. The major upper body submissions of Jiu Jitsu are NEUTRAL WITH REGARDS TOP OR BOTTOM POSITION - all they require is that your HIPS BE ABOVE YOUR OPPONENTS HIPS. As such closed guard is a potentially devastating position for upper body submissions whilst your opponent cannot even get started on upper body submissions until he gets his hips and legs out from under yours - a clear tactical advantage for the bottom player. In a grappling match (less so when striking is allowed), Never underestimate the power of top hip position - even when your opponent has the more superficial upper body top position. Learning to value the remarkable power of top hip position from closed guard bottom is a big part of your journey to develop a devastating bottom game in Jiu Jitsu.

The most readily available move in the sport - front headlock: Jiu Jitsu is a sport that prioritizes getting close to your opponent and getting to grips with him. As such there is a a lot of aggressive forward movement towards an opponent and a lot of level changing down to get under your opponents defensive arms and get a hold of him. This results in MANY opportunities to take a front headlock upon your opponent. In fact I would venture to say that front headlock is probably the single most available move/hold in Jiu Jitsu. It offers immediate control of the head - the most valuable part of the body to control when you want to restrain a powerful foe. It leads immediately into some of the best submissions in the sport - all guillotine variations and many kata gatame variations such as Darce and Anaconda strangles. In addition it leads naturally to the back - king of all attacking positions - along with many fine takedown opportunities. It is equally effective in both standing and ground grappling and it is equally effective as a defensive move and an offensive move. If you get into a serious grappling match with a good opponent for more than two minutes, I GUARANTEE at some point there will be an opportunity for a front headlock - it’s almost impossible to engage in grappling without either conceding the opportunity or being presented with the opportunity. As such you have two duties towards the front headlock. First, you should invest the time into developing a strong front headlock of your own. Second, you should have some strong and trusted defenses to the move given the very high likelihood you will have to fight out of it pretty much every time you grapple. Craig Jones took the time this year to vastly improve his front headlock skills in the blue basement and it showed at the ADCC World Championships where he used it extremely well en route to a silver medal with a seventy five percent submission rate! You must work this position and come to understand it’s incredible potential and value.

Failure and success: A moments reflect reveals that THE VAST MAJORITY OF SUBMISSION ATTEMPTS WE MAKE IN THE COURSE OF OUR JIU JITSU WILL END IN FAILURE. For every time we successfully apply a submission hold we typically fail more than ten times. It’s easy to get discouraged. It can even happen in the midst of a match. You have a favorite move - you try it several times and fail each time. It’s easy to say to yourself that this opponent is impervious to this form of attack and stop trying and move on. Understand that in most cases it is only the imperfections in your the application of the move that resulted in that failure - not the move itself or your opponents defenses. When you experience failure, don’t immediately assume this opponent can’t be beaten by this method. Instead, try to asses on the spot how good your attempt was and what deficiencies lead to the initial failure - so that when you attempt it again you are doing a better job. If we just repeat the first failed attempt, you can only expect a second failure. But if you quickly assess what made the initial attempt fail and change those elements on the second or third attempt - you have a great chance of getting the breakthrough even after several initial failures. Here, Garry Tonon unsuccessfully attempts a heel hook variation in his bronze medal bout at ADCC. It would have been easy to quit heel hooks and attempt other forms of attack. Rather than just give up on one of his strongest weapons, he assessed what was wrong the first time and came back with a better second heel hook that won him a medal! Never tell yourself “this isn’t working.” Rather, ask yourself, “why didn’t that last attempt work?” The former leads to defeatism, the latter to confidence and success.

Juniors on the warpath: Much of the focus of my posts is on the actions of my senior students as they provide an excellent example for you all in terms of long term training goals and performance increases. However, it is often the path of the juniors that is closer to most people’s daily experiences as many of you are fairly new to the sport and still in the early days of your journey. After all the attention on the seniors at the ADCC World Championships recently, this weekend some of the juniors stepped up at a local grappling competition - here is talented youngster Demian Anderson showing excellent form with leg entries from top and bottom position and showing how they can be used both for position advance and submission, using outside ashi garami as the means of controlling his opponents legs. Always remember that it was at this level that Garry, Eddie, Gordon and Nicky began five to seven years ago and grew from there. Keep working hard at whatever level you currently are - keep your mind on technique and tactics, your energy on your workouts and your vision on your dreams!

Closed guard - angle is everything: The closed guard is one of the most representative of classic Jiu Jitsu among of all the major positions. Even if you don’t favor it yourself, you can be assured that other people will often use it on you - so the more that you know about it the better - no exceptions. One of the main routes to success from bottom closed guard is ANGLE. It is difficult to perform any kind of successful offense without first getting misaligned with your opponent. You must make a habit of constantly misaligning yourself if your are to become a threat from bottom. Your opponent will seek to counter by re-aligning himself to you. In that action/reaction exchange of alignment vs misalignment if the game of closed guard. Your hips are the basis of the position and you want yours out an angle. This might be something as a small shift to one side that creates enough space to enter a triangle, or it could be a turn far beyond ninety degrees that enables you to spin and rise into an arm bar. In almost every case, some form of misalignment to an angle will be required to generate attacks. Remember always that there is a world difference between being on the back vs being FLAT on your back. It’s tough to be effective when you are flat on your back in bottom position - but the simple act of constantly shifting your hips from side to side and gaining angles big and small will help greatly to improve your offensive potential from this great position.

Time: Of all the critical factors that go into success in Jiu Jitsu the one that gets talked about the least and yet which probably ought to be talked about the most is the effect of time. There are three main ways in which time plays a decisive role in outcomes. The first is SPEED OF DECISION MAKING RELATIVE TO YOUR OPPONENT. Your job is to make better and faster decisions than the other fellow. If you can do this consistently you will almost always win. You want to solve the problems he creates for you faster than he can solve the problems you create for him. The second is the time lag between MAKING A DECISION AND ACTING UPON IT. We all constantly second guess and procrastinate. You don’t have to be the fastest man out there in a physical sense, but the faster you can go from DECISION to ACTION the better you will do. The world is full of people who know what they ought to do but delay pulling the trigger - that’s why failure is so prevalent. The third way in which time plays a role is more pertinent to competition. HOW MUCH TIME IS LEFT IN THE MATCH? This will heavily influence your choice of technique and tactics. Make sure you have techniques that are divided up by how much time it takes to execute them and there is considerable variation in this regard. Here, Gordon makes a quick time check on the clock as he enters a strong attacking position. This will determine our selection of technique - in this case, lots of time so a time consuming but very high percentage moves such as a rear strangle is appropriate - and in this case, an excellent path to victory.

Many people go out on the stage THINKING they are going to win - only a few go out KNOWING they are going to win. Your job is to train in such a manner that over time you become more like the latter and less like the former. Your first steps involve developing a clear understanding of all the means by which you could possibly lose a match and making it impossible for an opponent to make them happen. Once you know an opponent has no means of scoring on you - the act of winning becomes a lot easier.

A man out of balance is easy to attack: Attacking and scoring in Jiu Jitsu on someone your own level is never easy. Understand this: THE DEGREE OF DIFFICULTY ASSOCIATED WITH ATTACKING A SKILLED OPPONENT IS DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO THE STRENGTH OF HIS POSTURE AND BASE. If you can break his posture and base by upsetting his balance - the attacks come MUCH easier. Whenever you play bottom position, always seek to get gravity working in your favor by constantly attacking your opponents base of support. My favorite way of doing so is foot techniques - in particular foot sweeps (ashi waza). Well applied foot sweeps from bottom position can make your opponent miserable and make it very difficult for him to settle down into strong passing positions and at the same time, greatly facilitate your favorite attacks. Ideally you want to create a situation where he finds it very difficult to stand in front of you and is reduced to stumbling around like a drunk on roller skates while you are able to dart into your favorite moves. Here, Gordon Ryan uses foot sweeps to beautifully off balance a training partner. After the stumble there will be a momentary opportunity to go easily into attack and score. Take it and win!!

Unlocking the power of closed guard: Probably the single most iconic Jiu Jitsu position and the one that we all started with is closed guard. While mount and rear mount are the most dominant positions, there is nothing really surprising about their dominance. If a total grappling neophyte saw them he would intuit very easily that they are superior positions conferring great advantage to the player in the attacking position. But if that same neophyte saw a closed guard and you tried to tell him that the bottom closed guard player had a tactical advantage over the top player - he may well call you a fool - after all, he is in bottom position in a situation that looks more appropriate for the bedroom than winning fights. Yet the bottom player assuredly doesn’t have a tactical advantage in a grappling situation from bottom closed guard. As long as the guard is closed, the top player cannot engage in any serious positional or submission attacks. All he has are a few very low percentage options that are very likely to be strongly countered by a good bottom player. He cannot initiate any serious positional or submission offense until he first opens the guard. The bottom athlete on the other hand, can immediately begin attacking from closed guard with some of the best submission and positional attacks in the sport. There is a powerful asymmetry here between the top players inability to do much until he first opens the closed guard versus the bottom players ability to attack very strongly from the same situation. Learning to gain faith in this tactical advantage is a BIG part of your early development in bottom game Jiu Jitsu. In time you can make yourself a nightmare to anyone trapped inside your closed guard - to the point where opponents fear it almost as much as your mount or rear mount. That journey begins with understanding and trusting in the tactical asymmetry in attacking opportunity between top and bottom player in closed guard. It may not be obvious to the neophyte - but one day your ability to exploit this will identify you as an expert!

Fighting smaller people: One of the great themes of Jiu Jitsu is that of constantly developing your ability to OVERCOME GREATER STRENGTH WITH LESSER STRENGTH. As such much is written and talked about how to beat bigger opponents. In contrast, little is spoken about how to beat smaller opponents. The feeling is that bigger people ought to be able to beat smaller people just in virtue of being bigger. However, I’m sure you have all had the unpleasant experience of going up against a tricky smaller fighter and really struggling with the task. In the recent ADCC World championships open weight division exactly this scenario played out - 77kg division entrant Lachlan Giles had been beaten in his first match in his own weight division and went into the open weight as a heavy underdog as one of the smallest entrants. He used the classic weapons of the smaller athlete - inversion, inside positioning and off balancing to successfully attack three much larger heavyweights and win by submission - one of the outstanding performances of the event. Underestimating the smaller athlete resulted in three heavyweight world champions getting soundly defeated (lack of knowledge of the leg lock game was also an obvious factor). It was a valuable lesson to the Jiu Jitsu World - we cant ignore the question of how to take on smaller opponents. Gordon Ryan took on Mr Giles in the midst of his heavyweight blitz. We decided that the two best options would either finish him with counter leg locking as he appeared vulnerable to some strong counter opportunities and Mr Ryan has an extremely strong leg lock and counter leg lock game that the other heavyweights clearly lacked; or play a game based on the two biggest problems bigger athletes can create for smaller athletes - nullify the effects of the legs and inversion by stepping over a knee and getting chest to chest to maximize weight advantage and minimize movement from underneath, then get behind where height advantage creates tremendous control and submission opportunities through arm traps with body triangles. The second option arose first and here you see the result - but make sure you have a plan for ALL opponents big AND small

Pathways to the back: You all know how much emphasis I put on getting to the back. In a pure grappling match without strikes I value the back mount far more than the front mount EVEN THOUGH THEY SCORE THE SAME AMOUNT OF POINTS. As such, a big part of our coaching program is spent of developing pathways to the back from anywhere. All of my students excel in this, particularly the Ryan brothers. An interesting point about this notion of constantly seeking the back is that whilst it is mostly a physical skill, there is also a mental component insofar as you first have to identify the OPPORTUNITY. You have to train your eyes to see the opportunity before you actually pull out the move to realize that opportunity. The world is full of Jiu Jitsu students who know many moves to take the back, but who overlook myriad opportunities in live sparring and so never get to use those moves when it counts. I often preach to my students IF YOU CAN SEE THE BACK, YOU CAN TAKE THE BACK. While this is an oversimplification and there is more to the story than this, it does a good job of getting students to MENTALLY IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITIES to take the back - the single most important first step towards back mastery. Next time your are sparring keep those eyes of yours looking for the back and I promise you you will find yourself more often on your opponents back! Here, Gordon Ryan, master of identifying even the tiniest opportunity, goes from mental recognition and into physical action as he moves towards the back of yet another world champion opponent at the recent ADCC world championships en route to gold.

One of the surest ways to success in life is to identify an unacknowledged truth - something of value that is true, but which only a few people KNOW or ACKNOWLEDGE is true. For example, I knew many years ago that leg locks could be improved from their basic format and made into a system just as effective as traditional Jiu Jitsu upper body submission and position orthodoxy. When I taught that to the squad it gave them them a significant advantage that enabled them to effectively match up against athletes with far more overall experience than them and win. If everyone acknowledges the truth of a true idea, then it’s difficult to use it to advantage - but if an important idea is true AND YOU ARE THE ONLY ONE WHO BELIEVES IT TO BE THE CASE - THEN YOU CAN EASILY USE IT TO YOUR ADVANTAGE. A good example of this is one of my favorite moves - which I believe has always been massively undervalued in Jiu Jitsu. This is the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku). It is a truly devastating weapon, far more controlling than the more popular arm bars and strangles normally used in this position. From it you can apply a crushingly powerful strangle and many joint locks. It offers far more control than its alternatives and truly enables a smaller person to defeat a bigger person. All my senior students are masters of it - you should be too! Here, Gordon Ryan completely ties up and controls an opponent and now has his choice of which submission he will employ from here. Make a serious study of ushiro sankaku and take advantage of other people’s failure to see the value of this gold mine of submissions!

When the pressure is on - it’s good to have some weapons you truly believe in: Humans tend to be naturally risk averse. We generally tend to fear the risk of loss more than we cherish the prospect of gain. This tendency tends to become even stronger in high pressure situations. In Jiu Jitsu this will often result in athletes restricting themselves to only their most trusted moves when they are on the big stage. It is crucial for your development therefore, that you have a select arsenal of moves in which you have total trust. These are the guns that you will be willing to fire when the heat is on - all those other moves that you like and enjoy when you are rolling with your friends in the gym won’t do you any good now. At ADCC 2019 Garry Tonon fought for the bronze medal and took on the very talented and physically powerful Dante Leon, who had impressed everyone by defeating Jiu Jitsu legend Lucas Lepri in an earlier round. When it came time to attack, Mr Tonon went back to one of the most recognizable of the squad arsenal - outside heel hook from outside ashi garami - a move he has drilled and performed many thousands of times. Despite the tense nature of the match his confidence in the move, derived from so much practice and experience in its use and application, meant that there was not a second of hesitation and once again it was outside ashi garami heel hook for the win! You too, must develop a small but very strong subset of moves that are your most trusted weapons upon which you can call when the pressure is on you to perform. Your selection is an expression of your body and your personality so this is a deeply personal part of your development and no one else can tell what your selection will be - but select them over time you must, for when you are too nervous to try your other moves - these guns will still fire.

You’re never going to feel good about your training sessions - you’re never going to feel one hundred percent going into a match: We al have a dream that one day our Jiu Jitsu will feel unstoppable and that the efforts of training will be rewarded with constant progress to a point where you win every match without effort and that our bodies will strengthen with the training to the point we feel physically perfect. This is a pipe dream. Your body will always have issues and pains and in most cases you will have to face up to your challenges in a less than optimal physical state with nagging injuries and constant fatigue. In addition, understand that all your training partners are progressing at roughly the same rate as you and thus you will never have effortless victories in the gym. Every session will be a slog against the pains and fatigue inside your own body and the training partners who grow along side you and remain a severe test every single session. This photo of Gordon Ryan was taken one week before his dominant double gold performance at ADCC. It shows clearly the strain of a standard daily training session (one of three per day). If you saw how effortless many of his matches looked at the world championships you might think the training sessions were even more so - this picture tells a different story. ITS NEVER GOING TO BE AN EASY RIDE FOR YOU - don’t think in those terms. The only measure of worth is this - ARE YOU SLIGHTLY BETTER AT THE SKILLS YOU ARE WORKING ON WHEN YOU WENT TO SLEEP THAN WHEN YOU WOKE. No matter how tired and beat up you might feel after your workouts, THAT’S a realistic and worthwhile goal for each and every session.

People treat you differently when you are dangerous: A big theme in my coaching is that of PRECISION IN BREAKING MECHANICS. I insist to all of my students that they study deeply the dark arts of breaking limbs and strangulation. Remember always that it is the submission holds of Jiu Jitsu that make it dangerous. When you have powerful breaking mechanics and you can snap limbs like matchsticks your opponents treat you very differently from a strictly positional player. They start over reacting to threats and feints, they are reluctant to engage with you, they have to settle for a tactical game of score and run rather than really engage with you. Learning to master the precise details is not fun - you have to have it done to you to learn how to do it to others. You also have to be very responsible with it as you can’t afford to hurt training partners. But once you gain it, opponents will treat you with a respect that few are shown. Here, Gordon Ryan shows the punishing power of his heel hook. You can see the tension running through the leg and the reaction to the lock. Take time with a friend working on those all important mechanics. Experiment with how changes in your opponents position and body type require you to adapt the lock for maximum effect. There is a reason why all my senior students are feared for their breaking power. With training and experimentation, you can be too.

A key to confidence when you step out on to the mat - know yourself: The moment you step up to a challenge on the mats, whether it be just another sparring round at the dojo or a big competition; it’s natural to wonder about the abilities of your opponent. What are his best moves? What tactics will he employ? Will he be stronger or have better endurance than you? It good to pay some attention to your opponent, but don’t go too far down that route, as in truth there will never be any certainty about those questions until the match is over. Put your primary emphasis upon knowing YOURSELF. Know what you are good and what you’re not good at. Use that knowledge to develop a strong sense of identity - this is who i am and these are my strong points - and seek always to push the match in those directions. You can’t control who your opponent is or what his skills are - but you can definitely control who you are and what your skills will be. Any wishy washy thoughts of “what will I do out there?” Must be replaced with a strong sense of who your are technically and stylistically and the will to show that to the opponent. Knowledge of WHAT YOU ARE GOOD AT and a sense of WHAT YOU STAND FOR in Jiu Jitsu will give you the clarity of purpose you will need to rise to whatever occasion you find yourself in.

Amazing performance by the squad at ADCC 2019: There are four special prizes given out at every ADCC World Championships to recognize great achievements among the many athletes. Best fighter, best match, fastest/best submission and best takedown. Squad athletes won three out of four of those prizes. Gordon Ryan was unstoppable and easily win best fighter award. Garry Tonon has the performances of his life with best match for his barn burner with Renato Canuto and fastest submission over Edwin Najmi. Great to see the amazing performances of these athletes getting official recognition - congratulations to @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @garrytonon

Life isn’t fair - and neither should be your Jiu Jitsu: The whole point of Jiu Jitsu is to create an unfair advantage over your opponent - Jiu Jitsu is the art of making things as unfair in your favor as possible within the rules. The most well known and important means of creating an unfair playing field is POSITION. If you get a dominant position on an opponent from where you can attack him whilst he cannot attack you, that is clearly going to make for a much easier match for you. Of all the various positions in sport Jiu Jitsu, I favor the back above all, and make it the centerpiece of our positional training. A big theme of my teaching is to GO BEYOND POSITION as a means of creating advantage and start bringing in other elements that create STILL GREATER ADVANTAGE until the fight becomes completely unfair in your favor. Here, Gordon Ryan, a true master of creating unfair advantage from the back, goes far beyond positional advantage and ties up both of his opponents defensive arms whilst leaving one of his arms free to strangle. Such is the effect of the arm traps he is using that one hand proved to be sufficient to finish this strangle in the final of the ADCC world championships against a very tough opponent. Look always to go beyond position and constantly seek to enlarge and improve your understanding of advantage in Jiu Jitsu. Understand always that the entire sport is built upon this philosophy and that the deeper your understanding of how to get mechanical and tactical advantage over an opponent the easier and more impressive your Jiu Jitsu will appear.

Handicap yourself to improve your performance: When we think about performance improvement we typically think of giving ourselves every possible advantage. However, one of the best ways to improve your overall performance levels is to deliberately handicap yourself in training and take away your advantages so that you can build up other, weaker aspects of your game that will be of great benefit in the future. Take the example of Nick Rodriguez. He is built like a titan and moves like a leopard. On any given day in the basement there may be only two or three people even close to his size and no one with his overall physicality. If wanted, he could simply overwhelm 95% of his training partners in sparring on physicality alone. That however, would mean zero technical improvement over time - just the same workout and results every day until he got bored. Instead, he intelligently handicaps himself by starting in compromised positions and toned down the use of his explosive speed and strength so that he can practice the refinement of his technique and make technical progress. His intelligent approach to training paid off in the ADCC heavyweight division. In our training room he is always the biggest in the room - but in the heavyweight division his first opponent towered over him and outweighed him by around 30-40 pounds. His second opponent outweighed him by almost a hundred pounds. In his battle to the finals he had to defeat a Jiu Jitsu world champion and two former ADCC champions - all bigger or at least same size as he - an incredible task. If he had just run over all his smaller partners in the gym he never would have practiced the compromised positions you inevitably find yourself in against bigger more experienced opponents you will face in competition in your own weight category and probably would have lost; but his good training attitude gave him the competition skills he needed to get to the finals in one of the most impressive debut performances in ADCC history. Remember always - A GOOD HEAVYWEIGHT CAN GET A GREAT WORKOUT IN A ROOMFUL OF LIGHTWEIGHTS AND A GOOD BLACK BELT CAN GET A GREAT WORKOUT IN A ROOMFUL OF WHITE BELTS.

Fastest submission and best move of ADCC 2019: Garry Tonon made a huge impression on ADCC 2019 with the match of the tournament against Renato Canuto and the fast submission and best overall move of the tournament against another submission specialist world champion Edwin Najmi. Both men are masters of flying submissions from standing position and both are quick to pull the trigger on these powerful and spectacular moves. As soon as they came to grips with each other, the crowd sensed something was going to happen. Mr Tonon have Mr Najmi the over hook grip - a brilliant tactical ploy - as the over hook is the preferred no gi grip for Mr Najmi’s favorite flying submission - the triangle - and the under hook that Mr Tonon took us not generally considered an optimal grip for Mr Tonon’s favorite flying submission - kani basami (the scissor takedown into inside heel hook). Seeing the apparent grip dominance, Mr Najmi felt he was safe, but Mr Tonon had compensated for the inferior grip with side on body positioning that allowed him to enter even with a less than optimal grip. The second he jumped he was in hip to hip and feeding the heel to his armpit and following his opponents strong defensive roll to land a beautiful and controlled submission in the opening seconds. This was one of those magic moments where skill, tactics, subterfuge and artistry worked together to produce a truly beautiful expression of Jiu Jitsu that was at the same time, deadly functional. Most of the time in Jiu Jitsu our primary concern is function and effectiveness - but when artistry is combined with function, the results are truly impressive. If you ever have a friend who thinks grappling is slow and boring - show them this 😜😜

This is me after I just found out that I won the state lottery worth $250,000,000 and got lifetime sponsorships from Bugatti and Lamborghini and that the entire Rockettes lineup wants to give me blow jobs - maximum excitement and emotion...what a day

Um...Garry? I’m pretty sure I told you to SHOOT in for the takedown, not FLY in....
#thereisonlyonegarryfuckingtonon

My favorite moment of ADCC 2019: Most of the preparation and execution for World Championship competition is pretty stressful for everyone involved but every so often there are some fun moments that lighten things up. During the tense and tactical final of the absolute division, Gordon Ryan took on the great Marcus Buchecha Almeida, a ten time world champion and former ADCC champion and unquestionably one of the very greatest Jiu Jitsu athletes of all time. In addition to being among the best exponents of Jiu Jitsu in history, Mr Almeida is also one of the nicest people in the sport. In a sport often divided by team loyalty he is a joy to be around and share time with and possessed of a great and natural sense of humor. The match, as you would expect, was a very tight one. Mr Ryan had gotten off to a strong start in the first ten minutes with a beautiful sweep to mount during the time when points were not scored. It was the best move of the match thus far and a with greater activity level overall Mr Ryan seemed to be ahead as the match moved closer to the time limit. It was important for Mr Almeida to convey more action as he was in danger of a stalling call, but pressing forward too much meant entering the dangerous guard of Mr Ryan - Mr Almeida intelligently went into a heel hook as a means of conveying a sense aggression to the judges even though heel hooks are not really his specialty - a sound tactical move. The only problem was that it was Gordon Ryan, like all of my senior students, a master of leg locks and heel hooks in particular. Mr Ryan looked at him with a “are you really trying to heel hook ME?” look and turned to me coaching on the sideline and smiled. Everyone observing saw the humor of it and chuckled. Mr Almeida saw the humor in it too and shrugged and laughed and went right back on the attack. It was great to see even when two of the very best go at each other with everything they’ve got there can still be some humor and smiles among the action 😜🤗

Reflections on ADCC 2019 - the internationalization of grappling - Australia makes a statement: One of the great themes to emerge from the recent world championships in Anaheim California was the terrific performance of developing grappling countries. For most of its history the podiums of the world championships has been dominated by a single nation - Brazil. In time some great individuals emerged who won titles - mostly from the United States. This year two outstanding Australian athletes won medals and really impressed everyone with a very high submission rate over 75%! Craig Jones won silver in his weight category - the highest ever won by his nation. Lachlan Giles won bronze in the absolute division - a fantastic achievement for a 77kg grappler (I’m not sure but I think the only other person from 77kg to medal in absolute division was Marcelo Garcia - perhaps some of my readers can confirm/deny this). Craig Jones won every match via submission on his way to the final, showing great variation with three different submissions over three different parts of the body to reflect his rapidly growing versatility. Lachlan Giles hit three superb heel hook finishes on three MUCH bigger and stronger world champion opponents and brilliantly showcased the great ideal of Jiu Jitsu of lesser strength controlling and defeating greater strength. The work of these two young Australians is a clear statement - Jiu Jitsu belongs to the world. The future will see a growing internationalization that I think will be immensely helpful for its growth and development. If ADCC is to strengthen its role as the Olympics of grappling it must, as the Olympics does, reflect the work of the whole world. It was a wonderful thing to see Australia, a nation that has always punched far above its weight in sports representation, take the lead through these two brilliant athletes. Well done Craig and Lachlan and well done to the Australian grappling community who helped launch these two to the top of the grappling world. I am certain other developing grappling nations will follow this example and will soon see a truly international flavor to world championships in future years. 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺

Grip and attack: A common problem that many students run into once they start to develop favorite grips from which to launch their attacks is a natural tendency to get to a good grip and HESITATE, as though the grip will get better with time. GRIPS DON’T GET BETTER WITH TIME. Once you get your grip - ITS TIME TO GO! You don’t have to set a speed record, but you don’t want to procrastinate either. Grips almost always get worse with time as your opponent will invariably be trying to break free. So build a habit of getting to your grip and moving seamlessly into the appropriate attacks from that grip. Train the grip and attack reflex and you will soon be experiencing more success with your favorite moves.

Victory in Long Beach! Gordon won a smooth victory over Rousimar Palhares by quickly taking the back and controlling position until the end to cap off an amazing two week display of Jiu Jitsu after his double gold medal performance at ADCC World Championships. Now I am heading from the arena back to NYC - waiting for my Uber to LAX. It’s been an amazing time out here in California - so proud of the development of my incredible students and the interest and innovation they are creating in our sport. Now I will fly back on the red eye to arrive back in good old NYC! Looking forward to landing and heading straight back to teaching in the blue basement and seeing all my students again 😜😜 Wishing you all the best from California - thank you all as always for your support and interest in our approach to the game!

Big match today in Long Beach California - Rousimar Palhares vs Gordon Ryan: Two of the grappling worlds best submission experts will take on each other today. Rousimar Palhares is a renown leg lock expert - he is also a master of kimura and juji gatame arm locks. He is a silver medalist at ADCC and could easily have won the event if he decided to specialize in it ( he primarily focuses on MMA). Gordon Ryan is similarly known for his submission skill - so this match should be a great one. Everything kicks off early evening here in Long Beach - hope you all enjoy the show!

Find your special gift, work hard to develop it, believe in your ability to express it - the story of Nick Rodriguez: One of the most inspiring stories to come out of the ADCC World Championships is that of blue belt Nick Rodriguez. The young man from New Jersey was a former high school wrestler with an additional year of D3 college wrestling, took up Jiu Jitsu because he preferred the idea of a submission hold over a pin. Gordon Ryan brought him into the basement and he would travel four hours a day to get to class and learn. In preparation for ADCC the great question was how to take a raw talent with very limited experience in the sport and get him ready for championships level opponents. Obviously he was not going to win with pure Jiu Jitsu nor with pure wrestling. Step number one was to give him a cast iron defense to the biggest danger to a blue belt - submission holds. He soon became extremely difficult to control and finish. Next was the question of how he would win. In order to create a winner you need to give them a skill that they do better than their rivals - but how do you make a blue belt better than Champion black belts? The answer was not wrestling but rather the fascinating INTERFACE between wrestling and Jiu Jitsu where there is a world of possibilities in scrambles for a well prepared athlete to beat people he would ordinarily not be capable of beating. Mr Rodriguez developed an amazing ability to scramble to the back in the grey zone between takedowns and ground and between bottom position and standing position. Once that was allied with our back finishing system it created a monster who shocked the hell out of everyone in the gym - and then at ADCC - everyone in the grappling world! With a silver medal at the world championships in such a short time there is a valuable lesson here for all of us - start with a cast iron defense, then build an offense around your unique talents/skills that really works for you. Then go out there and ignore all the preconceptions people have about how long it takes to be competitive among the best - your skill level, not your years of training- determines the outcome

From breakout to breakthrough - the story of Craig Jones and two world championships: One of the most memorable breakout performances of the 2017 ADCC was that of Australian grappling icon, Craig Jones. He submitted two world champions on day one in spectacular style and really caught the grappling world’s attention. On day two however, all the athletes in his division were now aware of the danger and used positional tactics to shut down his game so that despite his spectacular start, he came away from the event without a medal. Mr Jones did exactly what he needed - he kept working hard on the elements he was good at (submissions), while adding large amounts of time to positional and standing training, all while maintaining a very busy competition schedule to practice the new skills under pressure. He even moved to New York to train full time with the squad to get ready for the big new test. Let me tell you something - it’s tough and difficult just get to ADCC. It’s even more difficult to have a great break out performance there among so many champions - but it’s FAR MORE difficult to break through everyone and get to the finals WHEN EVERYONE KNOWS WHO YOU ARE AND WHAT YOU DO AND HAS COUNTERS SET IN PLACE TO STOP YOU. That’s when you REALLY see how good someone is. Craig Jones came into ADCC as a grappling superstar rather than as an unknown. His hard work, intelligent career planning and training truly paid off. This time he showed he was still true to submission oriented game with three beautiful submissions that ranged over the whole body. He showed his new front headlock/guillotine game that he worked so hard on. His positional and standing game was vastly improved and he used the threat of that to make his submissions even more dangerous. The result? A silver medal that with just a few minor changes could easily have been gold. What a performance by the young man from down under, who showed how growth through intelligent planning and hard work can take your performance from good to great and pave the way for even better performances in the future. It was a great ADCC for him and Australian grappling (more on this soon) - congratulations Craig Jones! 🇦🇺

The remarkable achievement of Garry Tonon: Some athletes inspire in different ways. Garry Tonon has shifted his focus away from grappling over the last two years towards MMA. However, when team mate Ethan Crelinsten got injured and Nicky Ryan had to drop from 77kg down to 66kg a month before the event, Mr Tonon immediately volunteered to take his place. Mr Tonon has always been among the most exciting grapplers on earth and in this ADCC he cemented that reputation in spectacular fashion. I always thought the best and most exciting grappling match I would ever see was Garry Tonon vs Rousimar Palhares - but Garry Tonon vs Renato Canuto in the second round of ADCC 2019 May have Just eclipsed that. Both athletes are fireballs and they went at each at maximum force in what was clearly the match of the tournament. Interestingly there was neither a point or a submission scored in the match - yet it was pure excitement from start to finish. The next day against Champion JT Torres Mr Tonon showed his remarkable ability to escape bad position and then turn it into advantage with a beautiful escape from back and into an equally beautiful locked knee bar - with just a few more seconds on the clock victory would have been his - but it was not to be - at world championships level, sometimes the difference between victory and defeat is despairingly close. Then in the bronze medal match Mr Tonon went up against the formidable Dante Leon and went back to the squads roots to win via heel hook from outside ashi garami to take his first ADCC medal - ironically at a time when it is no longer his focus! In open weight Mr Tonon had another chance to awe the crowd against the extremely talented Edwin Najime. Both men are masters of spectacular flying submissions. Mr Tonon fired first with a beautiful flying heel hook entry - kani basami - and then locked out an equally beautiful inside heel hook for another incredible win. This man is simply a human highlight reel and a pleasure and a privilege to watch. Thank you for showing the world that great Jiu Jitsu can be beautiful Jiu Jitsu and that even at championship level artistic flourish that captures our imagination is possible

The ideal of Jiu Jitsu: My understanding of Jiu Jitsu never waivers from this - JIU JITSU IS THE ART AND SCIENCE OF CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. The closer you stay true to this ideal, the more impressive your game will be. The further you stray from it, the less people will want to follow your example. The appeal of the greatest athletes in the sport is not just that they win, but HOW they win - and nothing catches our admiration more than the decisive and clean mature of victory by submission. The soul of wrestling is the pin, The soul of judo is the the ippon throw - but the soul of Jiu Jitsu is submission. Every move, tactic, strategy and concept that I teach goes in that direction. I am proud to see my students express that ideal every time they go out on the stage. Encouraging my Jiu Jitsu ideal of control leading to submission isn’t about rule sets - it’s about mind set - make that ideal your goal and take the time to learn how to enact it and the soul of Jiu Jitsu will become part of your soul as an athlete.

The incredible achievement of Gordon Ryan: This weekend at the ADCC World Championships Gordon Ryan won both his weight division and absolute to take double gold medals. After competing only twice in ADCC he has three gold medals and a silver and is only 24 years old. With six out of eight matches finished by submission (and a seventh where a submission was just seconds away as the match ended) this was an incredibly dominating performance that exemplified our philosophy of control leading to submission. What was truly remarkable about this performance is that it came after a severe knee injury early in the year that required major surgery. The camp for the event started twelve weeks ago. Gordon Ryan began with everyone else but could not do any standing grappling and I restricted him to only the most low impact training. Our understanding was that he would do the camp alongside the others but in a very low powered fashion with the assumption that he would not actually do the event but rather aim to compete around December. For most of the camp he really struggled and had some days where he did not shine at all. Finally four weeks before ADCC he started to look comfortable. Three weeks out he had one session where he looked like the old Gordon Ryan. Two weeks out he looked BETTER than the old Gordon Ryan. Then after a great end to the camp - the night before the competition he got food poisoning!! There was real doubt about whether he would be able to compete again! He actually weighed in very light for both days but the nausea settled and the rest of the story you know - complete domination. Let this camp be a light to those who think problems, injuries and obstacles are destroying their chances. Problems can hold you back, but time and industry can build the hope and belief that can overcome them all. Well done Mr Ryan. Twelve weeks ago i was a skeptic, but like everyone else In the Anaheim convention center and around the world - you made me a believer.

Thank you: It was a tremendous weekend for our team at the ADCC World Championships in California this weekend. Getting a team ready is a big enterprise and requires input from many people and I wanted to thank some of the major players in that team project. First, my sensei Renzo Gracie who took me from white belt to black belt in Jiu Jitsu and who gives us a gym to train out of in NYC along with the entire staff of the gym who let us focus on preparation and cutting edge Jiu Jitsu performance. To all of my students at the academy who make so many sacrifices in time and effort to create a training room that elevates the level of all who enter and stay and who create an environment that can build champions and advance the sport. To the competitive athletes who have the courage and drive to step out on to the stage and give life to the ideas and concepts I teach - you give my theories and philosophy life - without you I would just a man tinkering in a basement - I owe you guys everything. To @BJJ.fanatics for giving me an outlet through video to convey my ideas to a broader audience through my growing army of video students. I am so happy that you can get to see the very things I teach to you all unfold in the same way you learn them on the biggest stage before your eyes. To all of my followers on social media. Thank you for your interest and support on this crazy journey of growth and improvement towards an unattainable ideal in the sport we all love. To the team and staff at ADCC particularly @Mo jassim80 who took the world championships to an entirely new level and left everyone thinking that one day this sport could be HUGE and impressed everyone with a professionally run show that no one will forget. To @flograppling for taking that show to the internet and making it something the world could watch rather than just the spectators. Wishing you all the best and once again - thank you all.

Victory in LA!! A huge congratulations to squad athletes @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyrod247 @craigjonesbjj @garrytonon @nickyryanbjj @tazagarami for an incredible weekends work at the ADCC World Championships here in Anaheim California. The squad put on the most successful team performance in ADCC history with five medals and the most impressive individual performance by Gordon Ryan with double gold medals in weight and absolute divisions. These young men trained so hard for the big show and out on a truly amazing performance. A huge thank you to ADCC organizers and staff who put on the best show in the events history to a packed audience. The crowd was amazing and we are very proud to have a chance to show our philosophy of Jiu Jitsu at such a great show. Thank you all for your support and interest in what we do. Wishing you all the best from Anaheim!!

Strong first day for the squad at the ADCC World Championships: In Jiu Jitsu as in life, no one cares how you start - they only care about how you finish - that’s why we don’t put too much emphasis on the first day’s results - nonetheless it was a strong start for the squad on Day One with four out of five athletes through to the semi finals. There were some incredible matches today that I am sure will have people talking for quite a while. We are all heading back to prepare for a big day tomorrow. As always thank you so much for your support and following our athletes and our philosophies. Hope you all enjoyed the show! Back in action tomorrow 😜😜

The squad checks in: All squad members successfully weighed in this morning at the ADCC World Championships in Anaheim California for the first of three weigh ins over the course of the event. We will go for a final light workout later and then go out to a wild nightclub and party with strippers and drug dealers and rappers until dawn as final preparation for the event #viproomprepsucka

Counting down: Final days now before the ADCC World Championships here in Anaheim California. The nature of training now is very different from earlier in the camp. Now it’s about tactics rehearsals and general movement and weight management rather than hard sparring. Here, Gordon Ryan and the squad go through our pre match drills. Keeping an eye on intensity levels is important now - it’s analogous to the difference between SHARPENING the edge of a knife - where the idea is to remove metal and change its edge geometry to a narrower edge - vs POLISHING the edge of a knife - a less radical action where the edge is gently smoothed down to make a refined cut. All the athletes here in Anaheim are in this polishing phase now. Today and tomorrow the process will go into the final phase of weight management - never a fun experience 😜😜 Wishing you all the best from California!

First training session for the squad in LA: Getting acclimated on the West Coast, Garry Tonon, Nick Rodriguez and Gordon Ryan get a light workout in preparation for the big show this weekend in Anaheim. It’s getting close now so nothing crazy - drills and light positional sparring at @pointofimpactmma Now its back to the hotel for dinner and plotting 😜😜 wishing you all the best from California!

In a cab heading through Manhattan to JFK - ADCC Bound: Training Camp is over and the squad heads to California for the biggest grappling show of them all - The ADCC World Championships in Anaheim. Everyone has trained hard and given their all - now it’s time for final preparation and weight cutting. As always it’s a game of doing everything you can to prepare everyone to the best of your knowledge but ultimately the athletes will always have to overcome unforeseen challenges and problems on the stage. ADCC is always a special event. The international flavor with the different approaches and schools of thought makes for a truly fascinating experience for both athletes and spectators. This year has an insane level of talent from all over the world. There are many grappling legends in the mix and also many extremely talented unknowns who are fully capable of surprising everyone. As always - I’m running late 😜😜😂😂 Get ready for the greatest grappling show on earth!

Fifty percent of Jiu Jitsu is DENYING YOUR OPPONENT THE SAME THINGS YOU AIM TO DO TO HIM. We all practice as much as possible the things we want to do to our opponent - but at least fifty percent of your time should be spent in those skills of denial - of STOPPING HIM FROM DOING WHAT HE WANTS. I love to see my students practice offense - but I make damn sure they never neglect their defense because we all have a natural tendency to under emphasize it. So get out there and practice your skills of denial - the better your opponents get - the more you will need them!

Closing distance: The whole game in Jiu Jitsu or indeed, any grappling art, is to get close and come to grips with your opponent. The act of getting close enough to establish contact - CLOSING THE DISTANCE - is a skill like any other in Jiu Jitsu and must be practiced and developed. Unfortunately most people just assume that the opponent will engage in grappling and move forward rather lackadaisically and complacently reach out to grab an opponent with about as much technique and tactics as they employ reaching for a milk shake. In a competitive match you will have to fight just to establish basic contact with a skilled opponent. You must have a method of closing distance and getting to advantageous grips. Understand this - ATHLETES WHO START WELL GENERALLY FINISH WELL. Here, Gordon Ryan approaches an opponent in a seated guard. He has barely established contact but you can see he has already taken some considerable advantages even at this early stage. Don’t just approach and grab - APPROACH WITH A PLAN TO SECURE EARLY ADVANTAGE THAT WILL FACILITATE GETTING TO EVEN BIGGER ADVANTAGES.

Capturing the head: The human body is essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything hangs off that - so when you control the head you control everything else by default. As such, we must put a very high priority on capturing the head whenever we can. THE WHOLE POSITIONAL GAME OF JIU JITSU IS DESIGNED TO GET US PAST OUR OPPONENTS LOWER BODY UP TO THE MID BODY AND THEN PROGRESS UP UNTIL WE CAPTURE THE HEAD. Most of the time we capture the head with our arms, but you can do it in very impressive ways with your LEGS also - via the TRIANGLE (sankaku). Here, Nicky Ryan locks on a devastating side triangle (Yoko Sankaku) which will give tremendous head control that can nail down to the floor even the toughest opponents and offer a great stranglehold at the same time. Remember always the GOAL of the positional game - HEAD CONTROL. Whenever you have the opportunity to control the head - take it - and control of the rest of the body will be your reward.

Getting under an opponent’s center of gravity: A key skill is grappling is that of LIFTING AN OPPONENT OFF THE MAT. This is done for many reasons. In Jiu Jitsu but is mostly done from bottom position to set up sweeps and lower body submissions. Understand that you will never be able to lift people bigger and heavier than yourself until you master GETTING UNDER THEIR CENTER OF GRAVITY. only when you can under their center of gravity will you be able to lift them easily off the mat and into the move you seek to perform. In standing grappling this usually entails SINKING YOUR HIPS UNDER THEIRS WITH A LEVEL CHANGE. In ground grappling bottom position it usually entails SCOOTING YOUR HIPS DEEP UNDER THEIR HIPS. When you do this you can lift even very big opponents. When you don’t, you will be unable to lift even a lightweight. If you want to make a name for yourself as a dangerous attacker from bottom position, Practice scooting under and lifting daily and soon you will be attacking with much greater effect!

I am very pleased to announce I will be teaching a seminar at @5starmartialarts at the dojo of my old friend and comrade Shawn Williams at 6:30pm Wednesday September 25 at 4201 Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles. Contact @5starmartialarts for details and booking! This will be the week of preparation for ADCC world championships so it should be an exciting time in LA! Hope to see you there! 🤗🤗

Putting things together: Nothing gets the breakthrough better than COMBINED ATTACKS. Defending one submission is tough, defending a well applied combination of submissions is hell - that is why I always try to create thorough SYSTEMS around the most high percentage submission holds - so that as one attack gets foiled another can take its place. Best of all however, is when you can LINK ONE SUBMISSION SYSTEM WITH OTHERS. Now it becomes extremely difficult to stop an unfolding attack that is expressing combinations both WITHIN a system and BETWEEN systems. Here, talented junior Damien Anderson does exactly that at the recent Pan American Championships. Switching quickly and efficiently between positional pressure and Kimura and Back systems creates a chain of attack that quickly outpaces his opponent’s ability to defend to get the breakthrough.

Brothers in arms: Gordon and Nicky Ryan getting ready for ADCC World Championships in Anaheim California. Getting close now. Building a training camp to a peak is a delicate balancing act but having two studs like these in the room makes things a lot easier

The amazing story of Doug Pelinkovic: Often I am asked the questions, “I started Jiu Jitsu in my thirties - can I get to a good level?” “I work a busy job and have a family - can I get to a good level? “I never competed - can I get to a level where I can be competitive with champions?” Doug Pelinkovic is one of my senior black belts. He never competed until last year - his first ever Jiu Jitsu competition was the IBJJF world championships masters - he won gold in his weight division. This weekend he went into his third ever competition at the IBJJF Pan American games and win double gold - his weight division and open weight - almost all by submission. This despite being a highly successful Real Estate developer with wife and three sons and one of the busiest people I know. He did not start Jiu Jitsu until his thirties. I don’t have faith in many things - but one thing in which I have an unshakable faith is THE ABILITY OF HARD WORKING, HIGHLY MOTIVATED PEOPLE WITH A PLAN AND THE DISCIPLINE TO STICK WITH IT AND THE WISDOM TO MODIFY IT IF NECESSARY TO ACHIEVE AN EXTRAORDINARY LEVEL OF SKILL AND ACHIEVEMENT IN THEIR DOMAIN. Mr Pelinkovic is a great inspiration to all of us with this remarkable achievement over the weekend - a lesson to all of us as to what is possible when we stop telling ourselves why can’t do something and start telling ourselves why we CAN. Double gold in one of the toughest tournaments of the Jiu Jitsu calendar year in just his third ever competition - and best of all - where was he this morning at 6am after his big double victory? On his way to the basement for the morning class to help the ADCC team get ready. And where will he be tonight after a long day of work in the office? On the mat with me at his Bronx Jiu jitsu school for the late night workout. Extraordinary work ethics create extraordinary results - thank you for the inspiration Mr Pelinkovic 😊😊

Big congratulations to Keenan Cornelius - Open Weight No Gi Pan American Champion! Outstanding performance by Mr Cornelius yesterday to take gold at one of the years toughest competitions - The IBJJF Pan Ams No Gi in the toughest category - Open Weight - here in NYC. Mr Cornelius has been training hard in the basement with the squad here in New York in preparation for ADCC and wanted to test some of the new tricks and how they merge with his own highly developed game. He had some great submission victories along the way! Thanks also to Gordon Ryan for excellent cornering work - these two are training partners every day in the blue basement so know each other’s game well. Mr Cornelius is among the finest grapplers on the planet - it’s a testimony to his drive and desire to master a craft that he still seeks to add more to his already deeply impressive game and test it out in the toughest environments. Impressive work!

Take a breather: Probably one of the more commonly asked questions I get is - how can can increase my endurance during sparring? All kinds of people advocate all kinds of methods of improving endurance. In truth I see little carry over from increased cardiovascular training to mat endurance for athletes who are already close to their ideal weight. Obviously if you are well overweight some simple cardiovascular exercise that results in losing weight and improving fitness will be a big benefit. However, if you are already in good shape and still getting tired, chances are that the problem is more one of EFFICIENCY IN ENERGY EXPENDITURE than of a need for greater cardiovascular capacity. A simple insight that can have immediate beneficial effects on your endurance during sparring is LEARNING TO TAKE SMALL BREAKS IN THE ACTION as you spar. You don’t need to go one hundred percent at all times. Good players follow a pattern of hard work - rest - hard work - rest. This allows them to perform a task, get closer to a goal and then recuperate so as to repeat this pattern until the final goal is achieved. Jiu Jitsu is a positional game and there are many positions that offer a chance to take a brief rest and get your breathing and heart rate under control. Learn to identify safe zones where you can take a short break without great risk as you climb the ladder of position to your goal. Here, Nicky Ryan takes a short break in half guard top after a hectic scramble - this will enable him to re- energize for the next task of passing half guard.

Legs are like sex partners - two is always better than one: Controlling one leg in ashi garami is good, but your opponent will always use his other leg to defend the one you have trapped. That is why I always distinguish between the primary leg (the one trapped inside your ashi garami) and the secondary leg (your opponent’s other leg). Whenever possible you want to control BOTH legs as this will severely impact your opponent’s ability to use one leg to defend the other. In addition it creates an immediate SHACKLING effect where your opponent feels as though his two ankle are shackled together in a way that robs him of any athletic ability. This makes the task of CONTROL much easier - but it creates a problem for the act of BREAKING, as now you cannot attack both legs simultaneously, but rather you must release the secondary to attack the primary. This gives an opponent a window of opportunity to escape. LEARNING TO CLOSE THAT WINDOW TO THE GREATEST DEGREE POSSIBLE WHILST ACKNOWLEDGING THAT IT CAN NEVER BE TOTALLY CLOSED is the heart and soul of high percentage leg locking and a subject for a lifetime of study and refinement. Here, Garry Tonon ties up both primary and secondary legs and is planning on the transition back to the break

Know thyself: A big part of success both short term and long term comes from knowing your own game well. In the short term self knowledge helps you win today because you know what you’re good and where you have weaknesses - so that when you take on a tough opponent you play mostly with what you do well and avoid what you do poorly. In the long term, self knowledge will direct your training regimen. By identifying your weaknesses you can devote extra training time to them with the goal of making your current weaknesses into future strengths. So whether for today or tomorrow - self knowledge is a critical part of your success. We all look in the mirror once a day to check our physical appearance - how often do you look in your Jiu Jitsu mirror and take a hard look at yourself - do it more often and do it with more care and you will be better equip for the challenges of today and the future.

Shields up Captain...The human body is a rather delicate thing - but there are certain parts of our body that are quite robust. The elbows/forearms and the knees/shins are two fine examples. Both are exceptionally tough and can take a real beating with no ill effects. When it’s time to create a robust shield between you and your opponent - MAKE YOUR ELBOWS/FOREARMS AND KNEES/SHINS THE BASIS OF YOUR SHIELD. You can hold back anything your opponent can throw at you with these shields set in place and do so without suffering and be in good shape to counterattack. Learn to use your body in such a way that the tough parts of the body protect the delicate parts of the body and Jiu Jitsu will be a much more pleasant experience for you. Your shins and forearms are your shields in this sport. Just as ancient soldiers used their shields to protect themselves until they could launch their offense, so too you must do the same. Here, Nicky Ryan makes good use of his shins to hold off a spirited passing attempt.

Adversity and horror test a nations strength and fortitude
Memory and remembrance reveal a nations soul and spirit
NYC September 11, 2001
Gone but never forgotten 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Creation and destruction of space: Most of Jiu Jitsu is fought on the ground - as much the major dynamic between the two athletes plays out in TOP and BOTTOM position. It is crucial to understand that the top and bottom athletes have diametrically opposes general goals. From the top players perspective the whole game is to ELIMINATE SPACE between himself and his opponent. By getting past the legs and using gravity getting in close and tight is the best way to control movement and dominate the bottom player. From the bottom players perspective, the whole game is to CREATE AND MAINTAIN SPACE so that he can move under the body weight of the top player and launch effective attacks from bottom position. All attacks require MOVEMENT and movement is only possible from bottom position when there is space between you and the top player. This basic demand for the creation and destruction of space is the heart and soul of the ground grappling game. Here, Nicky Ryan works to eliminate space as the top passing player, while the inestimable Brian Glick uses frames and level changes to maintain space underneath. Learning to understand the nuances that underlie this classic battle between top and bottom player is a huge part of your development in Jiu Jitsu.

Using your head: The phrase “using your head” usually means to use your intelligence to perform a task better - that’s a wonderful ideal that you should use at every opportunity - but in this instance I’m talking about using your actual head (not brain) to perform tasks in grappling. Your head is an incredibly important means of PUSHING an opponent. When you use it is often frees up your hands to perform other tasks. You must actively seek to use your head whenever possible to move and control an opponent. A very big part of this sport is the PUSH/PULL DYNAMIC that underlies much of the game. Most people only push and pull with their hands and feet - give yourself a fifth pushing limb by actively using your head and you will have a big advantage over your four limbed opponent’s - now THAT’S Using your head! 😜😜

Aim high: The single biggest obstacle to the learning and improving process is LOW EXPECTATIONS AND STANDARDS AMONG THOSE SEEKING IMPROVEMENT. A huge part of realizing your potential in Jiu Jitsu and indeed anything else in life, is your ability to form a culture of high standards and great expectations around yourself. Days where you exhibit a “that’s good enough” mentality are days wasted. Always ask the better question - “is my performance of this technique good enough to win a world championship.” Just that switch in mindset from “is this good enough to get by?” to “is this good enough to work on a world champion?” Will immediately drive you to better performance of that move. THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS HIGHER PERFORMANCE AGAINST OTHERS IS HIGHER STANDARDS AND EXPECTATIONS WITHIN YOURSELF. Make a habit of comparing yourself to ever greater standards and you will soon see improvement in your technique

The foundations of your game and Learning new skills: The fastest learners of my approach to the game are invariably those who have a STRONGLY DEVELOPED FOUNDATION OF BJJ SKILL. So often students come to me and ask to learn advanced systems that i teach but lack overall competence in foundational skills and so struggle to learn the additional skills. Having a strong set of foundational skills makes the act of adding on new skills very easy on most cases. The body movement, conceptual understanding and sensitivity that comes with learning the sports foundations translate extremely well into the more exotic elements of the game at higher levels. So keep working hard on your fundamentals - there’s never too much practicing and refining the core movements and skills of the sport. Time spent this way will dramatically shorten the time taken to add on new skills later. Here, Keenan Cornelius, already extremely strong in foundational skills of back control, has an easy time adapting to the back system details we teach and getting them operational in a short time frame. Once you are secure in your foundations, you can do the same

I am very happy to announce the release of the latest installment of the GO FURTHER FASTER Jiu Jitsu fundamentals instructional videos series: HALF GUARD. BJJ Fanatics will be selling it and you can also use the link in my Instagram Bio. Half guard is one of the most important skill sets to develop and allows athletes of all body types and ages to work effectively from bottom position. Many forms of guard require a certain body type or movement quality, but half guard by its very nature allows shorter, slower athletes to form effective connections to an opponent and most importantly, GET UNDER THEIR OPPONENTS CENTER OF GRAVITY so that they can create tremendous instability and start sweeping even very tough adversaries. Check it out and see if it can help you get closer to your Jiu Jitsu goals!

Battles won and battles lost: When working from half Guard it’s important to understand that there are two major battles being fought, often at the same time - a battle for upper body grip dominance and a battle for lower body leg connection, balance and distance. It is very important to understand - YOU CAN LOSE ONE OF THOSE BATTLES AND STILL BE EFFECTIVE - BUT YOU CANT LOSE BOTH. Here, I have clearly lost the upper body battle. The athlete on top has secured far side underhook and cross face and so can pin my head and shoulders to the mat. Now the onus is on me to recognize that that battle is lost and start looking to win the lower body battle. The safest way to do this is via the most fundamental move in Jiu Jitsu - the elbow escape - IF YOU CAN WIN THAT LOWER BODY BATTLE YOU CAN TURN THE WHOLE SITUATION AROUND AND TURN YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY GRIPS INTO A LIABILITY. Learning to identify the two battles, the relationship between them and how to surrender one if the situation demands it and focus on the other is a big part of your development in the very important bottom half guard game.

Knowing your destination is half the battle: When you look at an average Jiu Jitsu match around half of the time is spent in what appears to be a hopeless tangle of limbs is in crazy inverted and back to front orientations that seemingly have little to do with combat. Yet in less than a second any one of those bizarre positions can be converted into a position that can result in broken limbs or devastating strangles. Some people do a better job of converting those strangle entanglements into winning positions than others - why? Probably the most important reason is that THEY HAVE A CLEAR SENSE OF WHERE THEY WANT TO GET TO which they can call upon in even the most confusing upside down, rolling double inversion and NAVIGATE THEIR WAY TOA FINISHING HOLD OR PIN. This is why you must develop a few favorite positions that become so hard wired in your consciousness that you can find your way to them from anywhere, anytime any place. Just as even the most confused and disoriented drunk somehow always finds his way home - so too a good Jiu Jitsu player will always find his way back to his favorite holds and pins and prevail among chaos. Keep experimenting until you find your natural favorite submission hold or pin that seems to fit you like a glove and practice until you can see a way to it from everywhere.

Guard passing and leg locks: A common sentiment in Jiu jitsu is that leg locks and guard passing are like oil and water - they don’t mix and you either do one of the other when on top and confronted by an opponent’s guard. This is absolutely not the case. Guard passing and leg locks actually compliment each other extremely well. The threat of leg locks often causes an opponent to play very cautiously with his legs and leg positioning making guard passing considerably easier. The threat of guard passing often causes an opponent to reach injudiciously with their legs and become very vulnerable to leg locks. The pressure and threat of one facilitates the success of the other. WHEN PLAYING ONE GAME DON’T BLIND YOURSELF TO THE OPPORTUNITY FOR THE OTHER. Here, Garry Tonon switches back into the legs after a hard passing exchange.

Distance control and half guard: One of the great problems associated with the use of half guard is that of DISTANCE CONTROL. Your opponent in top position will usually be looking to get right chest to chest contact and control your head and shoulders. If he can do so you will have almost no means of controlling the distance between yourself and your opponent for the simple reason that you will have no means of PUSHING WITH YOUR LEGS TO CREATE SPACE. Once an opponent get to half guard chest to chest, your legs can only PULL. One way to combat this problem is the use of an initial knee shield using the knee of your top leg positioned at the hip or sternum. This gives you what you need to control distance - the ability to use a leg to push and create space. This can be used to halt your opponent’s initial forward drive, and then to give your the space needed to come up with an underhook around your opponent’s waist that will create an attacking half guard position where your opponent will not be able to establish control over your head and shoulders. Used well, that knee shield can give you the attacking half guard you seek rather than strong passing position on top that your opponent seeks. As a general rule I like to position my knee shield at the hip when working without the gi, and at the sternum when I can reinforce it with my collar grip with the gi. Play around with the knee shield as a means of initially controlling distance so you can get the half guard positioning YOU want rather than the one your OPPONENT wants!

ADCC Camp: The squad is getting ready for the ADCC world submission grappling championships coming up in around three weeks in California. There have been some adjustments. Sadly, Ethan Crelinsten will be unable to go after qualifying by winning US trials due to an injury suffered during a positional sparring session. Accordingly, Nicky Ryan will go down to 66kg. Garry Tonon will take his place at 77kg, joining teammate Oliver Taza at that weight. Craig Jones will enter at 88kg. Gordon Ryan will enter at 99kg, Keenan Cornelius has joined the camp and will also compete at 99kg. Nick Rodriguez will enter at plus 99kg. ADCC Camp is a grueling affair. Everyone is training hard and working on the unique demands of this great tournament. It’s amazing to think how young all these athletes are and how they have the potential to do many more of these events as they continue to grow in knowledge and skill. Here they are battling it out on the mats - more again tomorrow 😜😜

Half guard and connection: One of the distinguishing characteristics of a tight half guard with an under hook wrapped tight around your opponent’s waist is the tremendous degree of CONNECTION it gives you to your opponent. Interestingly, this connection is easy even when your opponent is significantly taller and bigger than yourself. Contrast this with other guards - day closed guard - if you have short legs and your opponent has a thick midsection, it can be tough just to maintain a closed guard. In half guard you only have to get your legs around one leg, rather than his waist or shoulders, so making that tight connection is easy, even when there is a big height or overall size difference. Moreover, the very nature of the connection places you DIRECTLY UNDER YOUR OPPONENT’S CENTER OF GRAVITY so even time you turn left or fight it have a big effect on an opponent’s balance, making it a superb sweeping position. Because there is so much physical connection your body weight functions like an anchor upon your opponent’s body and dramatically SLOWS THE PACE OF THE MATCH DOWN as long as you maintain the position. This can be a real advantage when matched against a younger, faster, athletically gifted opponent, so half guard perfect for older or slower athletes who do better when the pace is taken down a notch or two. So if you are looking for a means of increasing your effectiveness from bottom position but feel that your mobility, age or body type may be a hinderance, look into half Guard as a possible solution to your problems. Many fine athletes have built a career around this great position - perhaps you can be one of them 😜😜

“Nicky...tell me that’s not the worst f**king excuse for an arm bar you ever saw in your f**king life...I could train a homeless crackhead with a missing foot and no fingers to do a better f**king arm bar than that...”

Give a little to gain a lot: Sometimes when beginners get a good position on an opponent they hold on so tight that the opponent cannot move at all. That’s not wrong - it’s a good thing to be able to immobilize an opponent. However, very often it is a good thing to allow your pinned opponent a little movement in a direction that can take you from a GOOD pin to a GREAT pin. Your opponent must move in order to escape. Oftentimes you can funnel their movement in directions that benefit you rather than him and make big positional gains as a result. Here, Nicky Ryan has released a little pressure to allow an opponent to begin moving into an elbow escape, but of course it’s a trap. The movement has created back exposure and a quick change of grips from Mr Ryan now creates a situation where he goes from good to great and gets a free ride to his favorite attacking position on the back. Next time you get a good position, experiment with releasing pressure in beneficial ways. You may well find that you too, can gain a lot by giving a little

The curious case of half guard: Here’s an odd thing - many of the most respected Jiu Jitsu authorities claim that getting to top half guard is one of the very best guard passing strategies in the sport and so advocate forcing your way to half guard as a superior passing strategy. Just as many respected Jiu Jitsu authorities claim that bottom half guard is one of the premier sweeping positions in the sport and so advocate actively getting to half guard whenever playing bottom position so that you can sweep an opponent. How can this be? How can the same position be seen as both the most desirable top position and at the same time the most desirable bottom position for the respective athletes? I am part of this seeming contradiction myself. I always encourage my students to actively work to get to half guard whenever they can and exploit its strengths as a passing position. Yet I also claim that bottom half guard is a great position to play for sweeps and submissions. How can you have it both ways? Much of the answer is bound up with THE CONTROL (or lack of) OF THE BOTTOM PLAYERS HEAD AND SHOULDERS. If the top player can pin the bottom players head and shoulders (usually through some variation of under hooks and crossfaces) then yes, it’s a superior passing position. If not, and the bottom player can move his head and shoulders as he pleases (usually by getting his own under hook to deny head and shoulder control to his opponent), then it becomes a very fine sweeping position for the bottom athlete. This fundamental element of control or denial of control of the bottom athletes head and shoulders determines much of the action in half guard. All the other battles you will face in this position, distance control, Kuzushi/balance, grip etc are most fought over either getting control of the bottom athletes head and shoulders or actively seeking to deny that control - depending on whether you are on top or bottom. Here, Georges St-Pierre looks to bolt down the head and shoulders of Gordon Ryan from top half guard. See in this light you can see how one position can be both the path to heaven and hell depending upon the outcome of the crucial battle for head and shoulders

Leg locks in MMA: So often I hear people say leg locks are ineffective in MMA. The very same criticisms (that you can lose position or get struck while attempting them or that the opponent could simply not submit and take a break and keep going) all apply to many other moves, but for some reason leg locks get singled out. Leg locks are no different from any other move. Done well, they can win you many fights, done poorly they get get you in trouble. As with any other technique it’s success or failure will come down to the precision and the context in which you apply it. Here is a very nice application of an inverted entry into the legs that culminates in a classic squad style outside ashi garami heel hook finish by @king_gozali son of @haimgozali This father and son MMA duo often come to NYC and train with myself and Gordon Ryan in leg kicking skills. It shows here as young Avi gets the fastest submission in Bellator Fighting Championship history with a spectacular heel hook! Focus on your technical prowess and develop wisdom in your tactical decisions and you will be delighted to learn that many moves that some disparage can be made a very effective part of your arsenal

One Jiu Jitsu - two paths: Two great combat athletes who took two very different paths with their Jiu Jitsu training work out next to each other. Keenan Cornelius works out next to Georges St-Pierre on a crowded mat in class today. One of the great features of Jiu Jitsu is the way the same techniques can be used in very different ways in very different arenas to get you to your own unique goals. Mr Cornelius took his Jiu Jitsu training towards grappling, Mr St-Pierre took it towards MMA - both became great champions in their respective domains. It fascinating to see such different athletes learning and performing the same moves but knowing each will have to find ways to apply them in very different contexts. Jiu Jitsu is a very malleable art that gives us a lot a choice in how we apply it. The foundations of the sport are broad enough that two entirely different careers can be lived while learning similarly next to each other just through adaption and the addition of other skills.

Hand control: The vast majority of moves in Jiu Jitsu require the use of the hands to form effective connection to an opponent so that the various moves can be performed. As primates, humans are hand-centric animals in all things - Jiu Jitsu included. As such, if we can control our opponent’s hands we can do a lot to shut down his offense. When you take on a dangerous gripper, make sure you pay attention to the possibility of shutting down his game by controlling his hands whenever possible. Just be sure that you do not do it in a way that makes you a negative player whose only concern is stopping the other fellow doing what he wants to do. Always take the action back in the positive direction of offense. So once you establish hand control - go into your attacks rather than just aim to frustrate an opponent’s offense at the hands. Here, Craig Jones does a fine job of thwarting a potential bodylock and is now switching to possible counter attacks - I am sure you can see some offensive possibilities starting to emerge out of the initial hand fight - Mr Jones certainly does!

Untying a knot: Have you ever had the experience of trying to untie a big and complicated knot? Sometimes there can come a point where you just get so frustrated that you just pull aimlessly on the two ends of rope knowing that it will only serve to make the knot tighter. Many of the situations you will face in Jiu Jitsu have a similar nature. Sometimes it’s so tempting just to yank and pull and push, even when the better part of us knows that it will have no effect. Learning to overcome our impulses and have the discipline to exercise the PROBLEM SOLVING side of our mind rather than the impulsive emotional side is a big step towards maturity in Jiu Jitsu. Next time you feel that urge to just apply force without a plan, stop yourself ask yourself the two critical questions you must address in these situations. WHAT IS THE PROBLEM I AM CONFRONTED BY? And WHAT WOULD CONSTITUTE A SOLUTION TO IT. Remember - it’s training - you can always stop and puzzle it out. Then the next time that knot ties up your game you will have the satisfaction of picking it apart and taking a straight line to victory.

Working for an angle: A foundational principle of Jiu Jitsu is to always seek some form of preliminary advantage prior to attacking. One of the best forms of advantage is ANGLE. If you can get away from being directly in front of opponents and instead get to the flanks, you will find a lot more success with many of your attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan works for angle from bottom closed guard. Constantly look to get your head off line and hips out to the side - often it will help to use an arm to grip inside your opponent’s leg and manually pull yourself around to an angle. Now it will be difficult for an opponent to use his weight and top position to control you - Indeed, if he tries to use weight this may even make things worse for him. Don’t settle for being held directly in front of opponents - work immediately for angle. Your opponent will have react to this threat - if he doesn’t you will have an immediate advantage - as he reacts you will find your attacking opportunities. Experiment tomorrow with making your first move every time from bottom closed guard just a simple shift to an angle and be prepared to work from there towards victory.

If you can extend a limb - you can break a limb: Good Jiu Jitsu players are always very wary of keeping their elbows and knees close to their torso. This makes it very difficult to apply joint locks to them. If you could get those elbows and knees moving out and away from the torso - the submissions would come a lot easier. One of the very best ways to do this from bottom position is Kuzushi (off balancing). We humans are hard wired to prioritize balance - so when we lose balance we get distracted from all other concerns as we try to right ourselves. That’s all the opportunity you need to enter into your joint locks. When working from bottom position - ATTACK HIS BALANCE FIRST AND HIS LIMBS SECOND and watch your success rate increase.

When the arms can’t get the breakthrough you seek - let your legs do the work: A fundamental feature of the human body is the discrepancy between our upper body which is weak and tires quickly, and our lower body which is strong and possesses remarkable endurance. So often we grapple predominantly with the upper body because it feels more coordinated and responsive than our untutored lower bodies. When attacking the back it’s good to take advantage of the precise movement and dexterity of the arms to apply our strangles. However, if our opponent has strong defensive hand fighting skills we often get shut out. That’s when it’s time for you to bring in the power of the legs. The best method is that of utilizing the incredible power of the triangle - USHIRO SANKAKU. This will quickly overwhelm your opponent’s hand defenses and often give you the victory.

In the majority of cases it is not so much any one submission attack that determines the outcome but rather YOUR ABILITY TO MAINTAIN A POSITION THAT ALLOWS YOU TO MAKE MULTIPLE SUBMISSION ATTACKS THAT CREATE WITHERING PRESSURE THAT BREAKS AN OPPONENT DOWN UNTIL THE FINAL SUBMISSION ATTEMPT GETS THE BREAKTHROUGH. This is the meaning behind “position before submission.” Here, Gordon Ryan gets close with a strangle - it’s not quite there - but as long as he can hold his position - it doesn’t matter as he can always renew the attack later - and each successive attack has a higher chance of breaking through as your opponent fatigues and must take greater and greater risks to make an escape. Remember always that the greatest submission hold of them all is PRESSURE OVER TIME and that the basis of pressure in Jiu Jitsu is position.

Attack their balance first and the real attacks become easy: There is nothing more difficult than trying to attack an opponent set in a strong defensive stance - his body feels like an impenetrable fortress and your attacks bounce harmlessly off. THE EFFECTIVENESS OF AN OPPONENTS DEFENSE IS DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO THE EXCELLENCE OF HIS STANCE - If you can break his stance you can attack with a high probability of success. The best way to break his stance is to challenge his balance. Generating Kuzushi (off balancing ) is this the key to successful attacks from bottom position. Break your attacks into two stages. Deliberately attack his balance to subvert his stance. Then launch your real attack as he is trying to recover balance and has no stance to protect himself. Breaking of balance does not have to be big, sometimes a small momentary twitch is enough. Anything big enough to cause a momentary reaction or adjustment will do the trick. Then go immediately into your real attack before he recovers. Here, Craig Jones, in the midst of his ADCC preparation camp in the blue basement does an excellent job of upsetting his opponent’s balance - this will make his follow up attack easy

I should be focused on the action...ADCC is getting close after all and it’s a well applied leg lace that’s getting pretty darned tight...but I just can’t get my eyes of that mustache...it...it’s...magnificent

Gordon Ryan comes back to the big stage: Great to see Gordon Ryan back center stage at @kinekticgrappling team event last night representing @bjj.fanatics It’s been a long hard road back after a severe knee injury leading to surgery and a long layoff. He is still far from one hundred percent but the rule set of this event allowed him to play a more passive sitting game (easier on the knee than a standing wrestling rule set) so he wanted to get out there and compete again. The event began with @lachlan_giles singlehandedly eliminating one team who did not appear to have kept up with the leg lock revolution in the sport over the last seven years. Then it was on the to the tougher team in the second round led by @sonnench Nick Rodriguez @nickyrod247 showed his developing submission skills with a nice heel hook win, then @gordonlovesjiujitsu stepped in and finished off the remaining three opponents in short order to finish a crushing victory for @bjj.fanatics Now we have to see if Mr Ryan will be ready for the pressures of ADCC competition - the opponents will be the best in the world and the rule set demands much more standing grappling and you have to compete over two days - we shall have to see if his knee is ready for that kind of pressure yet - one thing is for sure - no one has put in more work to get ready against the odds than Mr Ryan and I’m certain that if anyone can do it - it’s him. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Stop movement first - break second: Ever tried to hit a moving target with a punch? You quickly learn it’s a lot a harder than hitting a stationary one. So too in grappling. Breaking or strangling a moving opponent is usually significantly more difficult than one who has been immobilized. So take your time to first focus on IMMOBILIZATION and only when that has been satisfactorily achieved, switch to the task of breaking/strangling. There is a reason why some submission holds have a higher success rate than others - its most due to the ability of that hold to immobilize an opponent. The juji gatame arm bar being used here by Georges St-Pierre uses your legs to pin your opponent’s head and shoulders and as such makes it quite easy to pin even very strong opponents. That’s one of the main reasons why it is the most successful of all the arm locks in competition. So when it’s time to okay the submission game - divide your task in two. Focus first on restricting your opponents movement. Only then go on to the subsequent task of finishing. You may not be able to do it every time, but when you can you will be impressed by the results.

Do you know the future? What if I told you that Jiu Jitsu gave you the ability to see into the future? Would you think I had lost my mind (actually you have thought that already 😂😜)? In fact it does - to a limited extent. If an opponent stands in front of me there is very little i can tell you about what his future actions will be since I have no physical control over him. However, when you put your opponent into a controlling hold, the manner in which you hold and control him greatly limits his movement options and you can often make very accurate predictions about his future movements as long as you have that measure of control over him. It is this limited insight into the future that makes genuine control possible. When you know ahead of time what your opponent will do, combat becomes a LOT easier. For all your favorite holds and locks, you must have the main defensive responses mapped out and your reactions to those responses figured out shared of time. As your knowledge of his limited options and your responses to this options becomes more elaborate you are starting to construct a systematic approach to Jiu Jitsu that will enable you to control an opponent surprisingly easily. Here I have a secure ashi garami variation locked in place that limit an opponent to just a few defensive movements that I know well and each of which can be countered the second they are employed. As options are eliminated over time an opponent can be restricted to fewer and fewer options until they simply run out and submission is the result. This is the kind of approach you ought to aspire to in Jiu Jitsu

If you want to make a strong man feel weak - get his hand behind his back: There are lots of strong people out there - but no one feels strong when their hand(s) are pinned behind their back. Whenever working against strong people it is crucial to create conditions where your opponent works from some kind of mechanical disadvantage and you from advantage. So for example, if you wrestle his arms with your legs, you will have an advantage, if your get behind him you have a big mechanical and tactical advantage. One of the best is to get your opponent’s hand behind his back. Probably the most well known application of this principle is the use of Kimura - a fine means of both controlling and submitting opponents. Once you get the hand behind the back - keep it there until the job is done. Here, Craig Jones does a good job of exactly that as he goes through training and preparation for ADCC 2019 in the blue basement. While there are many effective ways to utilize Kimura even with the hand in front, all the most devastating arm breaking finishes and controls rely upon getting the hand behind the back as early as possible and keeping it there. The difference in strength in an arm between situations where the hand is in front of the torso versus behind the back is huge. Anytime you get a chance to put that hand into a position of weakness behind the back - take it - and soon you will be taking arms as trophies

Take some heat off your submissions and see what happens: In a competitive setting you want to make sure all your submissions take effect as quickly and completely as possible so as to ensure a decisive and convincing end to the match. In the gym however, I often encourage my students to leave a little slack in their submissions so that their training partner can employ an escape - you then must counter that escape and work back into either a reapplication of the original submission or a switch to a new one. As you gain in skill and confidence you can extend this process further and further until you can work with elaborate chains of submission attacks upon even multiple escape attempts. Just as a cat plays with a mouse in order to practice its hunting skills - it’s a good thing periodically to play with your opponent whilst locked into a submission. Don’t worry if he escapes occasionally - that’s all part of the fun. Training in this way will prepare you for elite opponents who have very well developed escape skills and it is unlikely the first submission attempt will get the breakthrough. In this situations the skill of flowing from one submission attack to another on an artfully defending opponent will be of great value to you. Here, talented junior Damien Anderson releases just enough pressure on a juji gatame arm bar to be able to maintain the threat, determine the direction of his opponent’s movement and set up subsequent attacks - great training.

Practicing offense is fun - but it’s the practice of defense that will determine how well you do against strong opposition: The sport of Jiu jitsu is evenly divided between offensive and defensive skills. It’s natural to want to focus more on the former as it is generally more fun and glamorous. Be aware however, that it will be your mastery of defense that will prove the more important when you come up against very good opponents who will be attacking you at least as much as you attack them (and in many cases - a lot more). While defense may not be as sexy as offense - those are the skills you will draw upon in a crises - and let me tell you - when you go against someone your own level or better - Jiu Jitsu is very much a sport of crises management. Make you you devote AT LEAST fifty percent of your training/development time to defensive skills. Those skills may not be as much fun to train but whatever unhappiness that training time may cause you is nothing compared with the unhappiness of losing a bout due to underdeveloped defensive skills. Balance your training time accordingly.

A relaxed body moves better and moves longer than a tense one: Jiu Jitsu is a competitive combat sport - so its only natural that you should physically tense up when the action begins. Be aware however that excessive physical tension is a potential pitfall that has sent many of us into early exhaustion and failure. Keeping a loose and relaxed demeanor whilst grappling in a competitive match is a difficult thing to do. Moreover, we can’t be loose all the time. There are times when maximal tension may be needed to finish a move. In addition we don’t want to be so loose that you flop around ineffectively. Finding the right amount of tension vs relaxation at the appropriate times is a long term study. Understand however, that it’s an IMPORTANT study, as your ability to relax when you can will be a BIG part of what determines your endurance levels in long tough matches - much more so than your cardiovascular fitness level. Start out by learning to relax yourself whenever you disengage with your opponent. Then start to expand upon this by learning to relax when caught in a pin or inferior position. Then try to get more relaxed even in the neutral positions so that you spend the majority of a match in a relatively relaxed demeanor. Soon you will notice your ability to move fluidly in response to your opponent’s movements improves, along with the length of time you can engage with a tough opponent. Look how relaxed Nicky Ryan looks as he enters a training partners open guard - getting to that level of relaxation in sparring takes time, but the potential benefits make the effort worthwhile

ADCC Camp continues: “You! In the red rash guard! That was literally the worst ashi garami entry in the two thousand year history of grappling. You two look like a drunk lobotomized orangutan trying to f**k a three legged donkey - start again!” 😂😂

He who controls the hands controls the beginning of every exchange: In the vast majority of grappling encounters ENGAGEMENT WITH THE OPPONENT BEGINS WITH THE HANDS. As such, if we can dominate our opponent’s hands as we first engage with them in a given scenario, we will have a significant advantage for the rest of the ensuing action. Make a habit of fighting to control your opponent’s hands and you will soon it is much harder for opponents to control and attack you. This advance pertains to some scenarios more than others. For example, escaping a mounted pin is not really dependent upon hand control and so it is much less important here; but other scenarios, such as defending and escaping rear mounts, are very much dependent upon good control of your opponent’s hands. Identify the scenarios where hand control is crucial and experiment with different grips and strategies to dominate your opponents hands - you will be impressed by how often this strengthens your initial defense and offense.

Unity is strength: It amazing how often we sabotage our own attempts to succeed. In Jiu Jitsu the most common form of self sabotage is poor application of our physical strength in which one part of our own body fights against the efforts of another part of our own body. ITS HARD ENOUGH TO FIGHT ANOTHER PERSON WITHOUT HAVING TO FIGHT YOURSELF AS WELL! Make sure that when you go to apply your strength into a move that you body works in unison rather than in opposition. Look at this beautiful application of the juji gatame arm bar by Garry Tonon. Note that both his legs point in the same direction, working in harmony in the best direction for success. If your feet point in different directions in this situation you are beginning to make the efforts of one leg clash with another and power begins to be diffused or lost. You can learn a LOT about how to make your whole body work harmoniously during drilling. Don’t just robotically perform the moves - CONSTANTLY EXPERIMENT WITH YOUR APPLICATION OF FORCE AND DISCOVER HOW YOUR BODY CAN BEST WORK AS A HARMONIOUS UNIT TOWARDS A COMMON GOAL. You will soon see benefits in both success rate and endurance on the mat.

Sometimes the real focus of the problem isn’t what you think: Very often in the sport of Jiu jitsu seems obvious what the problem you are confronted with as you grapple ; but deeper analysis reveals that it was something quite different. Let’s use the arm bar (juji gatame) as an example. On the surface juji gatame is all about your opponent’s ELBOW, as ultimately your goal is to be able to apply breaking pressure to the elbow joint that forces my opponent to either submit or face the consequences. Once you begin studying juji gatame however, it becomes clear that central problem you are confronted with is that of HOW WILL YOU CONTROL YOUR OPPONENTS HEAD AND SHOULDERS WITH YOUR LEGS as you will never able to apply breaking pressure to the elbow until the head and shoulders are pinned by your legs. Once you change your focus from the elbow to the head the move becomes much more successful until you come to see the final step of juji gatame - breaking the elbow - as little more than an afterthought. Your initial battle is always that of your legs versus your opponent’s head and shoulders. It is of the greatest importance that you take all your favorite moves and analyze them in this fashion. Constantly ask yourself what the primary problems for that move are - you will be surprised how often what are commonly thought of as the primary problems are really secondary problems and the real issue are quite different from what many believe.

When the action starts - have a plan of attack: It is very difficult to impose yourself upon the outcomes if you simply drift into the action when sparring starts. While you can never predict the entirety of any given match - YOU CAN ALMOST ALWAYS PREDICT THE OPENING SEQUENCES OF A MATCH BASED UPON YOUR RESPECTIVE STANCES AND MOTION. What happens in those opening sequences will often have real effects for the duration of the match - so impose yourself in the opening exchanges - KNOW WHAT YOU WANT AND HAVE A PLAN TO GET IT. Base that plan on your strongest moves, and then ask yourself what kinds of grip, stance, position etc you need to make them work and come out ready to impose those upon your opponent.

Myopia - one of the biggest problems I see developing submission grapplers run into is the problem of MYOPIA. We see an opportunity for a given submission hold and we lock ourselves into tunnel vision that only lets us see one possibility for attack. When you fight skilled opponents it is extremely unlikely that every attempt you make at a submission will succeed - on the contrary, the majority will fail. It is crucial therefore, that you develop early the habit of SEEING BEYOND THE INITIAL ATTACK AND ASK YOURSELF EVEN AS YOU ARE SOING YOUR UTMOST WITH THAT INITIAL ATTACK “WHAT WILL I MOVE ONTO IF THIS ATTACK SHOULD FAIL?” Only by training yourself to constantly ask this question and see beyond the move you are currently attempting can you make yourself move from attack to attack in combinations that even the toughest and most skilled opponents will struggle to keep up with. A WELL APPLIED SUBMISSION HOLD WILL NEVER BE AS DANGEROUS AS A WELL APPLIED SEQUENCE OF SUBMISSION HOLDS. Here, Craig Jones is working hard with a nice sequence of submissions beginning with an initial Kimura lock but can branch out easily towards both upper and lower body submissions. Your body already knows the submissions - now train your mind to see beyond the present one and on to the future ones. Once you replace myopia with long distance vision you will become a far more dangerous adversary to your opponents.

Every move has components - work hard on the components: Very often I have students tell me that that find a given move that they want to learn extremely difficult to perform and wonder if they should simply quit that move and go on to something else. Remember always that every move in the sport is made up of a components. Simple moves have fewer components and complex ones have more. Whenever you are struggling with a move - BREAK IT DOWN INTO ITS COMPONENTS AND FOCUS ON MASTERING EACH COMPONENT INDIVIDUALLY AS A MEANS OF ULTIMATELY MASTERING THE MOVE WHEN YOU FINALLY STRING ALL OF THE COMPONENTS TOGETHER. Using this method you will keep a sense of progress that will keep you practicing and allow you to get around any temporary feelings of failure. Here, talented junior squad member Nick Rodriguez works a component of an entry into cross ashi garami that will finish in our favorite leg locking position - inside sankaku - it can be a tough one when you begin, but breaking the move down into its components always helps the learning process. Even if you cannot currently perform the whole move to your satisfaction - you can often walk away from a training session with a sense of satisfaction and progress if you master a component of that move - knowing you are step closer to your goal.

Testing the limits of your game: We all have our limitations. What determines your level is just your capacity to find and expand those limits over time. Determining where those limits are currently set is the result of testing yourself in hard training - but expanding those limits is a question of spending time at the edge of your current skill level. It’s never a comfortable place to be and very often you go further than you can handle and fall - but it’s only there that growth occurs. Here, Gordon Ryan tests the limits of his defense with Georges St-Pierre. When you can stop worry about RESULTS of training today and instead start worrying about the EFFECTS of training five years from now - your growth will really begin.

Keep your body warm, your mind calculating and your heart cold: Everyone has their own mental approach to Jiu Jitsu and in truth I have seen great champions with every possible mindset from extreme fear to extreme confidence - so I don’t believe it’s possible to say there is any one correct way to mentally enter a match. I will say this however, if your inclination is, as mine is, to see Jiu Jitsu as first and foremost a game of knowledge and decisions and problem solving - then I recommend to keep yourself in an emotionally neutral and cold blooded state. Why? Because we do our calculations and problem solving best in a psychologically calm state. Imagine trying to solve a complex math problem whilst angry and agitated and you will get a sense of what I mean. Better to wait an hour, calm down and focus and then solve the problem. So if you favor a knowledge based/problem solving approach to Jiu Jitsu, train yourself to work in a state of relative calm. If you prefer a more intuitive, combative approach, it may well be better to go in hot blooded - champions have arisen from both - but know your own game and base your mental preparation upon that.

Drilling as an ideal: We spend a lot of time drilling - there is a simple question that fascinates me - IS IT WORTH IT? Is it possible that we would be better off just sparring the entire workout instead. I usually have about 1/2 - 2/3 of my workouts as drilling and 1/2 - 1/3 sparring - is it possible that all that is a waste of time and we would be better off just 100% sparring? I have many reasons why I am a strong advocate of drilling as an essential part of a daily Jiu Jitsu workout and why I believe it translates into faster progress for most (not all) students. One of the simplest is the argument that WE ALL NEED AN IDEAL TOWARDS WHICH WE AIM OURSELVES. If we have a strong mental ideal IT CAN HELP PULL OUR PHYSICAL BODY CLOSER TO THAT MENTAL IDEAL - EVEN IF WE NEVER REACH IT. We all know that in most cases we look a lot smoother and more competent when we drill a move on a cooperative training partner than we ever do in a live sparring situation against a competitive opponent. Drills let us get close to the IDEAL of what we OUGHT to look and feel like when we perform a given move - an elusive ideal to strive for. We know very well it won’t look that smooth and clean in a competitive match - BUT THE HIGHER OUR STANDARDS IN DRILLING, THE HIGHER OUR PERFORMANCE IN A MATCH. This is one of many reasons why I favor drills as a substantial part of your overall training time - the ratio may change depending on circumstances sometimes drills are only 1/4 of the workout, but always they are there. I do believe that different people need different ratios and that there are some who do better almost exclusively with sparring and for whom drilling does little good; but for the vast majority drilling technique in some way (obviously there are many types of drills) is a key part of faster progress. Here, Georges St-Pierre gets close to an ideal front triangle (omote sankaku) as a way of improving performance when we switch to live sparring.

Indirect attacks: When you first begin studying Jiu Jitsu you learn your first basic attacks - an arm bar from guard, a strangle from the back, a guillotine etc. In beginners class you see an opportunity and you try to apply the move. You do DIRECTLY to the move from observing the opportunity. As your opponent’s learn the same moves you are learning, they soon learn the warning signs that you are entering into a move and they start reacting defensively to frustrate you. Because you are going directly to the move, this is easy for them to do. This is when the great law of KNOWLEDGE AND ATTACK comes into play. THE MORE DEFENSIVE KNOWLEDGE AND SKILL YOUR OPPONENT POSSESSES, THE MORE YOU MUST EMPLOY INDIRECT ATTACKS TO DISGUISE YOUR REAL INTENTIONS TO A KNOWLEDGEABLE OPPONENT AND BREAK THROUGH THEIR DEFENSE VIA MISDIRECTION. You must learn to get your opponent reacting to false attacks/direction in order to break through with real attacks. THE LESS SOPHISTICATED YOUR OPPONENT - THE MORE DIRECT YOUR ATTACKS OUGHT TO BE. THE MORE SOPHISTICATED YOUR OPPONENT, THE MORE INDIRECT YOUR ATTACKS SHOULD BE. So if I am attacking someone with great lower body defense and I want the right leg, I may well fake an attack to the neck, as he reacts to the fake, go into another fake attack to the left arm, as an the opponent skillfully reacts to this, enter into the REAL attack on the right leg that I wanted all along. Moving in this way i am much more likely to break through sophisticated defenses than simple direct attacks. Making a habit of housing your favorite attacks in the context of INDIRECT approaches will greatly raise your success rate against talented opponents

The default principle: A critical part of your pathway to strangulation mastery is understanding and enacting the DEFAULT PRINCIPLE. This is the idea that you must constantly be alert for a strangle opportunity every time you get in position to do so. All you need to attack with a strangle from the back is a separation between your opponent’s chin and his chest greater than the width of your wrist - if you see that - GO FOR THE STRANGLE! If not - engage in hand fighting to trap arms and force an opening. You will be amazed how often strangles will present themselves to you on a platter if you are simply mindful of the conditions of opportunity. So often I see athletes on the back with the neck wide open and they are locking their own hands or fumbling for an opponent’s hands when victory is right there in front of them. When the opportunity is there - STOP WHATEVER YOU ARE DOING AND GO BACK IMMEDIATELY TO THE DEFAULT OPTION - SINK THE STRANGLE! Here, blue belt phenom @nickyrod247 uses a variation of the default principle (going over the jaw rather than under) with devastating effect. Remember always that the mind leads the body so applying this default principle is always first the mental act of recognition of opportunity followed by the physical act of strangulation - so train your mind to stay alert and immediately identify opportunities when they arise.

Aussie Invasion: The squad is in preparation for ADCC 2019 and a big part of the team is our Australian friends spearheaded by @craigjonesbjj @izaakmichellbjj and @ethanthomasmma Though I was born in the United States, I was raised in New Zealand and my family lives in Australia - one of my regrets in life is that I was never in a position to help grappling as much in Australasia as I was here - so having these Aussies here in the basement full time is a great way to atone for this 🤗😜🤗 Here they after a great day of training - a true cast of characters who represent Australia’s incredible sports heritage in the world of grappling. 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺

Let the incredible power of combinations take your game to a new level: Imagine you knew literally nothing about punching. You found a competent boxing coach and in your first lesson he taught you one punch - a basic jab to the head. At the end of your first class you are excited to have a little knowledge of one punch. In your second class he teaches you another punch - a straight rear hand to the head. Now you are pleased to know a little about two punches. On your way home you reflect on your progress and wonder how many punching attacks you could use on an opponent. You know TWO punches, but you can throw FOUR attacks off just this tiny amount of knowledge you have. You know two moves - jab and rear straight - but you can use them in four ways - jab, rear straight, jab followed by rear straight and rear straight followed by jab. So you in your second class you DOUBLED the number of punches you knew, but QUADRUPLED the number of different blows you could throw by doing so. THIS IS THE MAGIC OF COMBINATION ATTACKS IN A NUTSHELL. Even a small number of moves can be worked together in combinations to create limitless combinations that opponents will find extremely difficult to stop. Now add a few more moves, double jab, jab to the body, rear straight to the body - and suddenly the number of different striking attacks rises EXPONENTIALLY as the combinations of a few similar moves creates massive numbers of potential attacks that even very skilled opponents will really struggle to keep up with. EXACTLY THE SAME LESSON APPLIES TO GRAPPLING. My students have some the highest finishing rates in Jiu Jitsu, yet Ninety percent of our finishes come from combining just six submissions holds. You must learn to make the incredible potential power of COMBINED ATTACKS work in your favor. Don’t just drill and spar with single attacks in mind but always ask what will be your follow up if this should prove insufficient - start with it as a mental habit and then it will become a physical habit that will greatly improve your success rates.

Step outside of yourself and observe your game: One of the most factors in your progress in Jiu Jitsu is SELF KNOWLEDGE. If you can make an honest and accurate assessment of your current skills set then you can plan accurately what you need to improve and add to it to become the athlete you want to be. It is difficult to this, especially when you first begin the sport - you simply don’t have the knowledge yet to accurately assess your level and what else needs to be learned. In time however, you will learn the skill of SELF ASSESSMENT. Let me tell you that this skill is crucial for your progress. One of my primary functions as a coach is to ASSESS MY ATHLETES AND MAKE DECISIONS WHAT THEY NEED TO CHANGE TO GET TO IMPROVE THEIR PERFORMANCE. If you have an outside pair of eyes to do this for you - wonderful - it will be a great benefit. If you don’t - you will have to learn to do it yourself. Start writing down the things you believe you do well against your peers. Compare this with a list of things you think would make you perform better and write down the reasons WHY you think those additions are well suited to you as an individual and will be good additions to your current skill set. Now write down the skills you think are necessary but which you perform poorly. Compare and contrast the lists of skills that you do well and those which you perform poorly. What is the correlation between the two? Searching yourself in this way can teach you a lot about yourself and your current game - and the more you know about that, THE MORE YOU CAN MAKE BENEFICIAL CHANGES. Keep an eye on the game, keep an eye on your role models - but don’t forget to keep an eye on yourself...

We all have our favorites: A huge part of your progress comes from acquiring and developing your FAVORITE MOVES (tokui-waza). These are the moves that suite your body type and personality more than any others and with which you show early promise. Remember you are involved in a sport where A PERFECT APPLICATION OF ONE MOVE WILL WIN A MATCH, BUT THE IMPERFECT APPLICATION OF A HUNDRED MOVES WON’T DO A DAMN THING. When you acquire some favorites that seem to work for you - preferably high percentage moves - DEVOTE A BIG PART OF YOUR TRAINING TIME TO ENLARGE AND PERFECT YOUR UNDERSTANDING AND PERFORMANCE OF THISE MOVES. How good you get at those favorite moves will determine how good you get at the sport overall. Only once you have some heavy hitting main weapons can you branch off those main attacks to add new directions to your game. Let your opponent react to your main weapons and defeat him on his reactions to the strong initial threat - that is the pattern of good Jiu Jitsu for most people. Here, Georges St-Pierre works one of his grappling tokui-waza - Kimura. It is the mainstay of his submission offense and the move from most of his other grappling attacks branch off. What are yours? Are you happy with them? What would you like to add in the future?

You can’t close all the doors...and neither can your opponent: A big part of what makes Jiu Jitsu so fascinating, so frustrating and so uplifting; is the fact that our job is to shut down our opponent’s ability to move - TO CLOSE ALL THE DOORWAYS TO ESCAPE SO TO SAY. So if an opponent is using an under hook to escape, we can close that door by pommelling in our own under hook. If he is turning his head inwards to begin an elbow escape we might close that door with a strong cross face - and so it goes on - the better we get at Jiu Jitsu, the better we get and closing off all the routes to escape - closing each door as our opponent tries to open them. Understand however, that you can only shut so many doors at once - YOU CAN NEVER SHUT THEM ALL SIMULTANEOUSLY. As you focus on shutting down one area, ANOTHER DOOR MUST OPEN SOMEWHERE ELSE. This means that NO MEANS OF CONTROL IN JIU JITSU CAN EVER BE COMPLETE. The ramifications of this are deep. It means first, that we must move on from control and actual FINISH opponents, because you can never hold a skilled opponent for ever as eventually they will find an open door. Second, if you are the one being controlled, NEVER LOSE HOPE. There is an open door there somewhere no matter how hopeless the situation might seem - you just have to find it. This simple insight of the impossibility of closing all the doors of escape is both a source of frustration and hope. Frustration because you can never completely shut down an opponent’s ability to escape your control (and so the onus is on you to go forward without delay to the finish). Hope, because no matter how shackled you might feel, you always know that somewhere there is an open door for you to walk through.

Getting good at offense quickly - learn to get to the back - the remarkable case of Nick Rodríguez: So often I am asked how one can improve more rapidly in Jiu Jitsu. Well, there is no avoiding the mastery of fundamentals, especially the skills of escape and guard retention as the necessities for fast progress. Nonetheless, I can give you some simple advice for faster progress and results in one part of your game - offense. Devote a LOT of your training time mastering the various routes to your opponents back. The back is the single most dominant finishing position in the sport. If you want to boost your finishing rates in a hurry - focus on getting there quickly and efficiently. There are many routes to the back - you can go under the arms, around the arms, through the legs, over the back and shoulders etc - and once you get there your opponent is one hundred percent defensive. Nick Rodríguez is a blue belt with around a years training. This weekend he went into a crazy tournament where he took on four opponents (four against one) including a black belt and brown belt and beat all four. His favorite tactic for getting finishes against people with far more experience than him? You guessed it -TAKE THE BACK. He is a legend in the blue basement for a quote he gave us one day as we talked after class “If I can get behind an opponent and lock my stranglehold anywhere below his eyebrows - it’s done!” 😂😂 Make a point of training your pathways to the back. I am certain you can hasten your progress if you do.

Set the wedges, levers and fulcrums first - apply force second: One of the most common mistakes I see among developing grapplers is a tendency to get the opportunity for a submission and jump in with maximum force as soon as they enter the submission hold. This usually results in large amounts of energy expenditure and is a quick route to exhaustion and frustration. Take a little time to set your immobilizing wedges and your breaking fulcrums and make sure to seize the longest lever you can and only then apply your force. You will immediately see results. The submission holds of Jiu Jitsu are devastating when properly set, but feeble when poorly set. Get it right first - then your application of force will almost always get the results you seek. Remember that with submission holds it’s not how fast you get there that counts, but rather, what effects you can generate ONCE you get there. So give yourself a little time to adjust, a little time to refine and you will generate a LOT more force through the proper use of lever and fulcrum than you ever could through muscular exertion. Here, Gordon Ryan has set his wedges and fulcrums superbly and the result is another devastating leg lock - and another win. Follow the same philosophy and you can do the same

If you look at all the champions of Jiu Jitsu for the last twenty five years - a clear idea emerges - NO ONE BODY TYPE OR PERSONALITY TYPE DOMINATES THE SPORT. You see tremendous variation among the champions. The beauty of Jiu Jitsu and indeed, all combat sports is that they allow every one of us regardless of our physical or psychological type to find our own path to excellence. I have seen tall, short, thick and thin athletes become champions. I have seen both the nervous and the fearless, the confident and the anxiety ridden get to the top. Your job is to find one path among the myriad options that Jiu Jitsu offers that works for you - if you can and you can work hard to master it, you can achieve great things

When working arm bars from underneath a strongly resisting opponent - get your hips pointing in the same direction your opponent is facing: The juji gatame arm bar from guard is among the most popular and effective moves in the sport. Using it well is very instructive for many other skills as well. An important general principle in combat sports is to avoid head to head confrontations that pit your strength directly against that of an opponent - this approach will never allow you to defeat stronger opponents. The idea is to seek to align your forces with his as much as possible so that you DEFLECT and REDIRECT force rather than CONFRONT IT HEAD ON. In the case of the classic arm bar from guard, a good way to ensure you do this is to go beyond a ninety degree pivot when in the arm bar position. Get your hips pointing forward in the same direction your opponent is facing (or at least as close as you can). In this way your legs and hips will push in the same direction as your opponent’s defensive downward/forward stacking force. This addition of your force to his will enable you to easily off balance him from bottom. An opponent out of balance is easily attacked and finished or toppled over into a more compromised position from where you can renew the attack. Whenever you find your arm bar attack from guard stopped by your opponent’s defensive reaction - TAKE THE EXTRA TIME TO LINE UP YOUR HIPS WITH HIS DIRECTION AND APPLY THE FORCE OF YOUR LEGS IN CONCERT WITH HIS. Your success rate will greatly increase and his defensive reaction will aid you rather than stop you.

When attacking with ashi garami - make your first movement hip to hip: The single most common cause of failure for all submission attacks is too much space between the points of connection between your body and your opponent’s - leg locking from ashi garami is no exception. I always counsel my students when attacking with ashi garami based leg locks - make your first movement a scoot of your hips to your opponent’s hips - everything else comes after this. NO OTHER ADJUSTMENT OR COMPENSATION YOU CAN MAKE CAN ATONE FOR FAILURE TO CLOSE DISTANCE AND CONNECT PROPERLY - so make that your first priority. Here, Garry Tonon has done a fine job of getting close and staying close despite strong resistance. This makes all subsequent actions towards a break easier and more efficient - resulting in a perfect lock and victory.

Direction of force: Every move in Jiu Jitsu requires the application of force. The single biggest determinant of how successful that application of force will be is the DIRECTION you apply the force. SMALLER FORCES APPLIED IN THE APPROPRIATE DIRECTION WILL ALWAYS OUTPERFORM BIGGER FORCES APPLIED IN FAULTY DIRECTIONS. For all your favorite moves, study the optimal directions to apply forces when performing those moves. Understand that those directions can change mid-move and you may well have to make adjustments on the fly. Here I am demonstrating an INCORRECT direction of force for a popular pinning move or of front headlock (can you see why it is incorrect? What would be a better direction?) Knowing the difference between sound and unsound direction of force will often make the difference between success and failure. Next time on the mat you feel your application of force get stopped by a tough opponent - EXPERIMENT WITH CHANGES IN DIRECTION - sometimes even a small change will make a big difference. When you do you will have taken a big step towards the Jiu Jitsu ideal of GETTING MORE DONE WITH LESS EFFORT.

Daylight: The main means by which we immobilize opponents in Jiu Jitsu is to place wedges around their body and reinforce these wedges with weight (if we are on top) locked limbs (closed wedges) or muscular tension. A big factor in how effective these immobilizing wedge will be is the degree of connection between them and your opponent. The saying I always use is this - IF YOU CAN SEE DAYLIGHT BETWEEN YOUR WEDGES AND HIS BODY - YOU ARE MAKING HIS ESCAPE EASY. Whenever you go to lock an opponent down - look for daylight (space) around your limbs and his body. Try always to fit your body tightly into his - space is your enemy here. Make your body initially soft and flexible so that you can contour your body around his and there is no daylight between you and him. Then when it is time to apply to move puts tension through your body long enough to get the job done. This is an easy thing for a camera to reveal or a friend to see - often you can see it in yourself from your own perspective - WHENEVER YOU SEE IT - ELIMINATE IT - because it is the downfall of many an attempted move.

Varying your intensity levels: A truly vital skill in grappling is that of learning to VARY YOUR LEVELS OF PHYSICAL INTENSITY ACCORDING TO THE DEMANDS OF THE SITUATION YOU ARE IN. Probably the single most common problem I see in beginning students is an inability to change and regulate the intensity of their physical effort - they just go at maximum intensity the whole match. The inevitable result is that that quickly tire and fade. The other extreme is athletes who play so loose that when it’s time to pull the trigger and hit a move, are so loose that it is simply ineffective. Somewhere in between these extremes is the happy medium you seek. As a general price of advice - only employ maximal muscle contractions in short bursts and only when actually looking to perform a given move. At other times stay in a state of relaxed focus. Not that even in those short bursts of maximal muscular exertion - KEEP BREATHING and don’t use muscular strength to compensate for positional errors - get your body in good position first and THEN apply your strength. In this way you can play a hard physical game without exhausting yourself to a point where you become ineffective. Look at this picture. Georges St-Pierre has gotten into a potential finishing position and is thus ready to apply some serious force - the strain shows. Next to him Gordon Ryan has gotten to a dominant position but does not yet have a finishing hold in place and so takes on a very relaxed demeanor. The contrast between them is striking and instructive - one situation demands muscular tension and exertion, the other allows relaxation on the understanding that this will preserve your strength for a time when it is needed. KEEP MONITORING YOU STRENGTH/TENSION OUTPUT AS YOU ENGAGE YOUR OPPONENT. Know when to be tight and when to be loose and you will defeat many opponents on endurance alone and the rest by having the physicality in reserve to finish that potential match winning move.

Each of the main main moves of Jiu Jitsu has its own special character - learn to understand that character and you will go far: There is no question that certain moves in Jiu Jitsu have prominence among the countless moves of the sport. Some are what we often call “high percentage” That is, they work repeatedly across all body types, personalities, weight categories, ages, both sexes, at all belt levels. So for example, in every tournament you will see examples of high percentage moves such as single leg, double leg, elbow escape, guillotines, juji gatame arm bar, triangles, Kimura etc. These high percentage moves must be the basis of your game. Understand that all of these moves have their own character. They are strong in some ways, weak in others. They have good points and bad points. Developing a deep relationship with each of these moves is a huge part of your Jiu Jitsu journey. Just as you have your favorite friends and you understand the character of each very well, so that you have a friend who you know is probably not the best one to bring with you to the museum, but is your go too for back up in a bar brawl, another who is rather boring but perfect as a study partner before a big exam etc. you associate each friend with an appropriate context and they can help you through life - so too with your Jiu Jitsu moves. Each will do well and help you in a certain context and poorly in others. Your job is to understand the moves so well that you know not only the move - BUT THE CONTEXT IN WHICH TO APPLY THEM. Know your favorite moves as intimately as your closest friends, understand their good and bad points and they will never let you down

Orientation: Our goal is always control that leads to submission. Once you get a submission hold locked on, the defensive reactions from your opponent can be very strong indeed - after all, nobody wants to be the guy that tapped out. One of the more common defensive reactions to some of the major submission holds are turning or spinning escapes. These have an immediate effect - you will have to follow an opponent through three hundred and sixty degrees of rotation (sometimes several times) and STILL BE ABLE TO ACHIEVE THE BREAK OF STRANGLE AT ANY TIME DURING THAT ROTATION. As such, you must train yourself to be able to finish REGARDLESS OF THE ORIENTATION YOU FIND YOURSELF IN. We usually train our submission holds only in conventional or standard orientations, but the reality is that in a competitive match you will have to finish in many unconventional orientations. For all your favorite submissions make your You practice your finishes through a full three hundred and sixty degrees so that you don’t have any surprises when it’s time to finish upside down or back to front in a match. Here, Nicky Ryan follows an opponent through two complete turns and into a third and finishes on an unconventional side with a different form of ashi control against a strongly resisting opponent - the result of practicing finishing from anywhere in dynamic movement.

The magic of cross collar grips: In all aspects of Jiu Jitsu - THE BEGINNING OF CONTROL IS GRIP. When you go to grip an opponent you have a vast array of options, particularly when using the gi. Understand that each of the major grips offers a different type of control. Arguably the most important form of control is HEAD CONTROL. This is due to the basic nature of the human body. We humans are essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything hangs off that - so if you control the head - you control everything else by default. The gi is a rope around your opponent’s neck and offers a tremendous degree of indirect head control. As such, you want to take advantage of it as much as possible. When you first begin your Jiu jitsu journey I often recommend to use the cross lapel grip as your DEFAULT GRIP in most neutral positions on the ground (in standing situations straight collar grips are usually preferred) - if you are ever unsure where or how to grip in neutral positions, just go cross collar and in the majority of cases it will work well. As you gain in gripping expertise you will learn that gripping higher or lower can have important effects and that strangulation can be added to control. Take time to study the incredible potential of this foundational grip - it’s value will extend throughout your entire time in jiujitsu.

Climb - don’t jump: When we go to engage our opponent we must have a goal in mind - usually it is one of our favorite attacking positions. Now you don’t get given your favorite attacking positions for free - you have to EARN them. Often I see people trying to jump immediately to their favorite grips/positions. This can work on occasion, especially against opponents who don’t know your game and who you can thus surprise. However, once your tricks are shown and the surprise lost, you won’t get there anymore. The best way to get to your favorite attacking positions is to CLIMB THE BODY AND WORK YOUR WAY REMORSELESSLY TOWARDS THEM. Start with the part of your opponent’s body that is closest to you - usually his hands/wrists - and work up the arms to the torso/legs. The general pattern is that YOU START WITH THE EXTREMITIES AND WORK YOUR WAY TO THE CENTER OF MASS/TORSO. Avoid skipping steps especially when the opponent is skilled. CLIMB HIS BODY AS YOU WOULD A ROPE - WE DON’T JUMP TO THE TOP OF THE ROPE BUT CLIMB HAND BY HAND TO THE TOP. This approach will give you great connection and control - the hallmarks of good Jiu Jitsu. Make it your modus operandi and watch your performance improve!

The battle for space: In Jiu Jitsu the aims/goals of the top athlete are usually diametrically opposed to this of the bottom athlete. The goal of the athlete in top position is typically to CLOSE DISTANCE, GET TIGHT TO HIS OPPONENT AND RESTRICT SPACE. There is a reason for this. Almost all the bottom moves of Jiu Jitsu require some amount of space between you and your opponent to work - take away that space and you shut the bottom man down into a totally defensive game. The athlete on bottom wants the opposite - he must constantly fight to CREATE AND MAINTAIN SPACE so that he can play effective offense from underneath. The number one weapon for the bottom athlete is this war over space is the use of FRAMES - positioning your limbs as braces to hold an opponent at distance long enough to thwart his attempts to smother and pin you. Understanding and implementing the constant battle between the bottom athletes attempts to use frames and the top athletes attempts to negate them is a big part of your development. Your ability to improvise frames with your hands, forearms, elbows and your ability to combine these with appropriate body movements are the basis of one of the most crucial skills in the sport - GUARD RETENTION. The interplay between you ability to FRAME WITH YOUR ARMS and RECOVER WITH YOUR LEGS will determine your ability to retain guard and an aggressive passer. Here, Craig Jones and Gordon Ryan battle over frames in the blue basement - the outcome of this battle will almost always determine the outcome of the battle overall.

The foundation of your game: The essential nature of Jiu Jitsu is that it is built around the idea that your first responsibility is to REMOVE THE DANGER OF THE WORST CASE SCENARIO. The worst case scenario is always that of an opponent getting past your legs and into superior upper body pins from where he can pick and choose his attacks whilst you can do nothing in return. As such, the foundation of your Jiu Jitsu journey must always be the two skills of GETTING OUT OF PINS and STOPPING SOMEONE GETTING PAST YOUR LEGS AND PINNING YOU. Thus it is the skills of PIN ESCAPES and GUARD RETENTION that you must master first. Without these prerequisites all the other skills of Jiu Jitsu are of little practical value. You may have a fine arm bar or triangle, but if your opponent brushes past your guard and pins you you simply will never get a chance to use it. Even worse, if you know you struggle to get out of pins or your guard is easy to pass, you will stop YOURSELF from using your arm bar and triangle for fear of the risk of getting pinned if it does not work. So whenever beginner students or students with a confidence issue (afraid to pull the trigger when opportunity presents itself) come to me for advice on what they should focus on first, my answer is almost always - PIN ESCAPES and GUARD RETENTION. These two skills will be the foundation upon which you can build a game that can take you far. Without them the best you will achieve is a hit and miss Jiu Jitsu and as your opponent’s get better - far more misses than hits. As long as they can’t pass your guard you will always be capable of offense from bottom position. Ironically it is your defensive skills that will determine the reach and extent of your offensive skills. Take pride in being UNPINNABLE and UNPASSABLE (impassable) - only then will you be able to achieve your final goal of attacks that are UNSTOPPABLE

Guard retention instructional video released! The second installment of the BJJ FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER - GUARD RETENTION video has been released today. The guard position is the foundation of the entire bottom game in Jiu Jitsu. Given that there will always be times when we find ourselves underneath bigger, stronger and more aggressive opponents (or opponents who simply have more developed takedown skills than ourselves) it is prudent to spend at least half of your training time in bottom position. If you are a beginner or smaller it is wise to spend even more time than this as the likelihood of being in bottom position is even greater. The first two skills you need to master in Jiu Jitsu are PIN ESCAPES - because when you begin you will inevitably be pinned in inferior position by your more experienced opponents - and GUARD RETENTION - because if they can’t get past your legs and pin you they are going to find it extremely difficult to control you and finish you. They will never be able to get to the preferred top pins or behind you from where most of the best finishes occur. The guard is both your sword and shield when in bottom position. You need to be able to GET TO IT by escaping pins and KEEP IT through retention skills. If you can do so OPPONENTS WONT BE ABLE TO CONTROL YOU AND YOU WILL BE ABLE TO CONSTANTLY ATTACK THEM FROM UNDERNEATH - and that’s how bottom game must be played. So never neglect your training of pin escapes and guard retention - those two skills have saved more Jiu Jitsu players from losing situations and created more winning opportunities from underneath tough opponents than all the others put together. If you are interested in my instructional video the link in is my Instagram bio or you can order at @bjj.fanatics 😊

Getting it right: The sport of Jiu Jitsu is one of the most technically demanding in all of sports. A submission that was 99% correct fails as badly as one that was 5% correct. There is a lot of heartache over moves that got close - but failed. Interestingly, the cause of failure is usually something very small. That is why such a premium is put upon small technical details in Jiu Jitsu because they are the difference between almost winning (but losing) and winning. IN A SKILL WHERE THERE IS ONLY SUCCESS AND FAILURE AND ANYTHING LESS THAT COMPLETE SUCCESS IS FAILURE - EVERYTHING DOWN TO THE SMALLEST DETAILS HAS TO BE CORRECT. The number of high percentage submissions in Jiu Jitsu is small - I really only focus on twenty, and most of my time is spent on only six systems of submissions which form the core of our arsenal - the course of your study must focus on the DEPTH of your knowledge of a few moves. So work hard to amass those match winning details. When a fleeting opportunity arises before you against a tough opponent they will be the difference between triumph and frustration

Knowing what you are fighting against is half the battle - Guard Retention: There are few skills in Jiu Jitsu that are more important for success than guard retention. If someone passes your guard you are now one hundred percent defensive and you won’t be able to get back on the offense until you recover your guard. In a short time limit match this may mean that half the match time is lost based on that one mistake. Moreover, now your opponent is ahead on points and no longer feels compelled to engage and as a consequence you will have to push the action to catch up - never easy on an opponent who is not engaging. Guard retention is among the more difficult skills to teach to students. I always like to begin by clearly outlining what an opponent actually has to do to pass your guard. In fact it is not an easy process. He must complete five sequential steps
1 - Break whatever grip/connection you have to him sufficiently to be able to move independently of you
2 - get an angle
3 - close distance and bypass your legs and get past the line of your hips
4 - lower his level to get chest to chest (or in some cases knee to stomach)
5 - hold you in a pin with one shoulder to the floor for three seconds That’s a lot of work! Your job as the athlete retaining guard is to fight each one of those sequential steps as they occur. THE FURTHER INTO THE SEQUENCE YOUR OPPONENT GETS THE MORE DIFFICULT THE TASK OF RETENTION BECOMES AND THE MORE RISK YOU WILL HAVE TO TAKE TO PREVENT THE PASS. By breaking down the act of passing into these sequential steps, students can more easily identify what they must do to stop an opponent and when they ought to be applying a given defense. Once your retention game has a sense of DIRECTION you can take away the mad scramble elements that often detract from many beginning athletes attempts at guard retention and skillfully hold off even a determined passer - and when you can HOLD a guard, you can ATTACK and FINISH from guard - and that’s what Jiu Jitsu bottom position is all about!

Craig Jones Kimura: Craig Jones was victorious last night at @kasaigrappling July 4th event. He won with a beautiful interplay of Kimura and back attacks. He has been working hard in the blue basement this last month and next week the ADCC 2019 camp begins and he will join the squad for the full camp in preparation. Kimura is among the most fascinating holds in grappling. It functions in the grappling game in a way similar to the knight on the chess board. Just as the knight moves in a very different manner from all the other pieces on the board and can thus be used in very unique ways to deliver attacks that no other piece can attempt, so too, Kimura enables unconventional attacks. Any time an opponent reaches for you from underneath Kimura is possible. It is one of the few upper body moves you can reliably employ whilst still engaged in an opponent’s guard - as the squad has shown many times - an once locked, you branch off in many directions - the back being a squad favorite 😜 Well done Mr Jones! This weekend he takes on UFC heavyweight behemoth Anthony Rumble Johnson in a very interesting match up then he and the squad juniors team up for world championship preparation

Happy 4th of July!! Wishing you all the best! Remember always the deepest lesson of our nations birth - NEVER UNDERESTIMATE WHAT A FEW FREETHINKERS WITH A VISION, A PLAN AND THE DRIVE AND COURAGE TO ENACT IT, CAN DO. They started with nothing and started a revolution that changed the world forever - you can use the same attitude and revolutionize who you are and change yourself forever...🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

The Iron Law of Speed vs Control: When we go to engage with an opponent, a basic choice have to make is THE SPEED OF OUR OWN MOVEMENT vs THE CONTROL WE HAVE OVER OUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT. There is an iron rule that comes into play here that has deep ramifications for our game. You have to make a choice between speed and control - You cannot have both at the same time. The more you emphasize the speed of your own movements the less you will be able to control the movements of your opponent. Since Jiu Jitsu is a sport that primarily emphasize control above all else - it is typically a slow paced game in comparison to other grappling sports such as wrestling and judo. Note that all the fastest moves of Jiu Jitsu, for example a flying arm bar, are among the least controlling and need speed and surprise to get the win before our opponent can react defensively. The slowest moves of Jiu Jitsu - the dominant pins - where minutes can go by with very little movement are the most controlling. This iron law of speed and control is something you must ponder when building your own game. Both can be highly successful. It is also quite possible to use both at different times and in different contexts. For example, standing position is inherently less controlling than ground positions and thus speed plays a much greater role in success for most athletes. You might play a speed based game standing but a control based game on the floor. Both speed and control are wonderful attributes for combat athletes to develop - but learning to understand their relationship and how that relationship will impact your game is a big part of your Jiu Jitsu journey.

When strangleholds and joint locks join forces: The submission holds of Jiu Jitsu are broadly divided into JOINT LOCKS and STRANGLES. The former are an attack upon your opponent’s body, the latter an attack upon your opponent’s consciousness. Both are devastating weapons. There are a few occasions when you can bridge the divide and make them work together as one. Arguably the best example of this is the triangle (sankaku). Anytime you lock up a triangle of any type upon an opponent you always have the option of adding a lock to your opponent’s wrist, elbow or shoulder as well. The effects of this can be devastating as typically the defenses to the strangle tend to open you up to the joint locks and vice versa, so that the opponent is given the devils choice between getting strangled vs getting broken. Here, triangle master Gordon Ryan shows a fine example of a front triangle (omote sankaku) combined with an arm lock action (juji gatame) to create a terrible predicament for his opponent. Look for this every time you attack with triangles of all types and begin to exploit the potential of both strangles and joint locks at the same time!

Two different approaches to submission: I have always taught Jiu Jitsu as the art and science of control that leads to submission. When it is time to enter into submissions, understand that there are two general methods. The first is to emphasize SPEED OF ENTRY. The idea is to catch your opponent in a moment of vulnerability PRIOR TO HIS ABILITY TO SET UP STRONG DEFENSES. The second is to get to a completed dominant position first, your opponent recognizes the danger of the position and sets up strong defensive apparatus in response to the threat, and you employ a STEP BY STEP DISMANTLING OF HIS DEFENSES TO GET THE BREAKTHROUGH. The first relies upon your ability to sense OPPORTUNITY and have the speed to get to the prize before your opponent can construct defenses. The second relies upon your KNOWLEDGE OF THE MAJOR COUNTERS TO YOUR THREAT AND YOUR ABILITY TO OVERCOME THEM. If you wish to maximize your potential in the use of submission holds - you must gain expertise in both methods. The dynamic nature of sparring and competition will provide you with many opportunities to use the first method and snatch submissions in the midst of the action. As you develop strong positional skills you will get opportunities to also employ the second approach. Note that the first approach relies mostly upon your PERCEPTION. YOU MUST TRAIN YOURSELF TO SEE OPPORTUNITY AND ACT IMMEDIATELY UPON IT. The second relies more upon knowledge of PROCEDURE and a methodical dismantling of defensive structures. The best students are always those who can double their chances by using both with equal efficacy. Here, Nicky Ryan employs a methodical step by step approach using our back attack system, but as you have seen so often, he also excels at snatching strangles in the midst of scrambles. Play them both and watch your submission game take a jump forward !

Guard retention: One of the most exciting aspects of learning Jiu Jitsu is that of developing strong attacks with submissions and sweeps/reversals from bottom guard positions. Most people believe that in any combat situation a person in top position will have an advantage over an opponent underneath them. It is very eye opening to a beginner to see how powerful certain bottom guard positions can be if used well. However, EVEN THE BEST ATTACKING ABILITIES FROM BOTTOM POSITION WILL BE OF LITTLE VALUE IF YOU CANNOT MAINTAIN A GUARD POSITION LONG ENOUGH TO ACTUALLY PUT THEM INTO OPERATION. The bottom game of Jiu Jitsu is entirely predicated on the idea that you must be able to engage your opponent with your LEGS (Guard) If you are to be effective. If your opponent quickly passes your legs you can’t do anything from underneath until you recover your legs back between yourself and your adversary. As long as you have connection of your legs to your opponent or least alignment of your legs with your opponent, you can play an offensive game from bottom, but the moment he passes your guard, you are 100% defensive. As such, the ability to hold a guard position for extended periods of time against resistance is the single most important skill in building a foundation for offense from bottom position. While it may not have the sex appeal of submissions and sweeps, you won’t be submitting or sweeping anyone from underneath if they pass your legs - so when it comes to developing bottom guard skills - EVERYTHING STARTS WITH RETENTION. Only when you have that skill will you be able to constantly attack and play an offensive game from bottom position. AS LONG AS YOU HAVE YOUR LEGS/ HIPS POSITIONED BETWEEN YOURSELF AND YOUR OPPONENT YOU ARE A THREAT TO HIM - AS SOON AS HE PASSES YOUR GUARD YOU ARE NOTHING TO HIM BUT A TARGET. Work hard on those unglamorous but essential retention skills - they will provide more value to your bottom game than any other and create a foundation upon which you can build a truly impressive set of bottom offense skills

The greatest vulnerability of the human body - the back: The human body is entirely set up to deal with threats directly in front of it. The further around the body you go, the less well it can deal with any threat. That is why ANGLE is such a cherished commodity in all combat sports. The ultimate angle is to be directly behind someone. There are many ways to get an advantageous angle - in grappling sports probably the most successful route is to get control of, and then move outside of, your opponent’s ELBOW. While there are other very effective routes to the back, it is probably fair to say that domination of the elbow is the royal route to the back in grappling sports. Learning to get control of an opponent’s elbow when you are in any dominant or even neutral position, and getting a position outside of it, is a great thing in Jiu Jitsu, as you now have a clear path to the back. SHOW ME ANY NEUTRAL POSITION IN JIU-JITSU AND I WILL SHOW YOU A POSITION WHERE, IF YOU COULD SLIDE OUTSIDE YOUR OPPONENTS ELBOW, IT WOULD NO LONGER BE NEUTRAL BUT DOMINANT. learn to look for elbow control at all times and look to use that control positively get getting your body outside and past your opponent’s elbows and I promise you that you will soon be scoring more back points than you ever did previously. Here, Nicky Ryan, young master of the back, climbs skillfully around an opponent’s elbow from bottom guard. Guard is a neutral position - but once the elbow is beaten it becomes highly advantageous. Just a few seconds after this photo was taken he had successfully applied a strangle.

Start with head and hands: One of the most important concepts of grappling is that of CONNECTION. Only when you form some sort of physical connection to an opponent can you begin the process of controlling an opponent’s movement in ways that lead to submission (there are some ways to affect an opponent’s movement without touching them (feints, motion etc) but this is a different set of skills). Note immediate a general rule - THE MORE CONNECTION YOU HAVE WITH AN OPPONENT THE GREATER DEGREE OF CONTROL IS POSSIBLE. So as a general rule as we grapple an opponent we are constantly seeking to get good position with greater amounts of body contact in order to maximize control. However, this process of seeking greater connection must have a starting point - and the vast majority of cases, CONNECTION BEGINS WITH THE HEAD AND HANDS. Good head position and strong hand fighting skills are a BIG part of success and one which you must start practicing until they become instinctual. Your head and hands are the basis of your defense in grappling and if you can gain some sort of advantage with them it will start your offensive cycles that can lead to victory. SET YOUR HEAD AND HANDS PROPERLY AND THE REST OF YOUR BODY WILL HAVE A MUCH EASIER TIME GETTING ADVANTAGEOUS CONNECTION.

When you have strong submissions in your arsenal - as long as you have a heartbeat and time on the clock - you’ve always got a chance: One of The greatest things about submissions is that they can turn an entire match around in a moment. Regardless of what has transpired already in a match - no matter how far behind you are on the scoreboard - a submission overcomes everything and can give you the win. One of the greatest favors you can ever do yourself is thus to train deeply in submission skill. It will be your equivalent of a KO punch. Submissions make you dangerous and at a deeper level, they create a sense in you that you always a chance of victory no matter what. Here, blue belt junior Nathalia Santoro finds herself down 9-4 in a wild match with just seconds on the clock. Training with back master Gordon Ryan pays off as she locks in a strangle on the buzzer to take a great win. Nothing gets us through adversity better than a sense of hope - and strong submissions create a very strong sense of hope indeed because they are the one weapon that can instantly overturn the entire narrative of a match so far and give you victory out of defeat.

What comes next? If you can count on one thing for the rest of your time in Jiu jitsu it is this - every opponent you face will strive to resist every attack you make upon them. ACTIVE INTELLIGENT RESISTANCE is the fundamental feature of all combat sports and what makes them so challenging, so frustrating, so rewarding - and so effective. How well you do in Jiu Jitsu will come down to one thing - HOW WELL DO YOU DEAL WITH YOUR OPPONENTS RESISTANCE IN COMPETITIVE SITUATIONS? A great first step is to begin with a question. For all your favorite moves, list the most common responses (usually a very manageable number) and list a strong follow-up move to enter into when your opponent stymies the initial move. Just this simple act will greatly improve your performance on the mat. NEVER THINK IN TERMS OF SINGLE ATTACKS BUT ALWAYS THINK IN TERMS OF CLUSTERS OF ATTACKS so that as resistance escalates you can automatically go around that resistance into a follow up attack. Look at this photo of talented squad junior Frankie Rosenthal beginning to lose control of a nice initial triangle attack - where would you go from here? How long did it take you to formulate an answer to the question? Your two answers to these questions will say a lot about your current ability to deal with resistance and go on to victory.

The hardest skill for beginning students to learn - Guard retention: There are many skills that a student first beginning Jiu Jitsu must start to learn. While none of them are easy to apply on a resisting opponent, there is one that always seems to be especially difficult - this is the skill of maintaining your guard (keeping your legs between you and your opponent) as your opponent works to pass your guard (get past your legs and into an upper body pin). Nothing really prepares you for this. While some physical attributes such as flexibility help to a degree, they won’t allow a beginner to hold off a more advanced training partner for even a respectable amount of time. This is not good news, as THE ENTIRE BOTTOM GAME OF JIU JITSU IS BASED AROUND YOU ABILITY TO GET TO GUARD AND STAY THERE LONG ENOUGH TO MAKE EFFECTIVE ATTACKS. I always felt that guard retention was probably the most poorly taught subject matter in Jiu Jitsu. Too often people with excellent guard retention are seen as physically talented, as though physical attributes were the main reason why they were good at guard retention, rather than having a sound game plan and set of skills, tactics and knowledge that made them effective. So what can we do to improve this situation? I believe the first big step in the right direction is to begin teaching guard retention in a way that reflects the way the game is actually played. Guard PASSING is among the fastest and most dynamic aspects of BJJ. There are constant feints, push/pull action/reaction movements, switching sides, combined attacks etc. In this fast moving atmosphere where you can go from being safe and comfortable and then one second later be in total crisis mode with an opponent almost past your guard, it pays to have a guard retention methodology that reflects this dynamic nature. As such, I greatly favor a conceptual approach that gives useful, broadly applicable rules of behavior in response to guard passing threats that are loose and flexible enough to be workable in fast changing and chaotic situations. This is a big topic and I will be coming back to it quite often as it will determine how successful you are in bottom position on the mat

The versatility of front headlock position: one of the most commonly occurring positions in all of submission grappling is the front headlock/guillotine position. From feet to floor, top or bottom there are so many ways to enter into this position whether as a reaction to an opponent’s move, or as a proactive entry that we initiate ourselves that it is almost inevitable that it will occur on multiple occasions in the course of a match. As such, it must be part of your game. The good news is that there are many fine stranglehold’s that can be done from there - many guillotine and kata gatame variations - all of which can turn a match in your favor in a very short time frame. Here, developing junior @drewthewickd_mma uses a nice sequence that begins as an arm in guillotine and transitions to a high elbow guillotine attack from top position as the changing circumstances of the scenario unfold. This ability to get quickly to a controlling front headlock and then use that control to move through all the many potential strangleholds from there is a truly valuable combat skill that you can use every day you train.

Thinking versus unthinking action: In combat sports there is often a need for very swift action and no time for thinking. So for example, if an opponent quickly shoots in for a takedown there is often no time to assess the situation and make a reasoned decision as to how to respond. In cases like this you must train to develop HABITS that kick in without thought the moment the danger arises. Automatic action is thus always a big part of combat sports and you must train yourself to develop good habits that you will automatically apply should the situation arise. Then there are many other situations where there is a considerable amount of time to respond to a tricky situation that you have gotten into. In these situations, reasoned problem solving thought is the way to go. Here you can take the time to avoid a rushed and ill considered action and think things through to solve a puzzle. As a general rule, the demand for quick and automatic reaction with good reaction speed is mostly seen in standing position where the overall pace and the speed of the major techniques is high. In ground grappling the pace slows considerably and there is often time to figure out solutions to problems as you grapple. Your training must reflect this. Develop good habits in response to the faster moves of the sport so that you can reflexively perform the correct response to a quick attack with no need for slow thinking. Drill these counters until they become automatic. When response time is a priority those habits built through repetition will be worth their weight in gold. When you are tangled up down on the floor, go the opposite route - take the time to slow things down and engage conscious thought to problem solve. Using both these approaches in the appropriate contexts will be of great benefit to your performance on the mat.

Amazing night for the juniors! Last night some of the junior students went out to compete at @riseinvitational and at @thirdcoastgrappling @frankrosenthal11 won a fine victory to retain his Rise title. @katerinaleontyeva has to tremendous submission victories, one via heel hook and one via high elbow guillotine to show her developing mastery of leg and front headlock systems. @drewthewickd_mma won with a savage guillotine that rendered his opponent unconscious - I’ve always said that when people visit the basement the thing that shocks them the most is the effectiveness of my students front headlock/guillotine attacks - everyone expects them to be good at legs and back attacks - but the power of their attacks from front headlock is a nasty surprise. Meanwhile, down south @heysonnyy won a thriller via stranglehold in the last second of the match to show the progress of the junior female squad members. Also incredible coaching work by @garrytonon and @gordonlovesjiujitsu who used their own competition experience to help the juniors through the same types of challenges they faced years ago at a similar point in their own careers. Amazing work!! The submission rate in their matches is extraordinarily high - a great testimony to their hard work and progress and a great example for all of my readers to follow. SET YOUR GOALS HIGH, SET YOUR DEMANDS UPON YOURSELF FOR EXCELLENCE IN TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT EVEN HIGHER - STICK TO THE PROGRAM AS LONG AS IT GARNERS GOOD RESULTS AND MAKE CHANGES IF IT DOES NOT - AND SOON YOU WILL BE HAVING SIMILAR SUCCESS 😊😊

Making resistance work FOR you rather than AGAINST you: The fundamental feature of all combat sports is working in a competitive setting against a resisting opponent who is actively trying to defeat you as you try to defeat him. This means that every move you attempt upon him will be met with strong resistance. The natural tendency we all have when we encounter strong resistance is to TRY HARDER and if that fails, QUIT THE MOVE. Learning to go beyond this “try harder/quit” approach is one of the biggest developmental stapes you will have to take. Many never take this step and leave the sport frustrated and disappointed. You must learn to start seeing RESISTANCE AS OPPORTUNITY rather than as a barrier. Every act of resistance has a DIRECTION OF FORCE. When you can read that direction of force you can start to use it to your advantage by adding a second move that goes in the SAME DIRECTION AS YOUR OPPONENTS RESISTANCE. This creates a spectacular effect where your opponent’s strong resistance suddenly compliments your new move and an effortless follow up occurs. Here, Gordon Ryan goes hard to his right for a sweep variation I invented many years ago to allow powerful sweeps out of underhooks and arm lock attacks. His opponent, Dillon Danis has done a good job of setting his hips against the strong right side attack, but as a result will be easy to move back the other way. Gordon Ryan did exactly that - elevating left to enter into a cross ashi garami heel hook - unfortunately time ran out before the heel hook could be finished but the lesson remains. For all your favorite attacks you must be able to launch a strong initial attack that creates a big defensive reaction and then have a small set of complimentary moves in the opposite direction that will enable you to flow WITH resistance and get resistance working FOR you instead of AGAINST you.

Every match or fight you will ever be in, from the greatest to the least important, from your daily training matches to a world championship final - will be a STORY - like any story it has a beginning, middle and end - the great question will always be: will you simply be a CHARACTER in that story? Or the AUTHOR of it? Jiu Jitsu gives you the ability to IMPOSE A PLOT LINE on every match you partake in. You know the script. Top position plot line? Takedown, pass the guard, work through a hierarchy of pins that create sufficient pressure to get to the end - submission. Bottom plot line? Get your legs between you and your opponent, keep them there long enough to attack and either finish with a submission from underneath or sweep him over and get on top and switch to top position plot line. JIU JITSU CAN ALLOW YOU TO BE THE AUTHOR OF THE SCRIPT OF EVERY MATCH IN WHICH YOU PARTAKE. Before a match or fight even begins it gives you a great script with which to work - it becomes your job to impose it upon the characters and setting in which you find yourself.

The Greatest Of All Time: What an amazing thing to see my old friend Roger Gracie here in the blue basement teaching a seminar here tonight! Mr Gracie is teaching all week here in the New York area. The only seminar not yet completely sold out is the Big Saturday seminar at the new Upper West Side RGA @renzogracieuws Check with them for a spot because it will sell out quickly! Mr Gracie was unquestionably the greatest Jiu Jitsu competitor of all time and is also a truly superb teacher - he gives incredible insight into his seemingly simple, yet very deep and unstoppable game. The days when Roger Gracie would come to class here during his MMA career and during build ups to big grappling events were some of the best memories I have over my career and it’s incredible to see how he has created himself into a truly great teacher with a great school in London. If you want to see what the best looks like up close - see if you can get a space in his remaining seminars!

BJJ Fanatics @BJJ.fanatics just released a fun video free on YouTube that Bernardo Faria, Gordon Ryan and I made giving a general overview of Jiu Jitsu as a systematic approach to unarmed combat. It’s always fun working with these guys and talking about the sport and martial art we all love. Check it out - see if you like it. Perhaps it will give you a slightly clearer view of what we aim towards in a way that will make it easier to see for yourself or to explain to friends and family who have no knowledge of the sport.

The best ideas in life are simple: When you first come into Jiu Jitsu it is natural to get a little overwhelmed at the seemingly endless number of moves and variations of those moves. It can seem an impossible task to learn them all and become even proficient in them, forget about master them. Always remember that the underlying PRINCIPLES and CONCEPTS of Jiu Jitsu are much much fewer in number and very simple to understand. Jiu Jitsu is divided between a TOP GAME (when we play on top of our opponent) and a BOTTOM GAME (when we play underneath an opponent). When it comes time to play bottom game the central directive of Jiu Jitsu is very simple - ALWAYS SEEK TO KEEP YOUR LEGS/HIPS BETWEEN YOU AND YOUR OPPONENT TO MAXIMIZE YOUR OFFENSIVE AND DEFENSIVE POTENTIAL - IF YOUR OPPONENT GETS PAST YOUR LEGS, RECOVER LEG POSITION FIRST BEFORE YOU ATTEMPT ANYTHING ELSE. That is the whole bottom game of Jiu Jitsu in a nutshell. All the myriad techniques and tactics you will learn over the years in bottom position are just an expression of that statement. The reason for this is also simple. It is based upon a fundamental truth of the human body. HUMANS ARE MASSIVELY STRONGER IN THE LEGS/HIPS THAN THEY ARE IN THE UPPER BODY. This fundamental strength/endurance asymmetry between our upper and lower body provides the SINGLE GREATEST HOPE FOR SMALLER/ WEAKER PEOPLE TO DEFEAT BIGGER/STRONGER OPPONENTS IN UNARMED SINGLE COMBAT. If you can wrestle with your legs against a bigger persons upper body the inherent upper body/lower body asymmetry can be used to advantage as your legs/hips will be stronger and possess more endurance than his upper body. That is why your two first skills in Jiu Jitsu must always be the ability to recover your legs back between your opponent (ie to escape a pin) and the ability to prevent someone ever getting past your legs in the first place (Guard retention). Those two skills are the basis of the bottom position in Jiu Jitsu - everything else presupposes them.

“To hell with all this highfalutin crap Danaher...skill development, systems, the interface of offense and defense...I’m tired of it all...from now on I’m just doing bicep curls and I’ll crush everyone in the room...”

I learned this one from Captain F**king Kirk...Just wrapped up an awesome weekend in Boston filming with Bernardo Faria and the team from @bjj.fanatics for an upcoming video as part of the BJJ FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER series. Today we filmed positional attacks from various guard situations. Among the most useful and instructive are sweeps derived from the beautiful Tomoe - Nage throw. Once your opponent’s feet and hands leave the ground very few people will be able to stop you dropping them wherever you feel like - once you lift a man - you own him and where and how hard he lands is up to you. Tomoe nage is a fine example of a lifting sweep that is equally effective down on the mat and on your feet. On the bus now heading back in the rain five hours to New York City - quite a collection of characters on the bus 😂😂 smells like a 10th Planet seminar in here! 😂😂😉 Not sure if you can get high from passive inhalation but I think I’m about to find out 😂😂 Hopefully I’ll be sober for teaching duty tomorrow in the basement! 😂😂 Happy Father’s Day to all of you!

Don’t forget your legs! It’s very in Jiu Jitsu to get tunnel vision as we close in on a favorite attack. This is natural and not entirely a bad a thing - focus and relentless pursuit of a goal often creates success. Sometimes however, that focus on a narrow possibility blinds us to easier or better options that are right in front of us. A classic example often occurs with the most high percentage submission in the sport - the rear strangle. Because it is such a great submission it’s natural to focus entirely upon it when we get behind people. As long as our chest is locked to an opponent’s scapula that’s all good - but should an opponent start sliding down lower towards our stomach, start thinking about the other great strangle option from the back that ought to be used much more - the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) - where we can utilize the tremendous power of the legs to impart truly impressive strangulation pressure. Here, Nicky Ryan drills the transition from arm strangle to leg strangle - and as a bonus will also now have opportunities to add various joint locks into the action as he does so. Keep your options open - as much as we all love arm strangles, don’t ignore the great effectiveness of leg strangles.

There is always an opening somewhere: So often when we go against a skilled opponent it seems he leaves no openings for an attack and we get locked into a defensive mode that almost ensures eventual defeat. You must have confidence in the notion that THE HUMAN BODY IS CONSTRUCTED IN SUCH A WAY IT CANNOT DEFEND ITS ENTIRE LENGTH AND BREADTH AT THE SAME TIME. If resources are allocated by an opponent to defend one area of the body THIS CAN ONLY BE DONE BY TAKING DEFENSIVE RESOURCES AWAY FROM OTHER AREAS. You must have confidence in this. Our job is always to see where the openings are - they may not be big and they may not be obvious and they may not last long - but they are there to the observant and the watchful. The key idea is to present a STRONG INITIAL THREAT that makes an opponent divert defense to one area and then play from there. Here, Georges St-Pierre takes on one of his toughest rivals, Tiago Alves. Mr Alves has done an excellent job of defending his head, but could only do so by exposing his body - which Mr St-Pierre has immediately taken advantage of. This kind of thinking runs through all combat sports. Don’t let tunnel vision reduce your attacking effectiveness. Always keep your eyes searching for the inevitable openings around the whole body as you begin an initial attack and you will soon be breaching defenses that once seemed impregnable.

Defensive responsibility: It is crucial for your development to understand the golden rule of defensive responsibility: ALL GOOD OFFENSE HAS DEFENSE BUILT INTO IT, AND ALL GOOD DEFENSE HAS OFFENSE BUILT INTO IT. It is of the greatest importance than whenever you engage in offense, you must maintain your defensive integrity. Here, Nicky Ryan puts himself in a fine position to begin devastating attacks to his opponent’s legs - but he makes sure first to position his own feet and legs in a fashion where counter attacks are unlikely to succeed. Avoid putting yourself in situations where your opponent can come back hard at you as you attempt to attack him. Always look to be DEFENSIVELY SOUND even when pressing home your favorite attacks. Good opponents will always counter your attacks - your job as you press home your attacks is to give them as few openings for those counters as possible. Start analyzing all your favorite attacks and then list all the main counters to them - then ask yourself the million dollar question - what can I do when using these attacks to reduce the effect of these counters? Working in this fashion will help your offense immeasurably

Your finishing rate is heavily influenced by your entering rate: when we think of what it is that makes some people finish a move successfully on many occasions we typically think it is due to that athletes excellence in mechanical efficiency. Because his performance of the move is mechanically strong, he succeeds with it often. There is certainly a lot of truth to this idea - superior mechanical execution of a move will definitely raise the number of times you succeed with it. However, there is another very important factor that determines the number of finishes you get with a given move - how many times per match you get yourself in a position to attempt it. It’s very simple - other things being equal, the more times you get to attempt a move, the more times you will end up finishing it. As such, you must start becoming systematic about your entries into your favorite moves. What are the main types of entry? How do they compliment and interact with each other? Under what circumstances do we apply each? For example, when entering legs for ashi garami based keg kicks from bottom position the three most important categories of entry will always be ELEVATION METHODS, INVERSION METHODS (pictured here) and ROLLING METHODS. Each of these three methods has sub variations within it and each can lead into three main versions of ashi garami. Once you start looking into entries in this manner you will see that it is a huge and fascinating topic. Moreover, it is a vital topic, as the more you can enter into potential match winning opportunities - the more potential there is for victory

Grey zones: When we begin Jiu Jitsu we are immediately given a clear sense of good and bad position that make a lot of sense and which is easy to understand. The good positions all involve getting your opponent’s legs and controlling him from front on top or behind either underneath or on top of him. In these situations everything is black and white. A position that is good for me is bad for the other guy and vice versa. Once you go deeper into the sport you find that the vast majority of your time is spent in ambiguous positional grey zones where neither athlete has a definite advantage and you always feel that you are half a second away from some kind of positional profit or loss. It can be of great help in these situations to have some general guidelines, heuristic rules that give you some sense of direction in these grey areas. They should be precise enough to give directions but vague enough to give you flexibility and adaptability for chaotic situations. Look at this photo with Garry Tonon at work. What simple rules would you offer the bottom athlete? What pithy advice would you offer the top athlete? How general is that advice? Could you apply to yourself tomorrow in training and profit from its use? As helpful as the basic positional rules of Jiu Jitsu are, you must start the journey of going beyond them into the grey zones - the answers are never as certain but the potential rewards are huge.

Near misses: We all want to succeed with every submission hold we attempt - but always understand that no matter how good you get, if you are grappling someone your own level THE MAJORITY OF YOUR SUBMISSION ATTEMPTS WILL BE UNSUCCESSFUL. This is not said to discourage you - it is simply being realistic. Just as no boxer expects to hit with every punch he throws against a skilled opponent, so too, we should not expect to break through with every submission attempt he make. The question is - how will we react to this observation? Should we hold back next time we make an attempt at a submission hold so as to save some energy knowing that it is statistically more likely that our attempt will fail than it is to succeed? Absolutely not. That is the pathway to guaranteed failure for ALL of your attempts rather than most of them. What it means is that WE MUST HAVE A PLAN OF OPERATIONS SET IN PLACE AHEAD OF TIME SO THAT WE CAN MOVE CONSTRUCTIVELY FORWARD AFTER A FAILED ATTEMPT. So give everything you have into your attempts until you feel that it is destined to fail - and then switch all your effort into the follow up. It is very important that you have your follow ups well rehearsed - whether it be another submission hold, a positional move or a pull away to neutral. Never take a negative mindset to submission failure - don’t see it as failure, but rather an opportunity to attack in a different way, for every defensive action on the part of your opponent to an initial move will always render him vulnerable to a follow up move.

Will it work in a fight? I am often asked whether or not certain techniques of Jiu Jitsu will work in a fight, whether MMA or a street altercation. Some techniques of Jiu Jitsu such as say, worm guard, really do require a specific type of clothing (something very close to a Jiu Jitsu uniform) and are thus not applicable to MMA and highly unlikely to ever apply to street fight situation. Nonetheless there are many other techniques that are seen as inappropriate for MMA and street fighting even though they do not require clothing or conditions similar to a Jiu Jitsu match. For example, people often claim leg locks as worthless for MMA and fighting due to the danger of being struck whilst trying to finish them. This always struck me as odd, as there are MANY examples of successful applications of leg locks in MMA going back a long time. I have seen many more athletes pounded out while trying to attack from various guard positions in MMA than I have seen people punched out while attempting a leg lock, yet nobody says we should stop using guard position in MMA or fighting. In truth, it is not so much about WHICH techniques of Jiu Jitsu you choose to apply - all of them are capable of taking you to victory or defeat in their own way - rather it is much more about the SPEED/TIMING, MECHANICAL EFFICIENCY, TACTICAL MASTERY AND OVERALL COMPETENCE WITH WHICH YOU APPLY THE MOVE that will determine its success or failure. Success or failure in combat is much more about YOU than it is about which Jiu Jitsu technique you choose to employ. We all have our favorite techniques - don’t worry so much about what that selection is as you do about how good you are at performing whatever techniques you have chosen.

The tale of the runner: One day many years ago I had the pleasure of a new private client who had arranged to come in to train with me. When he arrived he introduced himself as young fellow from Kenya who had emigrated to the United States after representing his country with distinction in one of the toughest Olympic events of them all - the 10,000m Steeplechase. He was of light build and clearly extremely athletic. His job in NYC was to run alongside wealthy private clients as a jogging partner - he literally ran all day every day. He had become interested in combat sports and wanted to give Jiu Jitsu a try. He asked to warm up prior to training and began running some laps around the blue basement. When I say this fellow ran - I mean he truly RAN. I had never seen such a perfect expression of human running in my life. It was like watching a gazelle as his feet barely seemed to make contact with the floor. To watch an elite Olympian run up close was truly a sight to behold and there was no doubt in my mind that he was probably the fittest and best trained running athlete I ever saw. We did some basic techniques and then he asked if we could do some sparring. I let him start mounted and we worked from there. Jiu Jitsu, as you all know, has a way of confounding the movement of even the strongest and most gifted people if they have no experience of it, and in a short time he was in bad position. To my surprise he began hyperventilating and breathing in a very labored fashion as he frantically tried to get out of basic pins. After less a few minutes of thrashing about he suddenly went rigid and froze and asked me to get off, which of course I did. His entire legs were shaking uncontrollably and I could visibly see both his hamstrings locked in the most powerful muscle spasm i have ever seen. He was worried he had torn both his hamstrings - thankfully he had not, but after just a few minutes he could not continue and had to sit utterly exhausted on the mats until he got enough energy together to get dressed and leave. What lesson is there in this tale for us as far as developing our own endurance? Do you have any similar experiences? Let me know in the comments!

Hand control: One of the truly foundational skills of the grappling arts is GRIP. Only when you have come to grips with your opponent can you begin grappling. The basis of both your grips and your opponents grips is their HANDS. As such, if we are to negate our opponent’s ability to grip us WE MUST MAKE CONTROL OF OUR OPPONENTS HANDS A PRIORITY - for if we can control his hands, we can control his grips, and if we can control his grips we can determine the direction and nature of his attacks. When we train without the gi, typically we control the hand or wrist itself; when we train with the gi, we often grip the sleeve cuff as an indirect form of hand control. Learn to start your gripping with control of your opponent’s hands and you will soon be able to shut down his ability to use his grips to further his attacks and then you will be able to focus on your own attacks without interference.

A thought experiment: Imagine we came across a race of aliens who outwardly were just like us - same shape, dimensions, physical and mental attributes etc - but with one peculiar difference. Located directly in the middle of their forehead was bright red button, and if you touched that button, they immediately went completely unconscious for one minute every single time. It was like an off switch that could turn their lights off as easily as the switch in a lamp. Now ask yourself - WHAT WOULD THE MARTIAL ARTS OF THESE PECULIAR ALIENS LOOK LIKE? Obviously they would be completely centered around THE ABILITY TO MAKE CONTACT WITH THE RED BUTTON IN THE FOREHEAD OF AN OPPONENT WHILE DENYING THAT OPPONENT THE ABILITY TO DO THE SAME TO THEM. Everything they did would be to protect their own red forehead button while exposing their opponent’s. Now a moments thought reveals that WE HUMANS ARE NOT SO DIFFERENT FROM THESE IMAGINED ALIENS - for we too have our own off switches that are just as available and accessible as the imaginary red buttons. In humans, the two main off switches are of course, the jaw (striking) and the neck (grappling). And as such, our martial arts are best understood as essentially a set of skills designed to expose an opponent’s jaw or neck whilst hiding or denying our own. If you had to fight one of these imaginary aliens you would of course do everything with the goal of getting to his red forehead button - so too when fighting humans you must steer all your goals towards the human “off switches” jaw and neck. In a truly competitive situation where physical damage from body blows or joint locks are not enough to dissuade an opponent from further fighting - go for the off switches. When you size up an opponent always try to see their jaw and neck as your ultimate goal and your own jaw and neck as your biggest concern - it will give you a helpful basic sense of direction in any physical bout you get into and also provide a useful sense of direction for your training programs. Understand that just as the vulnerable red button would be the basis of these hypothetical alien martial arts, the reality of our vulnerable jaw and neck is the basis of ours

The best possible description of my first five years in Jiu Jitsu 😂😂😂😂 I am happy to help my students avoid the many errors I made in those early days 😂😂😂😂

A fundamental dichotomy in methods of attack - the ultimate aim of all good Jiu Jitsu is submission. When you pursue that aim there is a choice between OPPORTUNISTIC methods and CONTROL BASED methods. The former involve seeing a momentary opportunity to attack usually based on a fleeting lapse in your opponent’s defenses. The latter involve the systematic dismantling of your opponents defenses even when they have been out resolutely in place until the defenses are insufficient to stop your attacks. As a general rule I prefer control based methods since at the higher levels athletes don’t make many mistakes upon which to capitalize. Nonetheless, it is critical that you be strong in both for the simple reason that in operation they usually compliment each other. So for example, when attacking the back we must constantly be looking for any minor lapse of defensive position of hands and jaw on the part of our opponent. If there should be a fleeting opportunity we must immediately capitalize upon it and threaten the strangle. The predictable defenses our opponent must put in place to prevent that immediate opportunistic strangle then allow us to set into operation our distinctive back attack system of arm traps that strip away defenses until the strangle in inevitable. If the opponent over reacts to the arm traps and exposes his neck, we immediately go back to the opportunistic route and snatch the strangle. In this way we can exploit both the speed of opportunistic methods and the inexorable power of systems based/control methods and play them off against each other to great effect. With all your favorite submissions, INVESTIGATE THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN OPPORTUNISTIC ENTRIES AND CONTROL BASED ENTRIES AND LEARN TO USE THEM IN UNISON - you will love the results!

Assessing your performance: Every day we training we need to assess our days performance so that we can make adjustments for tomorrow. The most natural and simple way to assess your own performance is in terms of result - did you win or lose the various matches you played in. That’s fine and definitely the most important criteria. However, you must start going beyond this as you will have training partners of varying ability and attributes. For example, if you are going against much better people than yourself, you might want to judge your performance in terms of how long you lasted before being submitted, or perhaps in how long it took them to pass your guard. If you are going against people much lesser than yourself, you might want to assess your performance in terms of how much or how little strength and effort it took you to apply your moves, or perhaps in terms of how effectively you were able to apply your worst moves. By making your self assessments much more broad ranging and sophisticated than just “did you win or lose today” you immediately start to get a much clearer sense of progress as time passes. Always remember that the fundamental feature of good training is PROGRESSION. Using a more subtle and diverse set of measures for sparring results get you thinking along all the right lines for forward progress. Here, Gordon Ryan is going with a much smaller training partner and so plays a very relaxed game and tries to see how much he can get done with as little use of strength and power as possible. There is much more to progress than winning and losing. Progress is your lifeblood on the mats - understand that it comes in different forms and measures and you will have a better read on whether you are going forward with your training or not.

Big congratulations to @mikeymusumeci for his big win at the IBJJF World Jiu Jitsu Championships today! What an incredible accomplishment for this outstanding athlete to get to his third worlds final at such a young age! He is a truly fine example of attaining excellence both in and off the mats as he is an outstanding scholar as well as athlete. Great to see all the champions out there in the biggest gi competition of the year - so many outstanding performances!

Unity and division: All of Jiu Jitsu operates along the principle of unity and division. The only way we can make our own bodies strong is to unify all the weight and strength we have and take it in a shared direction so that our whole body works in a coordinated shared purpose. The only way we can make our opponent’s body as weak as possible is to divide it up into parts that can be conquered. Only when we use our whole body in unison to fight our isolated and divided parts of our opponent’s body are we really expressing Jiu Jitsu. Look how Nicky Ryan’s whole body has latched onto his opponent’s head and arm in an obvious mismatch of a whole body versus a part of another persons body. You must make this theme run throughout your game - for it is the only way you will be able to beat bigger and stronger opponents. The good news is that most of the major techniques of Jiu Jitsu have this idea built into them - your goal is to go further and build it into your personal game to the greatest degree possible. Studying triangles is a good start - as this is a quintessential example of whole body versus parts of a body in operation. However you choose to manifest the principle, make it the philosophical core of your game and you will be a formidable threat to bigger opponents

Studying Philosophy: I have made many foolish decisions in my life, but one decision I made that I never regretted and am eternally grateful for was my decision to study Philosophy when I went to College and Graduate school. This might seem strange as Philosophy is not what I ended doing as a career, nor will it lead to what most people associate with success - money, fame or status. Yet I honestly believe that outside of sport specific physical training and study, the study of philosophy was the single most helpful activity I bought with me when I began Jiu Jitsu. My reasoning is that the study of philosophy teaches you the crucial skill of clearly identifying a problem and assessing the merit of proposed solutions. Interestingly Philosophy itself struggles to make progress on the many questions it seeks to answer. It is probably fair to say that Western Philosophy is no closer to answering its central problems than the Ancient Greeks who first voiced them at its outset. The real value of Philosophy is in its ability to get people asking deep questions and applying reason to battle towards a solution. This creates a mindset that can be applied profitably in any field - including Jiu Jitsu. Here I am outside my office at the University of Auckland in New Zealand the day I left for America to begin study at Graduate School at Columbia University in New York. I had no idea what direction my life would go, but I knew that the ability to identify and clearly differentiate a problem and apply a set of rational criteria for grading prospective solutions would be a useful thing - that much I got correct 😊 (although my sense of fashion got even worse 😂😂) When studying Jiu Jitsu, always try hard to clear state and understand the problems you are confronted with - this will give you a strong sense of direction that can greatly reduce the time taken to make improvements to your game.

Indirect attack: When you are engaged in combat with a neophyte, simple and direct attacks work best. Just use the simplest moves and set ups to get the job done. Overly complex moves don’t work well on neophytes as they lack the appropriate defensive reactions and simply don’t react to feints and subterfuge. However, as the skill level of your opponents rise, you must more and more come to rely up the constant use of INDIRECT ATTACKS to get the breakthroughs you desire. A good rule of combat is this - WHEN BOTH COMBATANTS KNOW EACH OTHERS MOVES AND THE COUNTERS TO THEM, IT WILL COME DOWN TO WHO DOES A BETTER JOB OF DISGUISING THEIR REAL INTENTIONS PRIOR TO THEIR ATTACKS WHO WILL PREVAIL. If you wish to attack in the left, feint to the right, if you wish to draw an opponent forward, start by pressuring him backwards, if you wish to attack high on the body, feign a low attack first. Only by confusing an opponent as to your real intentions will you be able to consistently break through the defenses of a skilled adversary. Make a mental habit of always having a real intention when you go to attack, and an apparent intention you sell to your opponent and onlookers. GOOD JIU JITSU DOES NOT RELY ON TRICKS FOR VICTORY - BUT IT DOES RELY UPON TRICKERY.

The greatest submission in all of Jiu Jitsu: I teach six complete submission systems covering the whole body to my students. In addition I teach many other submission holds that we use somewhat less often but are still very important nonetheless. However, there is one root basis of all submission that stands far above even the most high percentage submission holds when it comes to accounting for the success or failure of submissions - this is the notion of PRESSURE. Pressure, the act of putting an opponent under physical and mental duress through tactics, weight of attack, intensity of attack, off balancing, combined attacks and a host of other elements, has finished more opponents than any one submission hold ever did. Indeed, without antecedent pressure the vast majority of submissions never would have succeeded. IT IS ABSOLUTELY CRUCIAL THAT YOU DEVELOP THE SKILL OF PUTTING AN OPPONENT UNDER CONSTANT PRESSURE OVER TIME - When you can do this the submissions come easy. In many cases you must break an opponent mentally before you can break him physically. This is done through pressure that makes him feel defeat is inevitable - as such they learn to ACCEPT a submission hold - but the real submission was a mental act before it became manifest in a physical move. When you first begin Jiu Jitsu the two most important ways to develop a pressure game is through POSITIONAL pressure when on top - constant advance toward superior position and not relinquishing it once gained - and through KUZUSHI (off balancing) when on bottom. If you can develop strong Kuzushi from underneath and consistently get past legs and into dominant pins on top, you will finish many opponents. Make every facet of PRESSURE an object of study and watch your submission game go to a new level.

Preparation must mirror the event: In all your training you must ask yourself one simple question that is of supreme importance - DOES THIS WORK I AM DOING ENHANCE THE SKILLS I WILL NEED TO PERFORM BETTER? So often I see athletes working hard, but on tasks that have a very tenuous relationship with the actual event they are preparing for. Sometimes we feel that as long as we are working hard we are getting better. This is often not the case. Only if the work you are doing is relevant to the task you are about to undertake will the effort be worthwhile. Always ask yourself if your training really does help your perform the tasks of your sport better. It is quite surprising how often i see even top level athletes engaging in training behavior that even a moments thought would reveal has little relevance to the sport they are preparing for. It’s not the amount of sweat you produce that indicates how well prepared you are, but rather how much sweat you have produced working in ways that directly increase the necessary skills required for victory. Here, Garry Tonon is seen just two hours before his most recent MMA victory, practicing the very move that won him the fight in less than a minute. Striking into a single leg and falling back for ashi garami into a heel hook. A short time later he would use that same movement in front of an enthralled crowd to take his fifth win. Never stop asking “will this work make me better at what I do?” The speed of your progress is dependent upon your answer...

Juniors pushing forward! The squad juniors had a great weekend with @nickyryanbjj and @nickyrod247 winning big matches in England and today @katerinaleontyeva won the female tournament at 115 pounds at Finishers Sub Only event in Rockaway NY Ms Leontyeva was able to get fishes via heel hook, knee bar and kimura along with a dramatic overtime win against team mate @daniellekellybjj to take gold and win $2500 shekels 😜😜 Its always a pleasure to see motivated people working hard towards their goals and dreams and the juniors just keep doing exactly that! Thanks to @frankrosenthal11 for coaching and to the all the training partners in the basement who help get everyone ready for the stage.

Victory for Nicky Ryan!! Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj won his title match against the great Urijah Faber tonight in England. It was a very tough and physical battle that went the distance. Mr Ryan got one very tight entry into one of his favorite leg lock positions but went out of bounds before it could be completed and the adjustments made to restart the position appeared to loosen it so there was not a decisive finish. It was Mr Ryan who did all the engaging and attacking while Mr Faber played a very defensive game based on physical roughhousing and defensive positioning so the decision was an easy one for the judges. At the same event standout junior heavyweight squad member @nickyrod247 won via strangle from the back to show his impressive development in a very short time frame. Big thanks to @garrytonon for going out to England with the juniors to coach after his recent tremendous win in @onechampionship It’s wonderful to see the development of these outstanding young athletes as they battle towards their goals and dreams. Now everyone comes back to the basement and gets ready for the next big challenge! 😜😜

Escapes - psychology and physicality: I have said this before and will say it again - your psychological confidence overall in any given match/fight is directly proportional to your confidence in your ability to physically handle the worst case scenarios of your sport. If you have no fear of the worst case scenarios, nothing else can faze you. This confidence doesn’t come out of thin air. It does not come from positive affirmations, self help gurus, meditation, visualization, breathing exercises or any other hocus pocus fluff like this. It comes from knowing exactly what you are supposed to do in these situations and drilling them every day until you find them easy to deal with. So the psychological attribute of confidence has physical roots. I make My students spend a LOT of time on Escapes - everyone has to work it every day - no exceptions, no matter what their level - and in competition it shows. That’s why they attack so fearlessly, because they know they can take risks without fear of bad consequences. In a crises situation nothing will help except KNOWING THE CORRECT THING TO DO AND HAVING SPENT THE TIME DEVELOPING THE PHYSICAL SKILLS TO ENACT THAT KNOWLEDGE SO THAT THE ESCAPES COME FLUIDLY AND NATURALLY.

Nicky Ryan back onstage in England this weekend: Nicky Ryan will take on MMA superstar, the great Urijah Faber, this weekend at @polaris_professional grappling event. The event features squad juniors, @ethancrelinsten and @nickyrod247 along with our friend @craigjonesbjj I always love the interface between grappling and MMA and Mr Faber was a fine example of this. He was a very fine wrestler and long time student of Jiu Jitsu throughout his long and distinguished MMA career. I often find that many people badly underestimate the pure grappling skill of many top MMA athletes and when they see them in grappling they are shocked at how good many of them are. I have witnessed many occasions where top grapplers were brought into MMA fight camps and had a very hard time going against MMA stars even in pure grappling. Mr Faber has a great mix of wrestling and Jiu Jitsu and uses them very well together and has a fine guillotine attack on top of that. Mr Ryan has very refined technique but will have to overcome a significant strength advantage of he is to prevail in this fascinating match up. @garrytonon is just off his latest MMA victory and is in England for coaching and cornering the youngsters (in between eating hamburgers and English pudding - I think he may be over three hundred pounds at this point). Keep your eyes on this event!!

Start your training sessions with a sense of purpose: probably the single most common error i see in most athletes training routines is a failure to have a clearly outlined sense of purpose in their sessions. Too often I see athletes arrive on the mat with no sense of what they will try to accomplish in next few hours. As a result, the session meanders into sparring where at the completion there is no obvious sense in which you can say that you are now better than when you started the session. It is permissible to have occasional playful, relaxed sessions like this, but the majority of your sessions must have a strong sense of direction if you are to improve over time rather than just remain at whatever level you currently are. At the start of most classes I always begin with a short statement of what is the skill we are working on, why it’s important and what we want to do to get the job done. This immediately creates a sense of direction in the class towards which we can move. Then it’s into the main part of the class - technical details and the sparring. Just as a man walking in a forest without a compass will inevitably end up walking in a useless circle, so too, a years worth of training sessions without direction will end up with you at the same point you started. Whenever we train without a goal we inevitably go back to the same old moves we always use and progress eventually halts. EFFORT EXPENDED IS NOT A MEASURE OF PROGRESS - only effort expended in a positive direction gets you to where you wish to be.

The fifteen fundamental positional skills of Jiu Jitsu: A very important question to ask in any area of life in which you wish to excel is this - what are the fundamental skill sets in this enterprise upon which competence/excellence are required? In the case of Jiu Jitsu there are three broad areas in which you operate
1 - Standing position
2- Ground Top Position
3 - Ground Bottom Position
A useful way to categorize and map out the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu is to see each of these three areas as having five distinct skill sets that we must first develop competence in and ultimately, mastery.
STANDING POSITION - Stance
- Motion
- Grip
- Off Balancing (Kuzushi)
- Transitions to the ground (Takedowns/throws/guard pulls/Standing submission entries)
GROUND TOP POSITION - Opening a closed guard
- Passing an open guard
- Passing a half guard - Pin maintainence and transitions
- Breaking down turtle position
GROUND BOTTOM POSITION - escaping pins
- Guard retention - Sweeps/reversals from guard - Sweeps/reversals from half guard - Escapes/reversals from turtle position
Seen in this way we can create a fundamentals program that clearly identifies three broad areas for skill development and five skill sets within each as the fifteen essential positional skills that we will need to cover if we are to be considered as having completed the fundamental requirements of skill development in Jiu Jitsu. There are many ways to interpret and express a fundamentals program - this is the outline of the one that I use. Obviously within each of these positional skill sets there are many moves, movements, concepts, tactics etc to learn. It is important to have a road map of our journey into Jiu Jitsu and this fifteen positional skill sets map gives students a clear understanding of what they need to cover to have a complete fundamentals game. Obviously there are many other skills besides positional skills, but Jiu Jitsu is founded upon position so that’s a sound place to start a fundamentals program. I always recommend starting with bottom ground position pin escapes and guard retention first, as this is where most beginners naturally end up in most training sessions.

I am very happy to announce the release of my new instructional video BJJ FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER - PIN ESCAPES AND TURTLE ESCAPES with @bjj.fanatics today! This instructional series covers the fundamental positional skills of Jiu Jitsu. The entire sport of Jiu Jitsu is founded upon positional skills - as the old saying goes - position before submission. Only when these skills are strong can a submission game be built upon that secure foundation. Probably the single biggest problem that most people encounter when they first begin the sport of Jiu Jitsu is getting pinned helplessly in side pins, north/south pins, mounted pins and rear mount pins - so learning to get quickly and efficiently out of these troublesome situations is the first skill developing students need to master to create forward progress in Jiu Jitsu. An interesting feature of this first installment of the GO FURTHER FASTER series is that for part of it I am joined by my old friend Shawn Williams to demonstrate some of the moves! We started the beginner program at the Renzo Gracie Academy together many years ago and it was fun going over some of the material we taught in those classes that helped take so many developing students, including a young Georges St-Pierre, towards their Jiu Jitsu goals. There is a link in my Instagram bio for those who are interested 😊😊 As much as I love cutting edge Jiu Jitsu and innovation, my deepest attraction to the sport will always be to the fundamentals - that is where the heart and soul of the sport resides and the well from which all Jiu Jitsu excellence comes.

Pin escapes: The first skill I try to build in a student is that of escaping pins. My reasoning is simple. The great majority of finishes in Jiu Jitsu are the result of getting held down and controlled in a pin. In Jiu Jitsu a pin is usually understood as any situation where an opponent has passed your legs and has at least one of your shoulders held down on the mat in a chest to chest position (there are a few exceptions to this - knee on stomach positions and rear mount pins are obvious exceptions). There is nothing more stultifying to your own offensive ambitions than getting held down for long periods of time where you simply cannot perform any effective offense. Often I ask a student, “can you get out of a pin.” Whenever someone answers, “I think so,” I almost always interpret this as no. My first job as a coach is to get you to a point where you don’t THINK you can get out - you KNOW you can get out. Only then will you have the confidence and ability to attack an opponent from bottom position. It is rare that I teach a class where students are not asked to exhibit defensive skills. Regular skill development and training of pin escapes - the core defensive skill - is something so important we work it almost every day. IN A ROOMFUL OF PEOPLE WHO ARE ALL STRONG AT OFFENSE, IT WILL COME DOWN TO WHO HAS THE BEST DEFENSE THAT DETERMINES WINNER AND LOSER IN MOST CASES. Work hard on your pin escapes as your first goal of mastery in Jiu Jitsu. No matter how high you goal it will be protective insurance against catastrophic loss.

Garry Tonon back at work the morning after victory: I am always impressed by a strong work ethic and no one surpasses that of Garry Tonon. Here he is the morning after his big victory last night at @onechampionship here in Singapore teaching at the big Squad Super Seminar at @evolvemma teaching how to escape from the very move he used last night to get another big win. People here are deeply impressed by Mr Tonon’s teaching ability. Everyone already knew he was a great athlete but everyone here is amazed at the clarity and effectiveness of his teaching as well. Soon he will be making an instructional video with @bjj.fanatics on his mastery of escapes! Keep your eyes peeled for that one!!

Victory in Singapore! Garry Tonon extended his unbeaten record in MMA here in Singapore tonight with a brilliant fifty five second victory in the first round. Mr Tonon wanted to give recognition to our roots in the sport of submission grappling and win via one of our signature methods - leg lock. Drawing on his exceptional knowledge of our leg locking system he latched on to a very tight ashi garami from an initial takedown attempt and switched to a stronger breaking position - a variation of outside ashi garami - to quickly apply joint breaking pressure that ended the match immediately. Mr Tonon’s excellent work ethic and hunger to gain knowledge and train hard to turn that knowledge into skill was always the basis of his success in grappling and now it is bringing success in MMA. It’s been a remarkable first year for him - still a long way to go for him because his dreams are big - but another great step forward here tonight. Wishing you all the best from Singapore! Thank you all for your support and interest in what we do! It was always our ambition to show that submission grappling and Jiu Jitsu can help provide a winning way in MMA and fighting and Mr Tonon did a fine job of that tonight! Keep training hard and moving forward 😊😊

Countdown: Garry Tonon made weight successfully and went through his final workout today here at @evolvemma gym in Singapore in preparation for the big show @onechampionship tomorrow night. Mr Tonon has been working hard on his developing MMA skill set and is looking forward to an another tough test. It is an incredible fight card featuring some of very best kick boxers in the world in addition to the MMA talent. Now it’s time to get recharged and prepare for the big day tomorrow

A fatal error: Gordon Ryan made the rookie mistake of asking me to look after his new Gucci shoulder bag here in Evolve Gym as he went to begin teaching. Ain’t no way you’re gettin’ this back, homeslice - go teach your closed guard big shot - earn some money to buy a new murse - this one’s gone and ain’t coming back...

Gordon Ryan teaching a masterclass on attacks from closed guard: Gordon Ryan wows the big crowd at @evolvemma gym here in Singapore with his closed guard game. Mr Ryan will be putting out a whole video on our closed guard system later this year for @bjj.fanatics It’s amazing to see the crowd react to his teaching here and then take those concepts to the mat and live sparring and get the moves to work very quickly. Later on tonight it’s training time with @garrytonon in his preparation for his fight in @onechampionship - all action here in Singapore 😜😜

I am so proud of this young man: Here in Singapore at the @evolvemma Squad Super Seminar young Nicky Ryan, just seventeen years old teaching a masterclass on his favorite aspect of Jiu Jitsu- back control and finishes - to an audience of over one hundred international Jiu Jitsu enthusiasts at one of the best gyms in the world. It’s incredible to watch someone so young display such artistry and teach so commandingly. He will soon be releasing a video on Back Mastery for @bjj.fanatics and judging by the awed reactions to his teaching here in Singapore he will make it one of the very best ever made - amazing to watch this lesson unfold!

Amazing first day here is Singapore at @evolvemma super seminar with @garrytonon @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @nickyryanbjj The theme of the camp is the crucial interface between offense and defense in Jiu Jitsu. Garry Tonon got everyone off to an incredible start with his signature escape into offense skills. Now it’s big Gordon Ryan up next to teach our approach to closed guard the way we like it - as a devastating attack position that with the right methods, can get you dominance from underneath an adversary. In the future Garry and Gordon will produce videos on these subjects so it’s amazing to see the depth of their instruction and their own innovative ways of presenting the material 😜😜 Things are about to start up now!!

In all combat sports I observe the iron law of OFFENSIVE OUTPUT - IN ANY COMPETITIVE MATCH WHERE YOUR OPPONENT IS ATTACKING YOU AS YOU ATTACK HIM - YOUR OFFENSIVE OUTPUT WILL BE DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO YOUR DEFENSIVE CONFIDENCE. When I coach athletes I am not nearly as interested in how good their offense looks when they drill as I am in the question of whether their defensive skills MATCH AND INTEGRATE WITH THEIR DEFENSIVE SKILLS - FOR ONLY WHEN THEIR CONFIDENCE IN THEIR DEFENSE IS HIGH WILL THEY ACTUALLY USE THEIR OFFENSIVE SKILLS WHEN THE OPPORTUNITY ARISES. Every day I see athletes with fine looking offense in drilling, but when the moment of truth comes and it’s time to pull the trigger, they shy away and hold back. Why? Because they know if the attack should fail their suspect defensive skills will be exposed, so they stay in a safe zone and will not take a risk. ALL OFFENSE CREATES RISK. ONLY DEFENSE MITIGATES THAT RISK and thus ironically, DEFENSIVE SKILL IS THE SEED FROM WHICH ALL OFFENSE SPRINGS. Work hard in your fundamentals of defense. Only when you are defensively sound will you ever actually show what you are offensively capable of.

Bound for the Far East: Garry Tonon and the squad heading to Singapore from Newark Airport. Mr Tonon will be fighting in @onechampionship and we will all teach at @evolvemma 😊😊 This flight 21 direct from NY to Singapore is the worlds longest direct flight! 😳😳 19 hours straight sitting next to Gordon and Nicky Ryan will destroy me i am sure 😂😂 See you there!

Back in action: @garrytonon had his last NYC workout today - back to back grappling and shoot boxing (kickboxing with takedowns) work outs. It is a fascinating thing to watch his assimilation of striking technique and its blending with grappling. For so long the martial arts were heavily divided between striking arts such as boxing, Muay Thai, Karate, most Kung Fu styles, Tae Kwon Do etc and grappling arts, Judo, Wrestling , Jiu Jitsu etc There was some superficial overlap, but nothing serious. It is a wonderful thing to live in an age where the integration of the two has come back. Unarmed human combat has always had two methods of operation - KINETIC ENERGY - done through striking - and LEVER AND FULCRUM applied through grappling. The historical pattern of martial arts has been to divide them. There have been great exceptions such as the Ancient Greek Pancration but for the most part grappling and fisticuffs were held apart. Yet the most challenging, the most exciting, the most effective and the most difficult art has always involved the integration of the two. I always encourage students to think of their Jiu Jitsu in relation to fighting, to keep up with MMA and study it, take not of the strengths and weaknesses of Jiu Jitsu in this arena, even if they never train or compete in it. It is a very instructive and gives a clear insight into the roots of Jiu jitsu. Tomorrow we are off to Singapore and @onechampionship for another big challenge and another tough test for Jiu Jitsu in a bigger and tougher arena.

The devastating power of strangles - the dark art of strangulation: In all of unarmed martial arts there is no more devastating weapon than a well applied strangle. It is one of the few means of attack in empty handed combat that is reliably capable of killing people should the need ever arise. In combat sports it can overcome even the bravest of souls who simply refuse to submit to other methods - even the greatest bravery cannot make up for restricted blood flow to the brain. Having a good set of strangles in your arsenal is therefore of the first importance. My recommendation is to have one great strangle from the BACK, one from in FRONT of an opponent, one for when you are in a FRONT HEADLOCK situation and one great strangle with your LEGS. These four general scenarios are by far the most common in the sport with regards strangles and hence you must have all four covered if you are one day to be a master of strangulation. Note that these are MINIMUM requirements and it would be a very good thing if you went beyond this. The STRANGLE is the grapplers equivalent of a knockout punch and thus something to be coveted among us all. The good news is that there are quite a few choices of stranglehold among the basic four scenarios I mentioned and even more when you add the gi jacket. It would be a sad thing indeed if you went through your time in Jiu Jitsu without developing the arts greatest weapon. If you are starting out, start researching strangleholds for the four main scenarios and start your quest to find some favorites. If you already have some good strongholds, cover the other main strangle scenarios or improve your performance with those favorites in a wider array of set ups and variations to display increasing mastery. Here, Gordon Ryan shows his python like powers of strangulation in an intense match that shows well the kind of pressure too athletes must exert to get submissions at a high level. Train to be able to get similar strangulation power and you will one day be a master of the dark art.

Students and teachers: Something that I have always been very proud of is the fact that all of my senior students are excellent TEACHERS as well as athletes. This is no accident. I deliberately teach them to teach. Quite often when I show something I ask them to teach it back to me and I play the role of white belt asking questions which they have to answer. When I teach, I always seek to teach the WHY as well as the HOW of techniques so that they understand its RATIONALE as well as its MECHANICS. The result is that all are very fine teachers indeed. The first student of mine who I promoted to Black belt (I have only promoted a handful of people to blackbelt) was the inestimable Mike Jaramillo. He is a legend here in the basement for excellence of his game and teaching and mentoring ability. It is with great pride that Renzo and I announce he is now teaching a fundamentals gi class here in the blue basement every Tuesday and Thursday morning! Here I am giving him a beautiful Nepalese Khukuri blade I had made to my design in Nepal for all his great work and development over the years - I had it made fast and light and sharp - just Like Mr Jaramillo’s Jiu Jitsu game 😜 If you are in town and wanting one of the best introductions to our beloved sport you will ever see - come by and see Mr Jaramillo’s work! (Don’t worry - he won’t be carrying the khukuri knife 😂😂 - unlike me he has a warm and pleasant personality 😜😜) My sensei Renzo just awarded him his 4th degree this week - check out class and you will see how well deserved that rank is! And to all of you - when you learn something in Jiu Jitsu - teach it back to your friends as a kind of self quiz - nothing sharpens the mind like teaching. If there is no one there - teach it back to yourself. The questions you will ask and answer will sharpen your understanding and make you a better athlete on the mat.

Y2K Fundamentals back in NYC! In 1999-2000, My good friend and RGA comrade Shawn Williams and I started the beginners fundamentals class at Renzo’s. Up till that point all classes were just whoever showed up and beginners were immediately crushed like insects by the more advanced maulers. It was a Darwinian approach to training that produced some very tough and skilled survivors but the attrition rate was extremely high. I loved teaching that fundamentals class all those years ago with Mr Williams, some of my favorite coaching memories came from there - Georges St-Pierre was one of the original members (he used to do fundamentals and then immediately go to the advanced class afterwards). The real magic of Jiu Jitsu is teaching timid beginners skills that let them do things they could never have done previously in a physical confrontation with strong opponents in a fairly short period of time - and that magic begins in fundamentals class. Imagine my surprise when Mr Williams came back out of the blue to New York City this weekend and we taught the advanced Saturday morning class together like old times - only now it was the cutting edge material used by the squad. I’m excited to release a new video in next few weeks covering fundamentals so it was a blast talking about the old days learning the trade as a Jiu Jitsu teacher and how my views on fundamentals have both changed in some ways and held fast in others. One thing is sure - even the most most advanced classes i teach always make reference to the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu- for without them advanced material is like a beautiful house built on weak foundations - pretty to look at but liable to collapse and fall under stress. Here, I tie together fundamental concepts such as inside positioning with some advanced entries into leg locks from guard position to demonstrate the marriage of fundamentals and advanced Jiu Jitsu.

The defensive orientation of Jiu Jitsu: My sensei Renzo Gracie gave me a piece of advice when I just a white belt that I never forgot - he said, “John, your first responsibility is to not get your ass kicked - anything on top of that is a bonus!” This is really the essential idea behind Jiu Jitsu - it is first and foremost a means of PROTECTING YOURSELF FROM HARM and only secondarily a means of damaging an opponent. Even though my own approach to Jiu Jitsu is strongly offense oriented with a constant push towards submission victory, I always recognize that this is only possible if you have a sound defense that let’s you take the risks necessary to play an offensive game. To this day if you give me a choice in learning a new technique between one which gets me out of trouble versus one that lets me attack an opponent, my natural inclination is towards the one that gets me out of trouble. Your first responsibility then, is to learn the skills associated with SURVIVAL and ESCAPE. Only when you can guarantee these can you go on to attack an opponent. Escapes may not be the most glamorous part of the sport, but they are without doubt a huge part of the foundation of it. Spend time every day refining your ability to get comfortable under pins and then escaping them. This knowledge is pure gold and when you are in a bad situation on the mat and all the glamor moves are worthless, it will be all that time you invested in escape skills that saves you.

A fundamental feature of Jiu Jitsu: One of the signature themes of good Jiu Jitsu and one which I constantly look to instill in my students is to ALWAYS SEEK TO FIGHT YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY WITH YOUR LEGS. This is probably the single best way for a smaller weaker person to defeat a bigger stronger person. If you are a big strong person yourself, then it represents the most efficient way to win. The reason is simple - the human body as a big asymmetry built into it. The asymmetry between the strength of our lower body (quite impressive ) versus the strength of our upper body (not impressive in comparison). Our legs have massively greater strength, endurance and reach than our arms. The only problem is that they lack dexterity and coordination compared with arms - BUT THIS CAN BE OVERCOME IN TIME BU TRAINING - and once you get around this, your legs will overcome even a bigger stronger opponent’s arms. IN ALL YOUR TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT - SEEK TO MATCH YOUR LEGS AGAINST YOUR OPPONENTS ARMS/UPPER BODY AND YOU WILL PREVAIL IN MOST CASES. This is why I greatly favor moves such as triangle and arm bar - they are quintessential examples of this principle in operation. Here, outstanding squad junior Ethan Crelinsten uses a squad favorite - ushiro sankaku - the rear triangle - to use his legs to entrap and overpower his opponent’s head and arm in a classic expression of this critical theme. Make every battle you fight in a Jiu Jitsu a battle between your legs and his arms and victory will come to you often

Gym monsters: Most people in Jiu Jitsu know me through the fine work of my competing students. Their incredible success in competition gained international attention and generated great interest in our training methods, tactics and techniques. Understand however, that my training room has many people in it who chose never to compete or to compete very rarely, on a very informal, sporadic basis. Let me assure you of something - some of the toughest people in the room you have never heard of. I always loved this kind of thing - a student who trains part time and doesn’t really have competitive aspirations but who can go up against the best people in the world and go toe to toe with them without a problem. These are the gym monsters - athletes who work their craft in the dojo and whose goal is entirely internal - but their skills are as good as any. A legend in the blue basement is my student Shy Ace - a true gym monster. He spends most of his time in night clubs and on motorcycles but has a game that can shock the hell out of even world champions. Here he is going up against Kasai Grappling standout and silver medalist Tex Johnson and heel hooking him in short order after spontaneously entering a local grappling show after Gordon Ryan told he should give it a shot for the hell of it. One time when he was a white belt he went against Cyborg Abreau and survived a ten minute match without a problem. He has the best mount escapes I ever saw - he did one private class with me many years ago as a white belt and asked what should I learn first? I told him escapes come first and he is basically unmountable at this point. One time I asked a famous world champion to try to stay mounted on him for as long as he could - the longest time was around seven seconds in ten attempts! Take a lesson from this - even if you have no competitive aspirations and don’t train as often as the competition team - you can still be an absolute monster on the mats - I’ve seen it MANY times - indeed, there’s a good chance you have to - almost every good dojo has its own unsung and unknown mat monsters that can shock and inspire us. Maybe one day you can become a feared gym monster yourself! 😜😜

Guard Retention - Specifics vs General Theory: There are few skills so difficult for most students to understand and master than guard retention - and even fewer so important for your success in the sport. Guard retention is one of those skills that lacks glamour and sex appeal, but is absolutely essential to success in the sport. You have have the best guard attacks in the room, but if you can’t hold guard long enough to employ them against a good guard passer you will never get to employ them. The standard method of teaching guard retention is to teach the student a specific guard pass and to take note of its strengths and weakness. Students are taught to negate the strengths of the pass and exploit its weakness. This is a good method and has worked well for generations. It requires that you be able to quickly identify the type of pass being used against you and employ the appropriate counter moves. One problem with this move-based approach is that guard passing is typically a FAST and DYNAMIC part of the game characterized by rapid changes in direction and combinations of one style of guard pass to another. This immediately creates problems. By the time I have identified and reacted to the guard pass method being used against me, the opponent has switched to another and we can get left behind and passed. As much as I like and still use the traditional approach, I favor a more general approach to guard retention focus upon a core set of BODY MOVEMENTS and RETENTION SKILLS that can be applied against ANY form of guard pass. Rather than focus on the type of pass, I get students to focus on the DEGREE OF PASSING DANGER the pass presents as it is applied and reply with the appropriate degree of response. This enables students to better deal with the reality of a vigorous and fast moving, quickly changing guard passing vs retention exchange. Here, I am using a more traditional move vs move approach against the formidable over/under guard pass favored by the great @bernardofariabjj I’m looking forward to showing elements of this general concepts approach to guard retention soon!

Somewhere in that tangled knot there is both victory and defeat: perhaps more than any other grappling sport Jiu Jitsu often requires its athletes to get into complex limb entanglements for protracted lengths of time with opponents. Sometimes it is not obvious to an experienced eye who has an advantage. One thing however is sure - whenever this happens it is the athlete who can calmly and accurately ASSESS THE SCENARIO AND COME UP WITH A RATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION FASTER THAN THE OTHER FELLOW WHO WILL GENERALLY PREVAIL. There is a lot to be said for the ability to STAY CALM AND SOLVE PROBLEMS QUICKLY in this sport. Think about any kind of problem solving activity you have to engage in in your daily life. Has it ever been helped by getting emotional? By just doing the first action that occurred to you? By just being inactive? Nope. Me neither. A calm mind is the beginning of all problem solving. However difficult it may seem, try to THINK your way out of problems and towards solutions rather than just move for the sake of moving. This is a habit that must be formed - it is not natural - panic is natural - calm rational thought in a frightening or frustrating situation is not. Next time you are in a limb entanglement deadlock - stop, breath, take in the situation and work as a problem solver rather than just aimlessly thrash about and become a problem exacerbator. Just this simple change is a big first step towards maturity in your Jiu Jitsu.

Active observation: When most people observe Jiu Jitsu they do so as a spectator enjoying an event - as entertainment. That’s certainly an enjoyable way to spend your time - but you, as a student of the game seeking to rise in skill level, must go beyond this. You must always seek to ACTIVELY observe Jiu Jitsu, that is, to see yourself as one of the combatants and actively anticipating in the action - asking yourself what you would be doing in those situations second by second. In this way you begin to train your MIND in Jiu Jitsu in the same way you train your body every day. You will soon note that as the speed of your thought processes increase - SO TO THE MOVEMENTS OF YOUR BODY WILL INCREASE. Don’t be satisfied with just watching Jiu Jitsu. Go the extra distance and actively observe it every time you get the chance. Make it your goal to understand WHY people are doing what they do and what you would do in the same situation. You train your body every day - why not your mind also?

What are the most readily available moves and most commonly occurring scenarios in Jiu Jitsu? Whenever people ask me how to make make faster progress in Jiu Jitsu i always answer their question with a question of my own. WHAT DO YOU BELIEVE ARE THE MOST READILY AVAILABLE MOVES AND THE MOST COMMONLY OCCURRING SCENARIOS IN THE SPORT? I listen to it whatever answers they give - almost always there is pretty widespread agreement about this as the facts are rather plain and open to be seen by all - and then I tell them - DEVOTE THE GREAT MAJORITY OF YOUR TRAINING TIME TO THOSE MOVES AND SCENARIOS AND WATCH YOUR PROGRESS ACCELERATE. A classic example is the front head lock. You show me any Jiu Jitsu match (especially a no gi match) that goes longer than two minutes and i will show you multiple opportunities for both athletes to get to a front headlock. It is almost impossible to engage in a sport where the primary goal is to get a hold of people and control them without both people putting themselves in position to take or be taken in a front headlock. Time invested in this or any other readily available move or scenario in the sport is this time well spent - you will be making use of the skills you develop every single time you train and compete. Here, @heysonnyy applies a superb high elbow guillotine out of a front headLock to win her recent match at @kasaigrappling Despite a very short time in the sport she has deep knowledge of the position due to our heavy emphasis on building systems around the most commonly occurring systems and most effective moves so that valuable training time is not frittered away on skills that will rarely be used or which have only a low percentage chance of success if they are. Make your training time count the most by focusing upon the situations you are most likely to encounter and the moves most likely to succeed.

If unity is strength - isolation is weakness: Perhaps one of the biggest themes of my Jiu Jitsu coaching is LIMB ISOLATION. As long as one of your opponents limbs is locked close to another limb or to the torso, it will be very strong and difficult to attack. One of your primary goals in submission attacks, particularly joint locks, is to ISOLATE ONE LIMB FROM THE OTHER OR GET IT EXTENDED AWAY FROM THE TORSO. If you can do this consistently, you will submit many people. Whenever an attack on your opponent’s limbs is your goal - think about the two critical aspects of isolation - separate one limb from the other and separate it from the torso. Both are required. Doing so will make strong opponents feel weak. Every scenario will require a different method of limb isolation so I cannot give even general guidelines as to how you will do this every time you grapple, but the goal is easy to comprehend even if the means to it can be complicated. Still, this is a sport where KNOWING WHAT YOU WANT TO DO is half the battle - and that’s always a solid start in the right direction

Demian Maia and Michelle Nicolini: The greatest representative of Jiu Jitsu in modern MMA, Demian Maia @demianmaia came by the blue basement to train with the squad today. This incredible athlete has flown the Jiu jitsu flag with tremendous distinction for so long - it was an absolute pleasure to watch him drill and spar with the juniors and even get some light MMA work with Garry Tonon. He is a true role model for the sport - a gentleman fighter who represents our art with style and grace. There is something deeply impressive about an athlete who can really hold up the ideal of Jiu Jitsu as a gentle art amongst all the violence of the octagon and weave a tale of bloodless victories in a bloody sport. Also in town was the the great Michelle Nicolini @miznicolini who is also doing a very fine job of taking Jiu Jitsu into MMA. It is fascinating watching a great gi competitor make adjustments to the no gi game and from there into the fight game. I’m always proud to be involved in Jiu Jitsu and having two such great athletes representing our sport in the worlds toughest game always makes me even more proud. Wishing these two all time greats all the best from the basement in NYC! 🤗🤗

Remove the impediments first to get to what you really want: Everything we do in the sport of Jiu jitsu is done AGAINST KNOWLEDGEABLE RESISTANCE. This has a simple yet crucial ramification. We cannot in the vast majority of cases, simply go straight to our goals. In almost every case we have to take an INDIRECT route that entails first REMOVING THE BLOCKS AND IMPEDIMENTS OUR OPPONENT PUTS IN FRONT OF THE THING WE WANT TO GET AND ONLY WHEN THOSE HAVE BEEN REMOVED THEN GO TO TAKE WHAT YOU WANT. We all have to develop a sophisticated arsenal of techniques and tactics to remove those defensive barriers long enough to get to what we want. Here, Nicky Ryan wants to get to a leg to begin a takedown sequence. That cannot be done until he removes the barrier of his opponent’s hands, arms and head. SO THAT IS WHERE HE BEGINS THE BATTLE - not at the legs- even though that is his primary goal. He initiates with wrist ties that can clear away defensive hands and arms. If he can then get past his opponents head, there will be little between himself and the leg he wants - only then will he go in. ALL OF JIU JITSU IS LIKE THIS - from takedowns to positional moves to submissions. Become a master of INDIRECT THINKING and enjoy watching your game go to a new level.

Ask yourself two questions today: First - If you could have only one submission to use for the rest of your life, what would it be? Second, what is currently your most successful submission hold? Then go further...Are they the same? If not, what does that say about your training? If they are the same, how does your choice stand in relation to the observed success percentages of most athletes in international competition? Know yourself - Know the game - Know more - Win more

Rise among your peers: 90% of your training and development is done among your peers within your own dojo. As a result, your whole image of yourself is built upon your relative successes and failures among your peers. Your attempts to gauge your progress is largely done by assessing how much better or worse you are doing with them. They are your best friends and fiercest rivals, your measuring stick for who you were, who you are now and who you want to be in the future. Dream big - far beyond the walls of your dojo - but understand that it is your peers and your drive to rise among them that will be the vast majority of your Jiu Jitsu life. So dream big and international but realize that your daily life will always be familial and local - train accordingly.

The squad had a blast today training with the great Keenan Cornelius. Mr Cornelius has always been one of our strongest rivals - a true innovator and pioneer in the sport and someone we have always admired. He had some great rounds with the juniors as we all went through standing and ground grappling. He is an athlete whose game changes very dramatically from gi to no gi so it was fascinating to watch his no gi game and how it contrasts with our own. Looking forward to more sessions over the week from this outstanding American grappler.

Breaking your opponents structure and alignment - the power of unnatural positions: The human body is a fascinating subject of study - and at the deepest level, ALL OF JIU JITSU IS SIMPLY A DEEP STUDY OF THE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE HUMAN BODY IN UNARMED COMBAT. There are radical differences in the performance levels of our body depending upon the stance or structure in which it is held. Certain structures/stances make us very strong and powerful, others leave us shocking weak and vulnerable. In Jiu Jitsu our job is keep ourselves in stances/structures that make us strong whilst putting our opponents in stances/structures that make them weak. As much as possible, seek always to PUT YOUR OPPONENT INTO AWKWARD AND UNNATURAL POSITIONS FROM WHICH THEY CANNOT MOVE OR EXERT STRENGTH. Probably the single best way to do this is through your opponent’s HEAD. THE HEAD IS THE FOREMOST MEANS OF MISALIGNING AN OPPONENTS STRUCTURE IN WAYS THAT ROB HIM OF ATHLETICISM. Whenever possible, seek to put your opponent’s head into misaligned positions that make it very difficult him to use the rest of his body effectively. Here, I am putting my training partners head into a misaligned position that makes defense to the arm lock that I am applying significantly more difficult than usual. Actively applying the cross face leg in juji gatame arm locks like this undermines most of the standard defenses to the lock and will greatly boost your finishing percentages in sparring and competition. Look to apply the principle of posture/structure breaking wherever you can - once you can break an opponent’s structure and posture - his limbs will soon follow.

If you can isolate an arm - you can break an arm: arm locking an opponent who knows what an arm lock is and how to defend it never an easy thing. One way to make things easier is to focus on isolating one arm from the other. The principle of double trouble runs throughout Jiu Jitsu. NINETY PERCENT OF THE RESISTANCE TO A GIVEN JOINT LOCK ON AN ARM OR LEG COMES FROM THE OTHER ARM OR LEG. So if you can negate the defensive effects of the OTHER limb, breaking a limb becomes a LOT easier. There are many ways to isolate one limb from the other. In the case of one of the most popular and effective arm locks - Kimura - one highly effective method is to lock a tight triangle (sankaku) around your opponent’s head and arm and then focus upon the isolated and vulnerable trapped arm within the triangle. It is now significantly harder for your opponent to engage his other arm defensively. In addition, the strong head control greatly amplifies the potential breaking power of the Kimura by reducing the defensive head movements that can undermine the effectiveness of the Kimura lock. Here, outstanding junior Ethan Crelinsten uses triangle and Kimura in unison to do exactly this - the result is a punishing Kimura lock that is very difficult to defend and in the few cases where a successful defense can be made, leads immediately into other submission possibilities.

One of my favorite teaching experiences is always that of teaching military personal the kingly art of Jiu Jitsu. I have had the honor of teaching students from elite special forces units such as Navy Seals and Delta Force, Marine Recon and Green Berets along with many many students from regular service units. It is always a fascinating thing to listen to their stories about their training and development in the very extreme conditions in which they so often find themselves. It’s incredible to hear of their personal Jiu jitsu journeys under very challenging circumstances. It’s also extremely interesting to hear their theories as to the value of Jiu Jitsu training for military personal. Obviously we live in a time where highly advanced weaponry dominate the battlefield and unarmed combat is a rarity, but still these soldiers, sailors and airmen talk passionately about the value of their martial arts training. Today I had the great pleasure of training a fantastic group from a foreign military outfit that I have always greatly admired - Her Majesty’s British Royal Marine Commando! They are here in the USA competing against our United States Marine Corps in the 2019 Virginia Gauntlet Sports Tour, featuring nineteen different sports played by two hundred and fifty Royal Marines versus two hundred and fifty US Marines! 😜😜I would not want to take these fellows on in grappling! They impressed me with their skills! As much as we all value peace and diplomacy, our ability to protect and stand up for our ideals is directly proportional to our ability to fight for them. This is true for all of us as individuals in civil society and collectively as one nation among many in the world. As such I am always very happy to help train our soldiers and those of allies and listen to their experiences learning and applying Jiu Jitsu in areas far more extreme than any that most of us ever face. Thank you to @royalmarinesjiujitsu

Counting down to the super seminar in Singapore!! The squad is always looking forward to the next big project and coming up soon we have a triple challenge! @garrytonon will compete again in @onechampionship in his fifth MMA fight - a very quick turnaround from his flawless victory just a month ago in Japan. Then @nickyryanbjj takes on the great Uriah Faber in a grappling match in London’s week later. In between that the squad, myself, @garrytonon @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @nickyryanbjj will teach the biggest super seminar of the year at @evolvemma in Far East Square Singapore over five days, twice a day! This is going to be great!! We are plotting out our teaching and training schedule and really looking forward to this!! The energy and synergism of a multi teacher event is always something special and the location in the center of Asia adds something special to the whole event. Can’t wait to see you there!! #knowmorewinmore

The return of the boxing master!! Wonderful seeing my friend and cornering comrade, the inestimable Freddie Roach along with his hard working assistant Marie at RGA today!! Mr Roach is in town for Boxing at Madison Square Garden this weekend and stopped by to say hello. What a treasure this fellow is. He looks in the best shape I have seen him in years!! He came dancing down the basement stairs like a shadow boxing workout! Tonight we will go out with Georges St - Pierre and talk old days and technique 😜🤗 There is nothing better than a conversation with a person who is a master of their craft - tonight I get to talk with two!

Comeback: Despite its claim to be “the gentle art” Jiu Jitsu is a contact sport who principle aim is tackle people down to the ground and then manhandle them into locks that are fully capable of snapping limbs like match sticks and strangling people unconscious - as such injuries are entirely inevitable. There are going to be times when those injuries take you off the mat - sometimes for extended periods. It is natural to feel that when this happens all your hard work and progress will be lost and you will have to start off at the bottom again. My advice to injured students is always the same - STAY IN THE GAME THROUGH YOUR MIND. While your body is recuperating train your mind. My favorite way to do this is to have injured students watch their team mates training, both drills and sparring. By watching, thinking and questioning THE LEARNING PROGRESSION CAN CONTINUE TO SOME DEGREE EVEN WHEN YOUR BODY IS INACTIVE. In my career I have seen all my main students go through injury problems and emerge better than before. In my own case I entered the sport with a crippled leg and as a result many physical problems - this simple method of replacing physical engagement with mental engagement meant that we all came back to the mat KNOWING MORE than when we left and then it was just a matter of getting our body to catch up to the new knowledge when we got back. The only times I have seen students get noticeably worse during injury lay-offs was when they simply stopped coming and just did nothing Jiu Jitsu related during the down time. Here I am with Gordon Ryan - he is coming back from Knee surgery after a complete tear of his LCL - every day he comes down to the basement and watches class next to me. Every time he watches his mind is active - asking himself what he would be doing if he were in that situation he is watching - active minds don’t degenerate and bodies will soon soon catch up when they get healthy again. Whenever fate pushes you off the mat - and it will happen on multiple occasions - use this approach to stay moving towards your dreams and goals.

Know where you are now and where you want to be in the future: Most of my time coaching is spent upon technical guidance and development. In truth however, one of the most important roles any coach can play is that of ASSESSING WHERE A STUDENTS CURRENT SKILL LEVEL IS AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE CHANGED AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE ADDED. This is why I always try to monitor my students training and chat with them afterwards about what is good about their work and what needs to be improved. It’s tempting to just come in and roll around and play with your favorite moves - there is nothing wrong with that and you can make decent progress in this way and have a lot of fun. However, if you have higher aspirations you will definitely need to go beyond this. There must be a constant sense of PROGRESSION. You will need a sense of your current level and where you wish to be within a given time frame. If you don’t have that constant set of eyes on you - THEN YOU WILL HAVE TO OBSERVE YOURSELF AND DO YOUR BEST TO MAKE SELF ASSESSMENTS. Whatever errors you may make will not harm your progress nearly as much as making no assessments and merely drifting from one workout to the next with a “let’s see what happens” approach. Interestingly, I am the eyes that monitor my students, but there are no eyes that monitor me - so all my career I have had to use self assessments to gauge my own progress as a teacher and coach. You can do it too. Fortunately the very nature of Jiu Jitsu makes it relatively easy - every time we spar we get direct feedback as to our skill level and we can see very clearly both in ourselves and others which moves work well and hence what we might want to add to our arsenal in the future. So make sure there are some eyes on you - whether your coaches or your own - so that your workouts BUILD YOU UP OVER TIME rather than degenerate into repeating the same moves and tactics from one day to the next.

A new look at the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu - GO FURTHER FASTER: Heading back to NYC after a great weekend filming more content for the next instructional video series I am making in conjunction with @bjj.fanatics It will be titled GO FURTHER FASTER and strongly emphasizes faster progress in Jiu Jitsu through a combination of concepts to give you direction and details to give you the ability to move efficiently in that direction. The first great challenge most beginners in Jiu Jitsu face - and a challenge that will remain with you throughout your time in the sport - is the challenge of overcoming inferior position. Jiu Jitsu is not fun when you are constantly finding yourself pinned underneath people and totally unable to move into your attacks. Fundamentals must begin with the path towards mastery of DEFENSE and ESCAPE . Only when you are defensively sound will you be able to assert your offense. Keep your eyes out for some of the content we filmed today which we will put on YouTube for to check out and get your defensive game strong enough to show off some of your offense!!

Building a devastating arm bar: I always encourage my students to focus hard on the mechanics of their submission holds. Most of you know that I put the overwhelming majority of my teaching time on six submission systems - Back attack system, Ashi garami based leg lock system, Kimura system, front head lock system, triangle system and arm bar system. While it is only natural that among these six systems everyone will have a few that they favor over the others, they have to be strong in all six so that they can attack the whole body from any scenario. The arm bar (juji gatame) is a submission i strongly emphasize in their training. It is a potentially devastating weapon that can be used with equal effect standing or on the ground, gi or no gi, too or bottom, grappling or fighting. One very memorable application of juji gatame was a particularly powerful variation used by Georges St-Pierre in his third fight with the great Matt Hughes. Due to the fact that juji gatame usually requires some degree of prior positional work to get to the upper body it tends to come at the end of a sequence of takedown, guard pass, pin transitions and then the arm bar finish. That is exactly how Mr St Pierre used it in this fight. Done it this fashion it finishes a fight the way a full stop finishes a well constructed sentence. You can see here the arm breaking power of the move that has finished so many matches. Make a deep study of this submission - is your toughest matches it will always be one of your best weapons - a genuine fight ender as it was here.

Big plans: Here I am with my great friends @bernardofariabjj and @michaelzenga from @bjj.fanatics We are discussing our biggest video project yet - the follow up to the ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional series - it will focus on BJJ Fundamentals and as the name GO FURTHER FASTER implies, will cover a systematic approach to getting to a higher level in less time in Jiu Jitsu. We had a great day filming in the blue basement - now we are discussing video ideas in downtown Manhattan. My goal is to change the nature of video instruction and make it a viable addition to your learning journey that does not merely offer some moves to mimic, but rather changes your thinking and perception of the sport and pushes you towards creative independence and self discovery. Can’t wait to tackle this project! Wishing you all the best from NYC! #knowmore/winmore

The importance of Front Headlock position: One of the main criteria I use for selecting the main submission series I focus upon when teaching is AVAILABILITY. There are certain submission options which are almost always readily available in any grappling match regardless of your opponents body type or style. For example, Kimura opportunities arise any time your opponent reaches for you - and in a sport where you have to grip people to do anything, that means it is almost always there for the taking of you want it. Ashi garami based leg locks only require you to position at least one foot inside your opponent’s legs. In a sport where base is crucial athletes usually have to stand with feet apart to maintain base, so ashi garami is almost always available. However, the position which I believe is the most readily available of them all is THE FRONT HEADLOCK. Any time your head is higher than your opponent and he is in front of you - it’s on! Standing, ground, top or bottom - it doesn’t matter. Once you have the front head you have a bunch of very high percentage finishes - all manner of guillotine variations, all manner of kata gatame variations(Darce, Anaconda etc) and of course you can go behind your opponent any time to take his back. It is truly among the most effective positions in the sport. I put a huge emphasis on it among my students and many of them excel in its use. Here, Garry Tonon takes a fine win with a devastating high elbow guillotine finish from mount after beginning in a front headlock. Note how he has taken his opponent’s head into an unnatural position that weakens his body structure and makes defense extremely difficult. Make a deep study of the front headlock and I promise you both your positional game and your submission game will jump up in level 😊

Negation: A huge part of winning in Jiu Jitsu is the negative game of SHUTTING DOWN YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE. Our primary emphasis is not so much about how to move ourselves as it is a game of preventing the other guy from moving himself. Think about a foot race. There are always two ways to win. You can win by making yourself faster than the other fellow; or you can win without making any effort to make yourself faster by making the other fellow slower than you, say for example, by breaking his legs shortly before the race. Both methods will be very effective in bringing you victory (though of course the second would be highly illegal in most foot races). Interestingly, it is the second approach that is more prevalent in the sport of Jiu Jitsu. Our main concern is to UNDERMINE THE OPPONENTS ATHLETIC POTENTIAL MORE THAN IT IS TO ENHANCE OUR OWN. If you can tie up, immobilize, restrain or otherwise impede your opponents movement potential you have a huge advantage that can be used to take you to victory. Look at how Nicky Ryan focuses first upon shackling Garry Tonon’s feet together as a means of undermining his athletic potential prior to attempting a heel hook attack. Any time two legs are shackled together, athletic potential is severely compromised - that’s why I made it a centerpiece of our leg lock system. You must make a deep study of immobilizing and restraining people in your Jiu Jitsu journey. I tell you in all honesty - FOR EVERY TIME YOUR OWN SUPERIORITY IN MOVEMENT SECURES YOU VICTORY IN A MATCH, YOUR ABILITY TO ROB YOUR OPPONENT OF HIS ABILITY TO MOVE WILL WIN YOU TEN VICTORIES.

Fast progress: Ultimately I want you thinking about Jiu Jitsu in the long term as a lifetime study centered around self improvement, but let’s not kid ourselves, we all have a more short term goal to GET AS GOOD AS WE CAN AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE. Like any learning project, there will always be discrepancies in learning rates among different people, but I am very confident that all of us could be learning faster if we structured our training a little better. Sometimes the collusion of hard work, excellent attributes and sound training program can produce incredible results in a shockingly short time. This weekend @nickyrod247 who has done Jiu Jitsu for less than a year along with a year of wrestling at a D2 college took on and dominated a Black belt (and previous winner of brown belt world championships). The key is always to find a good balance between the need for DIRECTION and the need for DETAILS OF TECHNIQUE that enable you to actually move in that direction. With regards direction, ask yourself what directions you want your Jiu Jitsu to go. What will you need to get where you want to be? What should you be focusing on both short term and long term? THE MOST IMPORTANT TOOL IN ANY JOURNEY INTO THE UNKNOWN IS A COMPASS because it does not matter how how much effort you put into walking and climbing and running - if you are going in the wrong directions you won’t get to your destination. As soon as that direction is determined (and this will largely be a reflection of who you are and what you want to do) then it’s all about fleshing out details of technique and practice. Get those two elements - direction and technique - and you will fly towards your goals like this young man!

Observation: There are many catalysts to learning in Jiu Jitsu and life, one of the most important is observation. When most people watch a match or sparring session they look at the result - who won - and remember only that. The result is the least important element to look for. Much better progress will come by looking for successful application of a technique and the mechanical and tactical reasons why it succeeded. Best of all is to look for PATTERNS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE. If you see certain movements repeatedly giving positive or negative results you have made an important discovery - obviously one will push you towards what you want to do yourself and the other a cautionary tale in what to avoid. Only when you see REPEATED SUCCESS do you get clear evidence that something important is going on and may be worth devoting serious study to. It maybe something small, a simple set up or preambles a move - big or small, if you see repeated success then you ought to try it for yourself and see if you can share in that success and perhaps even improve upon it. Understand that simple observation, while never enough in itself, is nonetheless an important part of the learning and development process. It’s easy to sit back and relax and watch sparring and competition like a movie, but it is much more productive to watch it like a puzzle to be solved - you will need to do a lot more work from there - but it’s a great start that we all get many opportunities to partake in every day.

Great work by Craig Jones taking 3rd place at @kasaigrappling championships in New York City tonight! The outstanding Aussie grappler has two beautiful submission finishes out of four matches to take the bronze medal in a stacked tournament here in NYC. The show itself was outstanding with upsets and action at every turn - the tournament format creates great excitement and often produces unexpected results as the athletes have to make split second judgements in a delicate balancing act between position and submission. Outstanding performances tonight from @kaynanduarte @texjohnsonbjj To get to the finals. Mr Jones will travel for a while in Africa before returning to New York in preparation for the ADCC world championships in September. He was joined by his loyal friend @izaakmichellbjj who came all the way from Australia to help out his buddy here tonight. I always love working with these globetrotting athletes from Down Under - it is deeply inspiring to see how much progress they make working far from the known centers of Jiu Jitsu and how far they travel to compete and learn to better themselves - we can all learn from that example. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Attack their ability to move first and their joints second: Submission holds are most exciting part of Jiu Jitsu - the highest ideal of the sport is to make the opponent surrender. It natural therefore, that when you get into position to apply a submission hold, that you often tend to rush towards finishing it. Understand something - YOUR FIRST TASK IS TO SHUT DOWN/REDUCE YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE. Only then can you reasonably expect to exhibit the kind of control necessary to break a limb. Breaking a limb is extremely difficult when your opponent is moving around. Take your time, ride out the storm of the initial resistance and focus on limiting his ability to move to the greatest degree possible. You can’t really PREVENT movement, but you definitely can REDUCE it. Only when you feel your opponents defensive movement has been reduced to manageable levels do we switch to the next phase - breaking the arm or leg under attack. Think of submissions as having (at least) TWO SEPARATE TASKS. First, shutting down movement. Second, using lever and fulcrum to break the limb. Don’t bypass the first task in your concern to complete the second. Train yourself to hold and control the submission hold as long as you can before you actually go after the joint lock. You will soon learn that all the major joint locks also have a powerful pinning/riding/control component that can immobilize an opponent for long periods of time. Only when you feel your opponents movement and resistance begin to wilt do you go after the joint lock itself. Start looking at your submission holds as having these two separate phases and I promise you your finishing percentages will start to rise 😜 Here I demonstrate some of the control aspects behind an arm bar (juji gatame) That create a stationary opponent who is easy to finish.

One adjustment at a time: Understand something - there are certain fundamental techniques of Jiu Jitsu that you will be using every day of your training for the rest of your time in the sport. They constitute the very heart and soul of Jiu Jitsu. Moves such as the elbow escape, upa, knee slice pass, arm bar (juji gatame), triangle (sankaku) Kimura etc are so essential to the game that you must understand that mastery of them will be a lifetime endeavor. If you are still doing Jiu Jitsu twenty years from now - you will still be doing Arm bars, triangles and Kimura every day twenty years from now. As you progress, you will learn more about each and make small adjustments that hopefully will improve both your understanding and performance of these key fundamental moves. SOMETIMES A SINGLE NEW INSIGHT AND SUBSEQUENT ADJUSTMENT CAN YIELD VERY SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENTS IN PERFORMANCE. When you go to make new adjustments to old moves in your repertoire, try to make the adjustments ONE AT A TIME so that you can really focus on the adjustment and make it fit into your previous skill set. If you add five new elements to your arm bar at the same time it is difficult to do credit to all five. I prefer to add new details one at a time so I can focus on that aspect of improvement and maximize it. Remember always that you will be doing this move for the rest of your career - there is no rush. Once you feel you have maximized the value of the new adjustment, start work on the next. Let time work for you not against you. Here I am coaching two students through some arm bar work and focusing only upon the height of the knee of their cross face leg - this is a major adjustment that if done well, will significantly improve their connection to their opponent and much greater control of the head - two results that are TRULY WORTH the investment in time - one at a time - until it’s mastered and we move on to the next

Fun day of training today with the squad: It was great having guests @felipepenabjj @romulobarral and @marcusbuchecha and @craigjonesbjj joining up with myself, @gordonlovesjiujitsu and the squad juniors in a packed class in the blue basement today. Everyone is getting ready for the big show at @kasaigrappling this weekend featuring some of the worlds greatest grappling talent. Everyone looked in tremendous form - this show has the potential to be one of the very best ever. It was a pleasure to share technique with these gentlemen and some laughs to. Keep your eyes on Kasai grappling this weekend and see the best in our beloved sport!

That critical moment: Understand something that goes to the very heart of your performance in Jiu Jitsu - something we might call THE SHARED KNOWLEDGE PROBLEM. Whenever you go to employ a given move on someone of roughly the same rank as you - YOU BOTH HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE MOVES YOU ARE TRYING TO EMPLOY ON EACH OTHER AND THE COUNTERS TO THOSE MOVES. So if we both know what an arm bar looks like and we both know the counters to it - how are we supposed to successfully apply it in a competitive situation? When there is shared knowledge of a move there will always be a critical moment halfway through the performance of the move where your opponent will recognize what you are attempting and go into his counter sequences. THIS IS WHERE THE MAJORITY OF SUBMISSION HOLDS ARE LOST. Look at this photo - I am roughly halfway through an arm bar (juji gatame) from Guard position. Any opponent worth his salt will have recognized what is happening by now and ought to be going into strong defensive counters - IT IS HERE THAT THE REAL BATTLE FOR SUBMISSION IS WON OR LOST. It is at this point that you must be at your most mechanically sound in the application of the move. DON’T TRY TO USE SPEED TO GET PAST THIS POINT- USE MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS. Note how I use lower leg alignment and angle combined with a strong back-heel leg action to stay heavy on the head at this critical junction so that I can control my opponent’s movement and prevent slippage. Identify these critical halfway points of the major submissions and research how to exert tight control to take you successfully from HALFWAY there to ALL the way there - this is the single most important stage of mastery of any given submission hold and the one that you must master on your journey to submissions success.

Interesting assessment of Mr Tonon’s winning performance in Tokyo from Wikipedia: Not entirely inaccurate 😂😜

Mixed feelings: Waiting for my flight at Tokyo Narita airport bound for home. I’m sad to leave Japan. This is one of the most incredible places I ever traveled to. A nation of industrious, well ordered, hard working and well educated people. I have never seen a place where every person i observed was so committed to excellence in their work performance. Despite its immense size, Tokyo is the cleanest and safest city in the world - the world can learn much from this incredible island nation. It was incredible to be part of @onechampionship emergence into industry leadership in MMA competition - this show clearly revealed the big steps they have made and how high a level many of their athletes are. Huge congratulations to Garry Tonon - that young man is so hard working and driven - he grinds though hardship and physical issues that would stop anybody else and finds a way to his goals - an inspiration to all of us. Still I’m happy to return to America and see my students and help get them ready for big upcoming challenges! There’s no place like home and NYC is always my favorite. Can’t wait to see the troops back in the basement of suffering and hope and get the room cracking again! Wishing you all the best from the land of the rising sun! 🇯🇵🇺🇸🇯🇵

Victory in Tokyo!! Garry Tonon went to his fourth stoppage victory in his Burgeoning MMA career here in Japan at @onechampionship He took on talented Anthony Engelen a Dutch/Indonesian kick boxer. Early in the match Mr Engelen went to his strength with a strong low kick attack, giving Mr Tonon a reactive kick catch takedown. From there Mr Tonon put on a devastating display of grapple boxing - the integration of grappling and striking on the floor. Mr Tonon is a master of grappling after many years at the highest levels of the sport, tonight he showed his developing skill in grapple boxing and the intimidating power of this mode of attack when well applied. It is hard to believe he has been competing in MMA for only one year. And training for only three additional months. In that time, four fights, four victories, four stoppages. I am incredibly impressed by the speed of his development and the work ethic he has exhibited in making it possible. Here he is backstage at @onechampionship press conference area. Congratulations to Mr Tonon and @onechampionship for another amazing show. A big thank you to the amazing people of Japan - I am so hopeful that big time MMA can come back here to this great bastion of martial arts history and spirit. Wishing you all the best from Tokyo! Thank you all for your support and interest in our approach to learning and training! To all my students back in NYC - see you soon! To all my Instagram followers - keep training hard and aiming high!

Garry Tonon makes weight - all systems go! Garry Tonon Just successfully weighed in here in Tokyo for his fight tomorrow at @onechampionship Here we are going back to the hotel to recharge. It’s Cherry Blossom season here in Japan and there is a beautiful Temple next door which is popular for traditional weddings which are going on as a large groups of MMA athletes prepare for action tomorrow - such an odd contrast - but a rather poignant one as the essence of martial arts is controlled power. Though our business is ultimately a violent one, it is always sublimated to be contained within a peaceful social setting - that’s what differentiates a martial artist from a thug - so it’s beautiful to observe wedding guests intermingled with some of the baddest people on the planet as naturally as birds with the cherry blossoms above them. Wishing you all the best from Tokyo! Hope you all enjoy the big show!

Old school in Tokyo! Wonderful meeting up with two true MMA legends and pioneers - both early heroes of mine from the early days of MMA all the way up to the present and into the future! @vitorbelfort and @caoluno These guys had so many thrilling matches over the years - can’t wait to see them do more in the future! They are here in Tokyo for the big @onechampionship event this weekend - it’s a great time to be in Japan! Legends like these fellows put MMA on the map - I can still vividly remember all their biggest fights from years ago and they are both in tremendous shape even now and ready to show that old school skills are still an incredible force in an ever changing sport! I must have watched their fights a thousand times - such an honor to meet them in person!

Heading back from gym - Tokyo train: Taking the train back to Shinagawa Station after another great workout for @garrytonon for @onechampionship I am extremely impressed by the Japanese people and the city of Tokyo. It is deeply impressive to observe how well mannered and courteous everyone is. I have never seen a people so committed to their work - literally every interaction I have had with local workers, from Hotel staff to a cashier at the local seven eleven, has impressed me with their diligence and commitment to doing their job as well as they can with enthusiasm, vigor and professionalism. It soon becomes obvious how this Island nation with no natural resources worked their way up to become the second largest economy in the world for so long (and probably pound for pound number one). While no people or place perfect, There is much the rest of us could learn from them and improve ourselves. Their subway is immaculate and extremely efficient and people are extraordinarily polite and well ordered. Even though the population density here is very high one does not see many of the social problems we have back home here. There is a real martial arts culture also - with many great martial arts schools all around. The level of Judo and Karate here is simply astounding. I am very proud to be a tiny part of the first big MMA event here in Japan in many years. For such a long time Japan was a global leader in MMA development - it would be incredible if that could be brought back. Wishing you all the best from Tokyo and hoping this day took you all just another step closer to your martial arts dreams and goals! 😊😊

Shoot Boxing: Garry Tonon goes through his shoot boxing drills and skills in preparation for his upcoming fight at @onechampionship Tokyo. It is always fascinating to study how the presence of some new variable drastically changes the behavior of an established system. Nowhere is this more evident than in the case of shoot boxing - where the presence of takedowns drastically changes the established rhythms and patterns of boxing and kickboxing. Mr Tonon continues to make progress in this fascinating aspect of MMA training - he only started just over a year ago and has made tremendous progress in such a short time. Now it’s back to the hotel and some reading, them some note taking for the next video series I will make on BJJ Fundamentals. So impressed by hospitality and friendliness of local people - I hope @onechampionship has many more events here!

Garry Tonon getting ready: The big show in Tokyo draws closer. @onechampionship has sold out for their biggest card ever. Today was another step towards the cage as Garry Tonon went through his drills in the midst of cutting weight and the various media obligations that come with big events. It was fun going back to the hotel with tour guide Matt Hume through the Tokyo train system at rush hour! This city is amazing! So busy but so well organized! NYC looks like total anarchy and chaos in comparison! 😜😜 Here we are after this afternoons workout - so impressive to watch the dedication that Mr Tonon outs into his preparation and skill development - it’s hard to believe that it’s still less than a year since his first fight! His prodigious training routine helps make up for his short time in the sport.

Matched pairs: A very important notion to advance your game is to understand that all good Jiu Jitsu is based around the idea of DILEMMA. Whenever possible, work with two moves linked together so that as one runs into resistance, the over takes over. Note immediately that your CHOICE of linked moves is very important - CERTAIN MOVES LINK TOGETHER WITH OTHERS MUCH BETTER THAN OTHERS. What makes a superior link is often dependent on how you want to attack and what the scenario is. One of the very best linked attacks is the pairing of arm bar (juji gatame) and triangle (sankaku). Whenever you have one, you almost always have the other. Here, I start in a commonly seen arm bar from top rear mount, but as my partner begins to go into a standing escape sequence, I hook into the posted arm in a way that immediately leads into one of my favorite triangles - the rear triangle (ushiro Sankaku). The leg hook under the arm and over the neck creates an extremely strong breakdown to return the opponent to the mat. All it takes on your part is some simple leg pommelling - made easy by the fact the leg positioning in arm bars and triangles is very similar - and now you have two easily linked attacks in one scenario that double your chance of success!

First workout in the land of the rising sun: Garry Tonon gets a nice shoot boxing workout after the long flight to Tokyo at a local Golds Gym - impressive to see that in Japan even the body building gyms have martial arts mat area 😜 Tomorrow we will use a real martial arts gym but this was perfect as a first late night workout to break jet lag and get moving. It’s always fun adapting a workout to a new environment - even more so when its a new country! Now we get a chance to see some of this grand city of lights as we head back to the hotel in a cab. This nation is so impressive - physically small and with very few natural resources other than a highly disciplined, education and research oriented, unified and motivated population they rebuilt and reinvented themselves soon after the total catastrophe of World War 2 to become the second or third largest economic power in the world - a truly remarkable feat that we can all draw inspiration from in our own individual bid to grow and prosper.

Tokyo bound with the the Lion Killer: heading to @onechampionship Tokyo with @garrytonon at Newark Airport. He has trained exceedingly well as always - so impressive with his drive to learn and improve - a real inspiration to all the other athletes in the room. Thank you all so much for your interest in our approach to the game. Will try to keep you all updated as the week progresses. I will miss all my students in the basement as always but excited to see you all when I get back! 😊😊

Six systems - feel the power: With the release of the arm bar (juji gatame) video, the ENTER THE SYSTEM series is complete. It might seem odd that I teach only six submission systems, Back attack system, ashi garami system, front headlock system, Kimura system, triangle system and juji gatame system; afterall, there a vast number of other submission holds out there. When it comes to submissions i use three criteria for selection. First, which moves are truly high percentage? Are they used repeatedly by athletes at all levels, all weight classes in all formats? Second, do they as a whole allow you to attack the entire body? Third, can they be put into highly developed sequential systems that enable you to punch through the toughest defenses and resistance at championship level? Judged in this light you will see that the number of submissions to be selected now shrinks dramatically. My coaching philosophy is always to focus on a select few very high percentage moves and create great DEPTH of knowledge around those, rather than superficial knowledge of a vast BREADTH of moves whose effectiveness in competition is questionable. When my students go out to compete I am always very confident that the six systems we practice will give them a big firepower advantage in submission skill and range. They have enough HIGH PERCENTAGE submissions to cover THE WHOLE BODY with a depth and sophistication that will make them VERY DIFFICULT TO STOP. As Thanos strapped on six infinity gems to gain his powers - add these six submission systems to gain your powers on the mat! 😜

Very pleased to announce the release today of the latest and last installment of the worlds most popular martial arts video instructional series - ENTER THE SYSTEM: ARM BAR (juji gatame). The arm bar is highly representative of the ideals of Jiu Jitsu - it uses the power of the legs and hips to fight against an opponent’s head and arm - and so allows smaller players to overcome bigger and stronger opponents. It is equally effective gi and no gi, in grappling and fighting, from both top and bottom position. Its central feature is its great control in a perpendicular angle that gives easy access to arm locks, strangles (switching to triangles) and leg locks (switching down stairs to variations of ashi garami). This makes it a devastating weapon in the hands of a well trained athlete - fully capable of ending a match in a moments notice when done well. As always thank you to all my instructors and mentors, to my many outstanding students whose brilliant exploits and hard work made the world notice the power of a systems based approach to submission holds and training, and to all you, my readers and followers who have taken an interest in our approach to the kingly arts of Jiu Jitsu and MMA. Thank you also to @bjj.fanatics for all their help in getting my teachings out to the world and joining my vision of changing the nature of video instruction in martial arts into a truly viable supplement to orthodox methods of instruction and learning that can speed progress and offer new ways of looking at the sport rather than simply offering a small set of tricks. The link to the video is in my Instagram bio above. Wishing you all the best - work hard on your arm bars! They represent one of the most valuable combat skills you can ever learn and are big part of our Jiu Jitsu ideal - YOUR WHOLE BODY AS A WEAPON - YOUR OPPONENTS WHOLE BODY AS A TARGET!

The power of symbols: I am a big believer in the power of symbols to inspire, educate and motivate people towards their goals. I try to use them as much as possible in my own life and those who I coach. For example I believe that edged tools and weapons - knives and swords - have important metaphorical value (in addition to their obvious practical value) in martial arts training (one day I will discuss this at length). One of my favorite symbols since my childhood is the famous MITSU-TOMOE (sometimes mitsu domoe) - often seen throughout Asia. I use it’s symbolic power whenever possible in my coaching and living. My own version of it is a double mitsu- tomoe; a smaller one inside a larger one. This captures the biggest theme of my coaching philosophy in Jiu Jitsu - the idea of Jiu Jitsu as a system and my attempt to create subsystems within that system to create a new approach to Jiu Jitsu. Traditionally the most common forms of this symbol have three “commas” inside a circle (there are other versions with more or less commas) and these are usually seem to represent heaven, earth and humans. My personal rendition of it sees the trinity of commas representing the three fundamental skill sets of Jiu Jitsu - standing position skills, ground top position skills and ground bottom position skills. Interestingly the three commas create an optical illusion. If you look you can either see three spokes or blades, or three commas - depending on your focus. Two people can look at the same thing and see two different things - just like Jiu Jitsu - where two athletes can be in the same situation and see two completely different opportunities - and both be correct. Like the mitsu tomoe, Jiu Jitsu involves interpretation on top of technique. So many key themes of Jiu Jitsu and my interpretation of it are bound up in this beautiful image - I love to surround myself with it when I can. Do you have your own favorite symbols to keep your mind on what you do? Do they capture how you feel about your passions? Put them around you in daily life and let them help keep you focused on your dreams and goals 😊

Aussies in NYC: Team Australia is back training in NYC in the basement. Aussie grappling super star and overall nicest dude in grappling Craig Jones is here for the month in preparation for the big upcoming show at @kasaigrappling tournament featuring many of the best in the world such as Felipe Pena and Kaynan Duarte among others. Mr Jones has been training hard and continues to improve as he goes through a busy competition season leading up to world championships at ADCC this year. He is joined by rising Aussie grappler @izaakmichellbjj who is preparing for Oceania ADCC trials. Always a pleasure to see these guys back in the gym. Keep your eyes on this upcoming Kasai Grappling event April 6th - that will be a clash of Titans for sure! Meanwhile it’s back to work in the basement! Lots of new skills to develop and new tactics to try! 😜😜

Pins and transitions: Very often when I coach Jiu Jitsu i see players get into a mindset when they get to a dominant pinning position such as side or mount or north/south - they tend to use it as a STATIC PLATFORM FROM WHICH TO LAUNCH ATTACKS. There is nothing wrong with that approach - it is a time tested and valuable method. However, don’t ignore an alternative that can be very useful for tying together your positional game with your submissions game - this involves strongly emphasizing TRANSITIONS BETWEEN PINS RATHER THAN THE PINS THEMSELVES. Constant movement from one pin to another is one of the very best means of generating LIMB EXTENSION in an opponent as he tries to respond to your movement and escape. WHERE THERE IS EXTENSION THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY OF SUBMISSION. When you emphasize movement between pins you will generate many move opportunities for submissions - it can come at the price of stability if done poorly - SO KEEP THOSE TRANSITIONS SMOOTH AND TIGHT. Here, outstanding junior squad member Frank Rosenthal shows excellent skills going from one dominant pin to another to get around a wary opponent’s defense and shift to a strangle from the back at a recent grappling tournament in England. This kind of pin transition is something we should all be building into our game.

Different arm bar - different priorities: Probably the most basic difference in the execution of arm bars (juji gatame) is that between arm bars performed from bottom positions and those performed from top positions. The fundamental emphasis in each is substantially different. In the case of juji gatame from any given TOP position our primary emphasis must be upon KEEPING OUR OPPONENTS HEAD DOWN, whereas in the case of juji gatame from bottom position our primary focus is on KEEPING OUR HIPS UP HIGH to our opponent’s shoulder. This difference in primary focus creates a very different feel for one move in two different applications. In order to maximize your effectiveness with the move overall, you must be mindful of different priorities in different applications. When underneath - work hard to get your hips rising up off the floor and chase your opponent’s shoulder. You will soon notice an increase in your finishing percentages with this great move

Nicky Ryan vs Uriah Faber: Very pleased to see Nicky Ryan will face off against MMA legend Uriah Faber at Polaris Pro 10 on May 25 in England. Mr Faber always showed great grappling skill throughout his MMA career and was renown for a devastating guillotine which he often used to win his matches. As a grappler he has gone the distance with one of the very best in the world - none other than Paulo Miyao - so he is no stranger to taking on the best in pure grappling. Mr Ryan was back in the gym training today in preparation for this next great challenge - this should be a tremendous match as both athletes are known for a dynamic attacking style! As always, Mr Ryan will go in with a serious strength disadvantage but he is used to that and structures his game around movement and positioning to overcome it. Looking forward to helping with preparation for this show against such a great opponent!

One of the most fundamental concepts in all of Jiu Jitsu is that of BASE/BALANCE. Whenever you are in top position or standing position it is crucial that you be able to maintain some form of base so that you are STABLE ENOUGH TO GET THE TASKS YOU NEED TO DO, DONE. Now when you first begin Jiu Jitsu most people equate base/balance with STATIC BASE. That is, a stable stationary position that feels secure and solid, usually featuring widely spread hands and feet and lowered center of gravity. That is fine for beginners class, but understand something - as you go with better people, THEY WILL ALWAYS BE ABLE TO USE MOVEMENT TO EXPLOIT YOUR CURRENT BASE OF SUPPORT AND KNOCK YOU DOWN. As you progress in Jiu Jitsu you must begin to trade static base for DYNAMIC BASE, where you use momentary supports in rapid succession to hold yourself up long enough to get your tasks done. This is not an easy path and there is no set way of making this switch - it typically takes place organically over time as you go with better opponents - but being COGNIZANT OF THE NEED FOR IT HELPS PUSH YOU IN THE CORRECT DIRECTIONS AS YOU TRAIN. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows characteristic dynamic base as he gets fully elevated yet easily holds his base on one arm and uses his opponent’s body as the rest of his base in a way that will facilitate a hip switch guard pass follow up - a fine example of dynamic base leading to task completion that must become YOUR ideal as you progress.

Arm bars from bottom - GET HEAVY ON THE HEAD: Arm bars (juji gatame) are among the most versatile weapons in Jiu Jitsu - being effective gi and no gi, standing or ground, top or bottom position. When performing them from underneath the main problems you run into will always be stacking and posturing up and away. Both reactions, if done well, can subvert your ability to finish your arm bar. Both reactions start with head position. It is crucial therefore, that you get HEAVY ON YOUR OPPONENTS HEAD WITH YOUR LEGS in order to prevent forward head movement (stacking) or up and away head movement (postural escapes). Look at Nicky Ryan finishing a beautiful juji gatame arm bar variation that involves two legs covering the head for extra weight over the head and a very strong finish. Next time you work juji gatame from bottom position really emphasize getting heavy on your opponents head as he begins to resist and watch your finishing percentages rise with this classic Jiu Jitsu finishing hold.

Drilling: All forms of drilling are to some extent, artificial. They are not the same as real sparring or competition - nor are they intended to be. Drilling is meant to take some element that you will use in sparring or competition and isolate it so you can focus upon some aspect that if you trained and understood it, it would improve your sparring/competition performance. There are many forms of drilling - each has its good and bad points. Understand that drilling represents an ARTIFICIALLY IDEALIZED FORM OF WHAT YOU WANT TO DO IN SPARRING/COMPETITION. You can easily perform a perfect arm bar in drilling because your partner is not resisting. When you compete against each other - it will never look as clean and perfect as it does in drilling. Realize that the better your drilling looks, the better your sparring will look - but that it will never match the ideal of drilling due tot he inevitably messiness caused by strong resistance. This is important - it means that when you drill it is relatively easy - SO SET THE BAR DAMN HIGH FOR YOUR PERFORMANCE - knowing that it will be a lot more difficult in real situations. If you look sloppy and uncoordinated in drilling against a cooperative partner, how do you think you will look when you go against an opponent fighting you tooth and nail? SET THE BAR HIGH WHEN YOU DRILL. The higher your standards when you drill the better you will move when it counts. I coach my students to take real pride in the quality of their drilling and to constantly seek improvements in mechanics and smoothness of application (and severely punish poor performance with a torrent of verbal abuse 😂😂) Whilst the real application will never be as good as the ideal - understand that the higher the ideal - the higher the real world application.

Very excited to join @sanabul for the development of MMA training gear this year. I have been coaching MMA for a long time now and am fascinated by the idea of improving training gear for athletes to help create better workouts in the cage in preparation for bouts or just skill development. Looking forward to working with @sanabul in the development of shoot boxing and grapple boxing equipment to take your workouts to a new level! Stay tuned! 😜😜

The legend of Alabama Joe - part 2: Now don’t get me wrong - it was not pretty. Joe was not going to win any style points from the IBJJF for his performance. His tackle looked like zombie attack from the dawn of the dead, his guard pass to mount looked like a crippled dog pissing on a tree and his punches were about as explosive as a sackful of wet mice - the sleeper hold he employed was about the same level as Rick Flair - BUT IT WORKED!! Three more times in those four nights Alabama Joe stepped up to the plate and fought people that I would have bet would defeat him - and each time he won a messy, ugly, but complete and well deserved victory! It was fascinating to me that this man could more than hold his own with untrained adversaries JUST BY KNOWING WHAT GENERAL DIRECTION HE SHOULD BE GOING IN A FIGHT. Technique? As primitive and unrefined as could be. Outcome? Total victory four out of four times! Now don’t get me wrong - if Joe had fought anyone with skills he would have come up short. But in mid 1990’s NYC no one even knew what Jiu Jitsu WAS - forget about how to defend it. Just by watching Early MMA and Jiu Jitsu he carved out a remarkable run of success in that context. Now, understand that Joe did have some advantages - he had been in a lot fights and so did not freeze or get adrenaline dumps etc and you could argue that his job - bouncing WAS his training. Still, it is clear that just some basic knowledge without any refined skills made a DEFINITE DIFFERENCE in his performance. I always wonder what became of that crazy cat but never forgot that lesson that in a world of ignorance a little sound knowledge can be a game changer - even without a training program

The legend of Alabama Joe - part 1: Would it be possible to become a better fighter just by knowing the theory of what you ought to do in a fight without ever actually practicing? That’s a question I have always found interesting. I got an answer years ago while working as a bouncer during my early years in NYC. Working around the city in was often teamed with interesting characters with many different approaches, theories and styles of combat. Some of them (especially wrestlers, BJJ and Judo players and boxers) were very effective - others not so much. At one time I was briefly paired with a fellow who we called “Alabama Joe” He was man of average build, not in particularly good shape whose main joys were drinking, smoking cigarettes and fighting. We worked a door together for just four nights in the lower east side mid 1990’s but I never forgot the experience for a good reason. As we worked, Joe talked incessantly about his prowess in brawling and how he would whip any man who was foolish enough to step up to the plate with him. I was rather skeptical as I’ve always believed fighting prowess to be mostly determined by ones training regimen and Joe’s training regimen appeared to be based around nothing more than Bourbon and Marlboro’s. He proudly told me he had never trained a day in his life but that he was a huge fan of the early UFC’s which he would watch incessantly. I was intrigued by this as I had begun training with Renzo Gracie And was similarly fascinated. He told me that when he fought he just did what he saw Royce do - run forwards and tackle people, climb up to mount, hit them and wait for them to turn and then strangle them. Later that night we threw some fellows out of the bar after a dispute and outside one of them was unimpressed by the appearance of Alabama Joe and demanded a fight. This fellow was a powerful looking man and I had to do some work to get him outside with a body lock and some light wrestling - I was not at all confident that Joe would be able to handle him. They immediately went to fisticuffs and true to his word, Joe tackled him, got mounted and punched him enough to make him turn and strangled him out!

KNOW MORE - WIN MORE: The first step in performance improvement in Jiu Jitsu is KNOWLEDGE. someone who KNOWS THE CORRECT THING TO DO will always have a chance of success, where as someone who simply does not not know the correct thing to do has no chance. Then the question will always become - if they know the correct thing to do, are they actually CAPABLE of doing it. You must begin with knowledge and then build that knowledge into a skill. Without the prerequisite knowledge, the skill is very difficult to build. My job as a coach is to supply the knowledge and then construct a training program to build the skills into the student. I have made my career as a coach on the notion that knowledge and skill will generally prevail over toughness, spirit and will. In the last year I have been able to massively increase my reach to people outside the gym in which I teach through video instruction. My aim in partnering with @bjj.fanatics is to get out to the world the same knowledge i offer to my students in the classroom and then they can in their own time and through their own daily training convert that knowledge into skill - skill that help take them towards their goals and dreams in the sport. In a world of tough competition where a great number strive for only a tiny number of prizes I count on KNOWLEDGE as the single most important resource you can have - more important than all the things we ordinarily stake our success on - toughness, courage, tenacity, etc. My goal is make people see that every battle on the mats and indeed every battle in life is a war of knowledge where WHO KNOWS MORE WINS MORE. Once knowledge is infused then you must go in to convert that knowledge into a SKILL by hard physical training over time but it all begins with knowledge. There is a sense in which our videos create a partnership. We offer the initial knowledge and you train to convert that into skills. There are not many things in life of which I am certain - but one of them is this - in all combat, KNOW MORE - WIN MORE.

Mixing Martial Arts - Personal Growth and Evolution: I am extremely proud and happy to see the recognition of one of my favorite martial arts comrades today. I want to talk about it a little because i think there are lessons in there for all of us. Gene Dunn, US National Karate champion and Renzo Gracie black belt was inducted into The US Karate Federation Hall of Fame for his outstanding career in the 80’s and 90’s where he was a feared champion. As a champion in his sport he could have stayed there and had a very successful career on that alone - but when the MMA revolution began in 1992 he came out of his comfort zone and at a relatively late age started BJJ as a white belt at the same time I started. We went from white belt to black belt together. As we progressed and senior students left to open their own schools, I became the night time time enforcer and Mr Dunn was the day time enforcer at a time when you had to prove to a skeptical martial arts world that Jiu Jitsu really worked. Mr Dunn’s introduction to martial arts came from need - he grew up in the mean streets of 1970-80’s NYC - a very different place from today. To put things in perspective, 1990-1 when I arrived NYC had 2245 murders, last year less than 250. Mr Dunn saw martial arts as a route to survival in a very tough city. His training and demeanor reflected that. Now Mr Dunn is a teacher. He runs a very successful set of schools in Brooklyn NY teaching Jiu Jitsu and Karate together. Interestingly he has continued his evolution as a teacher. As an athlete it was always about being the toughest fellow in the room - but as a teacher he saw that he need to appeal to the people who NEED MARTIAL ARTS THE MOST - the weaker, smaller, less confident - and building them into a new, more powerful future where they can take the knowledge of his lifetime in martial arts and become better, more confident and skilled people both in the dojo and everyday life. Congratulations Gene Dunn @gene_dunn_ @brooklynbjj You joined different martial arts, unified them, excelled at them and now pass them on to others. Great to see you get recognized for all you have done for US Karate, for RGA and your many students

Georges St- Pierre showing the colors of his team mate @garrytonon in Singapore at @evolvemma gym where he is teaching a huge seminar this week 😊😊 Mr Tonon fights for @onechampionship owned by @yodchatri Great to see the GOAT showing everyone his way to the top and helping his buddy on his own path! Mr Tonon will soon be heading to Japan for his fourth MMA fight - remarkable given that he only began serious MMA training less than a year and half ago!

Division and Unity: A big part of the arm bar (juji gatame) system that I teach is the DIVISION PRINCIPLE. This is the idea that you have both of your legs involved in any juji gatame attack and EACH HAS A SEPARATE FUNCTION. Knowing what the function of each leg is at every step of the arm bar is a big part of success. As you go to complete the final phases of the arm bar, your legs must become much more unified. Here you can see me approaching the last steps and my two lower legs are lined up together. Once I clamp the right leg down the unity will result in a very tight clamp around my opponent’s head and shoulders that will make extraction and defense surprisingly difficult. When performing your arm bar practice, always look for this unity of direction in your lower legs. Should the lower legs be pointing in opposing directions at this point there will be a noticeable drop in pressure around your opponent’s head and shoulders. You will need to divide the function of your legs to ENTER arm bars, but to FINISH them you need this readily observable unity.

Approach on your own terms: Very often in the sport of Jiu Jitsu and indeed, any grappling sport, where you will break contact with your opponent and then have to re-engage. Every time this happens you will have to approach your opponent. When you do this - MAKE A HABIT OF DOING SO ON YOUR TERMS. What does this mean? Whenever you step forward to engage - both of you will have your respective aims - usually they will be directly opposed to each other. Both of you will be seeking some form advantage, which in this type of situation is usually an interesting amalgam of DISTANCE, ANGLE, LEVEL and GRIP. Have a sense l of what you want BEFORE you engage and you are much more likely to get off to a good start. Make sure also that you work to NEGATE what your opponent wants. Here, Georges St-Pierre approaches Frank Rosenthal and immediately takes control of the grips to prevent any kind of effective attack from the bottom player and setting up a safe entry into guard passing work. The game is hard enough already - don’t make it harder by fighting on your opponents terms. Understand what you want upon approach and start working early to get it.

Redlining: A common phrase that most people understand is that of redlining. It refers to a situation where you push an engine above its rated rpm (usually indicates by a red line on the tachometer). If you stay above the redline for any length of time, it is almost inevitable that the engine will be blown out. Just as we studiously avoid redlining whilst driving, so too we must avoid it in Jiu Jitsu. Much of what we call fatigue to failure on the mats is caused by unconscious redlining where an athlete takes his muscular exertion beyond what his breathing patterns can sustain. Interestingly, this is very often not so much a result of what the opponent is doing, but rather, is A SELF INFLICTED HARM CAUSED BY A FAILURE ON OUR PART TO MATCH OUR BREATHING PATTERN TO THE ACTION. In beginner classes this is usually the result of unconsciously holding the breath while attempting to finish a move. Nowhere is this more common than when attempting a strangle. Usually by the time you get to apply a strangle you have done a lot of prior work and so begin in a state of fatigue. Then when you clamp down to finish we hold our breath to maximize squeezing power - this must be avoided. YOU MUST TRAIN YOURSELF TO DEVELOP MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS ON THE LOCK RATHER THAN MUSCULAR TIGHTNESS. Above all, keep your energy expenditure within sustainable limits - strangles take time so budget your rate of energy expenditure accordingly - and KEEP BREATHING! Your opponent should be the one unable to breath - NOT YOU! Here Nicky Ryan shows perfect strangle composure - there is tightness and tension, but it is intended to lock him into POSITION rather than provide the horsepower behind the strangle, and of course, he maintains his own breathing as his opponent loses his ability to do the same (though of course this is ultimately an attack upon blood flow rather than airway). Train your STRANGLE COMPOSURE as you would any other skill in the sport - it is a big part of the path to submission mastery.

It had to happen...due to underwhelming demand, BJJ Fanatics has done the unthinkable and brought out an 80’s Danaher T Shirt featuring the infamous ultra tight V neck sweater and Flock of Seagulls haircut 😂😂 Check out the link in my bio for the “I’m from the 80’s” T Shirt 😂😜😂

Memento mori: I am a big believer in the power of metaphor to teach and remind us of important ideas. Often I surround myself with images, artifacts, art works etc that provide daily reminders of important themes in our lives. One of my favorite is the juxtaposition between our active, striving will - placed in a competitive world where strategy, tactics, planning and knowledge are our keys to success; versus our innate weakness and mortality. The tension between our high ambitions and our mortality fascinates me. I symbolize this with the image of the chess board - the quintessential example of our striving, strategic mind in competition, and the skull, the best memento mori - reminder of mortality. In my living room it is a daily reminder that for all our planning, desiring and striving - we are weak and finite - so don’t take it all too seriously and remain humble in a world where the best laid plans of mice and men often crumble and fall.

Negate first - attack second: A big part of my coaching philosophy whenever you are in neutral positions (neither athlete has a distinct advantage over the other in terms of basic position), is to BEGIN BY SHUTTING DOWN YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO ATTACK YOU, and only then, ASSERTING YOUR OWN ATTACKS. Nothing is more hazardous than trying to attack someone while they are simultaneously trying to attack you. The match quickly becomes like a Wild West shootout where the first cowboy to land a shot wins. Instead, position yourself in ways that subvert your opponent’s offense and when things have calmed down a little and under greater control, then switch focus to attacks. Now the attack can be performed in a more relaxed fashion as you are no longer fighting for survival as you are trying to mount your offense. Here I am negating much of my partners guard offense by leg positioning - this will make the subsequent passes and submissions much easier to apply. When you are in these common neutral positions, ask your self what your opponent needs to attack you, and begin by DENYING HIM THOSE THINGS. Only when you feel you have done an adequate job of this and you are under less pressure should you now apply your own offense

ENTER THE SYSTEM is complete: Just finished a final last minute filming session for the final installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video series - ARM LOCKS (juji gatame) These videos have a vast amount of material in them - I was curious to see if i could improve this latest one by adding a special feature at the start of the video where I taught an outline of the system so that viewers can get the big picture at the outset and then get all the crucial details in the heart of the video. We filmed it today at it came out really well! Now it’s time to head back to NYC - there’s a big snow storm coming so this should be interesting! 😜 Wishing you all the best and can’t wait for this last ENTER THE SYSTEM video to get edited and released in a week or two!

Coming to America part 2: Just when you thought it was safe to come back to Instagram...the return of 80’s Danaher and the V neck sweater...This photo is from my last day in Auckland New Zealand, at the airport waiting for my plane to the land of my birth, The United States. Here I am with my old side kick, Kemp - himself a formidable martial artist from the same era as myself- the era of standing striking as the paradigm of all martial arts (to this day, Kemp had one of the best sidekicks I ever saw in my life - full splits and perfect kick control even in near vertical axis at 225 pounds!). Just a few months after this photo was taken my whole conception of martial arts would be turned upside down and my American Journey would begin. Soon after my arrival in New York I began working as a nightclub bouncer and began working with wrestlers and Judoka, two arts I had ignored (such was my naivety I did not even consider wrestling to be a martial art at this time). Hard experience quickly revealed the errors in my thinking and I began the study of grappling. Ultimately a series of fortuitous events took me in the direction of Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and Renzo Gracie. In time, even my earlier conception of standing striking tactics and techniques would be completely overturned with the arrival of the Young Georges St-Pierre and his approach to standing striking integrated with takedowns - what he called “Shoot Boxing.” If I had known that day at the airport how much I would change and in what directions that change would take me and what I would go through to make those changes - perhaps I would have turned around and gotten off the plane! Nothing is more rewarding and uplifting than the feeling of positive change in your life - even when it overturns long accepted beliefs and dogmas. I am infinitely grateful to all the people who helped me on that journey and hope that I can help other people on theirs (only in martial arts, not fashion 😂😂)

Submissions - It’s an all or nothing game: There is a temporal order to Jiu Jitsu that is emphasized from your first day in the sport - first get your opponent to the floor, then get past his legs, then work your way through the various pins, and finally submit your opponent. Before you even get to attempt a submission, quite a lot of work has to be done. There is nothing more frustrating then, than doing all that work and getting halfway through your match winning submission hold and then having your opponent slip out just before you could close the deal. Failed submission holds are like missed punches - they had potential, but score nothing and if thrown too often can exhaust you. It is critical therefore that your study of all your favorite submissions be in great depth to minimize the chance of losing them while in the act of applying them. Here, I am coaching the one of the last steps in the arm bar (juji gatame ) from bottom position. A LOT of arm bars are lost at this final stage. As always THOROUGH KNOWLEDGE OF THE ENTIRE PROCESS OF THE ARMBAR FROM SET UPS TO BREAKING MECHANICS IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS AND THE ANTIDOTE TO FRUSTRATION AND DISAPPOINTMENT. Submissions are a chain of moves in a sequence - and as the old saying goes, a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. If you are losing more submissions than you like - IDENTIFY THE MAIN AREAS OF WEAKNESS IN YOUR CHAIN AND TRY TO BRING THOSE UP TO THE STRENGTH OF THE OTHER LINKS OF THE CHAIN.

Happy to announce a big super seminar in Singapore coming up in the future in conjunction with @evolvemma and @onechampionship Looking forward to teaching alongside Garry Tonon and Gordon and Nicky Ryan!

The mind leads the body: Whenever you are sparring your mind will have a given direction of focus. The most basic division is between SELF FOCUS and FOCUS UPON THE OPPONENT. Both are necessary for success but an important question is - what amount should I focus upon myself and what amount upon my opponent? I often see beginning students out A DISPROPORTIONATE AMOUNT OF FOCUS UPON WHAT THEY OUGHT TO BE DOING WITH THEIR OWN BODY AT ALL TIMES IN A MATCH. This is a perfectly natural mistake to make at the beginner level. The game is complicated and there are many ways to lose. You are juggling a lot of new information in a very stressful environment, so it’s natural to over focus upon how you should holding your own body so as not to be an easy victim, rather than focus upon the weaknesses and opportunities your opponent is offering. The opposite mistake is to be overly confident and focus too much on looking only for your opponents vulnerabilities WHILE BEING BLIND TO YOUR OWN. This can definitely get you in trouble also. Your path to mastery in Jiu Jitsu is largely bound up with finding a workable compromise between these two extremes. If you feel you suffer from an over emphasis in one direction, command yourself to mentally focus on the other at the start of each sparring round one day. You will immediately notice that THE CHANGE IN MINDSET WILL YIELD PHYSICAL RESULTS. You may not submit everyone but you will try more attacks if you make yourself actively look for the second by second openings your opponent offers. Conversely, if you command yourself to focus on maintaining sound defensive posture at the start of each round, you will immediately present a more difficult target to your training partners. Here, Frank Rosenthal shows a fine perception of his opponent’s body position, made easier by his well balanced posture. This reflects his confident attacking spirit - the ideal of Jiu Jitsu that you must strive for. When you train - don’t just train your body - train your mind - for it has dominion over your body and it is the inner workings of your mind that will determines how well your body performs the physical skills you work so hard to perfect.

Getting ready: @garrytonon is preparing to go back to fight for the fourth time in @onechampionship in Tokyo Japan on March 31st. The transition from Jiu Jitsu to MMA is always a long and arduous one. It has been about a year since his first fight now and his progress has been astounding - but still a long way to go. Despite the new direction we never forget where we come from and Garry is proud to carry the Jiu Jitsu/submission grappling flag into the cage. A big part of what we are trying to do is show that the power of submission holds applies in all domains and that locks and strangles can play the same role as KO punches in a fight - as devastating and highly effective weapons that can thrill an audience and end a fight at any time. On the other hand, we are realists and only a fool would claim that grappling is all you need in MMA. Training in striking is essential also, even if it is not your main weapon. It’s a fascinating journey and nothing is more interesting and challenging to me as a coach than the complex interplay between striking and grappling. Another day on the mats and in the cage - lots more to go 😊😊

Filming in Boston: Today I finished up the final installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM video instructional series - The Arm Bar (juji gatame). Then we began filming more material for the next series FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER This represents a radical departure from the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. It is a gi series and our intention is to make a series showing a path to quicker progress through the use of a structure that builds a foundation of essential moves upon which the sport is based taught with a level of technical detail and conceptual insight that cuts down on the time spent to get to a strong level of performance. As such, the content is much more classical positional work - the foundation of the sport. It is positional excellence that will create the opportunity for submission brilliance further down the road for developing athletes. I always loved teaching fundamentals more than any other aspect of Jiu Jitsu - that is where the heart and soul of the sport is, so I’m having a blast with this material! I hope you get similar enjoyment when you get to use it on all your teammates! 😜😜 Heading home now on the train from Boston - tired but happy. Big day of training back at RGA tomorrow and looking forward to it 😊 Wishing you all the best from somewhere between Boston and New York City!

Concentration of force: Among the most foundational axioms of all forms of combat is that of concentration of force. The idea is to take a large percentage of our strength and apply it against a low percentage of an adversary’s strength at a vulnerable and important point where, if the attack is successful, the opponent will not be able to continue the fight. Jiu Jitsu, like all intelligently crafted approaches to combat, is based around this principle, most obviously through the use of submission holds, which are a very clear example of concentration of force in practical application. One of our favorite examples will always be the triangle (sankaku) which pits the strength of both our legs and hips against an opponent’s single arm and neck. It works not just one vulnerable point, but two (strangles and locks to the entire arm). Within the triangle family one of our big favorites is the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) which creates an especially impressive demonstration of concentration of force as you can see in this picture of outstanding junior squad member Nick Ronan. Note the total isolation of head and arm and the power restraining forces of the legs and hips that immediately create both a strangle threat and arm lock threat. This is the ideal of Jiu Jitsu. Make the study of concentration of force your life’s work in Jiu Jitsu

A study in greatness: The most important people in our lives are those who give us an example of what is possible so that we can lift ourselves higher. They don’t give us THINGS, they give us IDEALS; and those ideals can move us from within to become better people. Georges St-Pierre was the single greatest example of a positive athletic role model I ever met in my career. Every dojo or training partner he walked into or befriended was lifted by his appearance. Starting off as an unknown youngster from Quebec, he fought his way to the top of the fight worlds toughest division and beat the best of three generations of welterweights and then came back from an initial retirement to win the title at middleweight. Along the way he exhibited the highest standards of character and professionalism in an often wild sport. He ushered in the modern era of professionalism in preparation for MMA athletes to replace the traditional martial arts methodologies used by previous generations of competitors. Nobody did more to elevate the standing of the sport in the public eye as it grew from its bloodsport beginnings into the most popular combat sport in the world. He was an innovator who staked his career on the paradigm shift from single style specialists to what he stood for - integrated skills where the primary emphasis was on the interface BETWEEN skill sets rather than over emphasis on any one skill set. This enabled him to outwrestle wrestlers, outstrike strikers and dominate Jiu Jitsu champions on the floor. He was not the best at any one of those skills - he was the best at integrating them with a speed and direction that no one could keep up with. He defeated all his opponents, dominated every re-match he ever took and shut down the toughest opponents to a degree what was utterly astounding. It was the greatest privilege of my coaching career to be a small part of this great mans ascent to the top of martial arts. Through all the time i knew him and i have no doubt all the way into the future - He was a martial artist first and an MMA athlete second. This made him a perpetual student, a generous teacher and a truly noble fighter. Thank you, Georges, from all of us

With a well applied joint lock there is no such thing as failure: The very nature of joint locks is all or nothing - they either get the submission or they don’t - sometimes the dividing line is very narrow indeed. It is important that you don’t let this fact permeate into your thinking in a way that becomes destructive to your performance. While it’s true that the obvious outcome of a joint lock is black or white - submission or not; there are other important benefits that come from a well applied joint lock that occur even when you don’t get the submission. First, Sometimes your opponent simply refuses to tap. In these cases, continue the break and now his performance will begin to drop as the injury takes effect, leading to other routes to victory. Second, a threatening lock will elicit strong defensive reactions that enable you to go forward in other ways - towards a reversal, a new position, another submission hold etc. so that even failed joint locks can have excellent consequences if sufficiently threatening. Third, your opponent will now be much more respectful of your skills once he has felt serious danger and hence much easier to manage as the match progresses. These and other benefits of such joint lock attacks that don’t actually get a submission raise an important point - EVEN WHEN A POWERFUL JOINT LOCK ATTACK FAILS, THERE WILL BE TANGIBLE BENEFITS FOR YOU TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF. Don’t get dispirited if you don’t get the tap - instead, TRAIN YOURSELF TO LOOK FOR THE POSITIVE OPPORTUNITIES THAT ALMOST ALWAYS ARISE FROM THOSE ATTACKS AND SCORE WITH THEM. Here, Gordon Ryan comes close with a powerful heel hook attempt in a very close match - the lock ultimately failed insofar as it did not get the submission, but it forced a strong defensive reaction that under the rules of that particular match, scored the match winning points. Don’t concern yourself with the outcome of your joint locks - that’s up to your opponent - concern yourself with generating maximum breaking power and then a good follow up that takes you forward should it not end the match.

Strangles and self doubt: A very common phenomenon that I see both in sparring and competition is for an athlete to get into a good strangulation position, apply the strangle and then as it is starting to take effect, lapse into self doubt and unnecessarily release the strangle to adjust position, only to give the opponent a second chance at defense and have him escape. Remember, strangles take a little time and require constant application of force to be effective. Squeezing and releasing won’t get the desired effect - only squeezing and holding will get the job done once the strangle is properly set. Now, if you have set the strangle poorly, no amount of squeezing will be effective, indeed, a common problem is that of beginners setting a strangle badly and then squeezing for all they are worth And exhausting themselves. However, don’t let fear of this make you fall victim to the opposite error - THROWING AWAY A GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR A STRANGLE BECAUSE YOU DID NOT HOLD RESOLUTELY FOR THE TIME REQUIRED. You must train the sensitivity required to know when the strangle will interfere with blood flow sufficiently and the confidence to hold pressure long enough to get the win. Here Nicky Ryan works a variation of the rear naked strangle where he compressed the jaw back into the carotid arteries (mandible strangle). This requires even more sensitivity and confidence as it usually takes longer to get the strangle effect due to interference of the jaw bone. So practice the feeling of a well set strangle to the point where EVEN WITH EYES CLOSED YOU KNOW WHEN ITS ON AND WHEN ITS NOT, and once it’s on, go forward with confidence to your victory

Many will look - few will see: A sizable portion of any grappling match just looks like a profitless tangle of limbs leading to nothing but confusion. I’m sure you’ve all had the experience of trying to explain the appeal of grappling to non grappler friends. When they watch a match it just looks to two people aimlessly rolling about on the floor. Your job as an athlete and mine as a coach is never to WATCH the action, but always to INTERPRET it. You must train yourself TO SEE OPPORTUNITY AND DANGER EARLIER THAN OTHERS DO - for this is the surest way to success in the sport. You can train this skill daily by watching two other athletes spar and trying to ask yourself what you would be doing in their respective situations. This trains your mind to ACTIVELY INTERPRET events rather than what most people do - which is passively watch for the outcome. The idea is not to FOLLOW the outcome - but to CHANGE the outcome; and the best way to train this is active interpreting observation - a skill you can train every day - even when you are not training yourself.

If you can see daylight...
A basic demand in almost all grappling moves - particularly submission holds - is the demand for tightness of fit between you and your opponent - often called “connection.” The tighter the connection the less likely an opponent will be able to slip out of whatever you are trying to control him with. Now whenever you go to perform a given move, OVERALL connection is important, but LOCAL connection at certain key points is ABSOLUTELY CRUCIAL. When you study your favorite moves you must make a point of understanding where the most important POINTS OF CONNECTION are for that move and strongly emphasize them in your training and drilling. So for example, here I am demonstrating the early phases of an outside heel hook. I emphasize the right connection of my opponents shoe laces to my ribs through good elbow position. This will make heel slippage, a common problem associated with heel hooks much less likely and also make the transfer of the power of my hips into breaking power upon my opponent’s knee and ankle much more efficient. If you can see daylight around the opponent’s foot - the lock will never operate at high efficiency. Make these crucial local areas of connection your study, not just overall connection, and you will soon notice a difference in your finishing ability.

Coming to America: Though I was born in the United States, I was raised the first twenty three years of my life in New Zealand, the land of my parents. While studying Philosophy at the University of Auckland I successfully applied for the PhD program at Columbia University in NYC. Here I am at University of Auckland on my last day in New Zealand age twenty three rocking my best 80’s haircut and baggy pants 😂😂 My first exposure to Martial arts was watching the great boxers of the 1970’s and 80’s. I was obsessed with the conflicting styles of Ali and Frazier. Later, with the four kings, Sugar Ray Leonard, Thomas Hearns, Marvin Haggler and Roberto Duran (also honorable mention to Wilfredo Benitez and Mike McCallum). In college my attention went almost entirely to Mike Tyson. Among kick boxers, Dieselnoi and Samart Payakaroon were my main heroes. The study of these great fighters was my first passion in martial arts. In this time period, grappling was not really taken seriously as a fighting method. I had no idea that day in 1991 as I boarded the plane to the land of my birth that my whole conception of martial arts would soon turn upside down and that an entire new world lay undiscovered before me. To this day I still love to watch those old heroes of mine, but it is done in an entirely different context, with different eyes and for different purposes. Sometimes I wonder if I could travel back in time and talk to this twenty three year old me and tell him what I now believe about martial arts at fifty two, the younger man would think the older man was crazy or even foolish! New environments and perspectives are the greatest catalysts to growth - I am blessed to have lived a life in two nations and lived through different eras of martial arts. Unifying the lessons learned is a big part of my coaching work.

If your submission game is strong, it does not matter how far behind on points you are, how tired, beat up and demoralized you are - as long as you have a heartbeat and time left on the clock - you can win. For a grappler, submissions play the same role that a knock out punch does for a boxer - they make you dangerous at all times in a match no matter what the circumstances. Photo @jeffreyschu

Becoming dangerous from bottom position: In Jiu Jitsu Your first responsibility in bottom position is to get and then maintain your legs (guard) between you and your opponent. This can be a difficult and attention consuming task against a good opponent; so much so that there is a danger that you will overlook your second responsibility from bottom position - TO AGGRESSIVELY ATTACK FROM UNDERNEATH WITH BOTH POSITIONAL MOVES AND SUBMISSIONS SO AS TO CREATE AN ATMOSPHERE OF INTIMIDATION AND FEAR/RESPECT THAT WILL MAKE YOUR OPPONENT MUCH MORE TIMID IN HIS TOP PRESSURE. How do you make sure you don’t overlook that critical second responsibility? I always encourage my athletes to finish every act of guard retention with an attack. Initially these might have a low success rate, but as you gain in skill and daring this creates a habit whereby you don’t get locked into a defensive mindset where you just focus on holding guard, but instead always finish in an offensive mode. Learn to throw your legs into the attack with confidence and vigor. Ashi garami based leg attacks, triangles and arm bars are my favorites from bottom. All three involve aggressive leg work where you can shoot your legs into the attack as a boxer throws his hands in fisticuffs. Here, Stanley Rosa goes from defense to offense in a second during a guard exchange at the ADCC trials in California - now his opponent, who was offensive just a few seconds before this photo was taken, is one hundred percent defensive. Next time he engages the guard he will be much more reticent about applying passing pressure.

Gordon Ryan guard passing video release today!! BJJ Fanatics will release the the best No Gi guard passing instructional ever made today. Gordon Ryan has meticulously put together our approach to No Gi guard passing featuring all of his own innovative additions and special tweaks that he has used to dominate his opponents guards at the highest levels of competition. Passing guard in the blue basement, where everyone is a dangerous leg locker, requires that in addition to being able to pass, you must also be able to shut down leg attacks at the same time. Also, much of our grappling training is grappling for MMA, where there is a constant danger of opponents standing up on you as you attempt to pass, so a big part of our focus is on guard passing methods that ensure an opponent is kept down as we go to work. Also, we began our journey in submission only tournaments where guard passing scores nothing - so we had to create many submission attacks as we passed and play a dilemma game based around the dual threat of passes and submission. Mr Ryan’s video reflects these four demands. He has created a passing method that
1 - Will get you passing the guards of all your peers in record time
2 - will shut down leg lock dangers as you do it
3 - will make it exceedingly difficult for opponents to stand up as you do it
4 - will make you a dangerous passer who can simultaneously create submission threats as you pass.
Check out this game changing instructional video to see how the best gets it done - soon you will too! 😜😜 Link to BBJ Fanatics website in my Instagram story

As thrilling as the big stage is - in truth it is not there that the outcome of a bout is determined. It is in the lonely training halls, where no one watches and no one applauds. In dank gyms where you must perform without recognition or praise and the only audience is your own mind. On the worn and dusty mats, ring or cage where you spar with training partners the world will never know, in sessions as tough as any bout, that the world will never see. That is where your craft is mastered and the outer form that you reveal onstage is molded. Here’s to those unknown and thankless hours, days, months and years of lonely hardship. What you do onstage belongs to the world; but those countless hours of unwitnessed and unappreciated preparation are yours and yours alone. They, not the stage, represent your true character.

Heading to the Bronx to teach: Every Monday night for years now, I head up to the Bronx to teach at the school of my outstanding student Doug Pelinkovic at @bxmartialarts This weekend one of the Bronx students, Stanley Rosa, shocked everybody (except us 😉) by making a devastating run to the finals featuring his characteristic panther like movement and crushing submissions to take silver medal and show what a force he is. I love seeing this happen. He is raised at a local school and does 95% of his training with his classmates at that local school, but with passion and industry and knowledge he showed he can take on the best and prevail in style. There is both inspiration and a lesson in that for all of us. Can’t wait to get to the Bronx and catch up with the whole crew and swap stories!

I’m very excited to see that one of my favorite people in grappling, the great Keenan Cornelius, is releasing a big video production of his masterful lapel guard work. I believe Mr Cornelius is one of the most innovative and forward thinking athletes in Gi BJJ today. His innovative lapel guard has been tying up and controlling the toughest opponents at the highest levels in a way that is extraordinarily impressive. I got a chance to chat with him again at the ADCC trials and it sounds like a fantastic project! Check out the link to his video work in my Instagram story 😊

Beautiful day in LA: After the excitement of yesterday’s ADCC west coast trials today I taught a big seminar at my good friend and RGA comrade Shawn Williams school @5starmartialarts I went over the relationship between arm bar (juji gatame) system and leg system. It was a pleasure seeing people from all over LA come in and develop their skills together. I got to see my Armenian friends Sevak Magakian and Karen Darabedyan who competed against us with skill and distinction in the past. They came with their legendary sensei Gokor Chivichyan and dis very well with the drills. Now I’m at LAX waiting for my plane for the lonely red eye flight home to NYC. Arriving at 5:30am - straight to RGA to teach the morning class then teach all day and then the night class in the Bronx. Looking forward to seeing my students again but always miss LA when I leave. Wishing you all the best! Photo @Jeffreyschu

Leading by example: Yesterday was an incredible day of success for the squad juniors at ADCC West Coast trials with two golds and a silver medal along with other outstanding performances from other athletes that did not medal but show great potential for the future. I wanted to say a big thank you to squad seniors @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @garrytonon who assisted me through twelve hours of coaching. Mr Ryan is wearing a knee brace and stoically limped from mat to mat to help coach. Mr Tonon is in fight camp for his next MMA bout but set time aside to come out and help. Both coached brilliantly and helped take the squad through to one of its best showings. Both came out on their own time and expense to help the team. Nothing inspires like example and these two go out of their way to help build a team culture that builds a roomful of talent rather than an individual. I am blessed to have students like this. Some you know, many you don’t; but to paraphrase an old saying - IT TAKES A ROOM TO BUILD A CHAMPION. Thank you to my whole room and thank you Garry and Gordon.

Incredible showing at ADCC West Coast North American trials: The squad juniors came out in force today in what was quite possibly the largest North American ADCC trials ever today in Los Angeles, California. Nicky Ryan won gold in the lightest weight category with a stellar performance WINNING EVERY MATCH BY SUBMISSION (heel hooks and back strangles). Nick Rodriguez won gold in the heaviest weight division - incredible given that he is only a blue belt and used an extremely impressive array of positional and submission moves to take gold. Stanley Rosa has his best ever performance, representing Bronx Martial Arts Academy where I teach every Monday night with my senior student Doug Pelinkovic. He moved like a panther all day to take the silver medal with many crowd pleasing displays of technique along the way. It was wonderful to see the youngsters take center stage and show how it’s done - 90% Submission rate overall and not a single stalling call on the squad 😜😜 As always I am so proud of their achievements - hope you all enjoyed the show!! Tomorrow it’s MMA training for Garry Tonon and then seminar at @5starmartialarts at 11am - then back to NYC for Monday classes. Wishing you all the best from LA!! Thank to all my incredible students and thank you to all of you who follow our progress 😊😊

Heading to LA: Big weekend in California with the North American West Coast ADCC trials. Heading out to help coach and then a seminar Sunday morning at @5starmartialarts then a quick turnaround back to NYC to help Garry Tonon get ready for his next MMA fight. I don’t know if running around after these kids keeps me young or makes me old! 😂😂😂 As long as everyone is having fun and getting closer to their dreams and goals it’s all worth it! 😜😜

Back system - the battle for head position: Jiu Jitsu is a subtle art. Very often there appears to be a certain battle going on between two athletes, yet the thing that actually determines the outcome of that battle is something completely different from what most onlookers think. In the case of strangles without the gi (naked strangles - but that sounds a little strange 😳😂), particularly on the side opposite the strangle arm (what most people consider the “weak side”) there is a battle for head position that is probably the single biggest determinant of success or failure. Look at how Outstanding junior squad athlete Frank Rosenthal keeps his head between his opponent’s (10th Planet stand out Marvin Castelle) head and the floor. Failure to maintain this head position will almost always result in failure of the strangle. JIU JITSU IS A GAME OF PREREQUISITES - WITHOUT THE NECESSARY PREREQUISITES NONE OF THE MOVES WILL WORK AGAINST RESISTANCE. Your job as a developing athlete is to learn exactly what the main prerequisites to your favorite moves and develop the skills to satisfy those prerequisites every time to the point where don’t even think of the move you want until those prerequisites have been satisfied. Understand that often those prerequisites are not obviously related to the skill they set up - you must think deeply about WHAT REALLY MAKES THE MOVES WORK. When you do this, soon you will be applying perfect strangles like this one!

Thumbs up if you like strangling people with your legs! MMA star Sage Northcutt enters the system at a seminar I held in Singapore with @evolvemma The rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) is the second most important triangle in my sankaku system (front triangle is number one) and a fantastic way to utilize the impressive strangling power of the legs to finish highly resistant opponents. Unlike strangles with the arms, there is no need to penetrate under the jaw (a constant source of frustration for many athletes attacking the back) and in addition, a great set of alternative finishes if the strangle should prove ineffective. There is no clearer example of using your legs to overwhelm and control a portion of your opponents upper body - the ideal of all good Jiu Jitsu - that gets a thumbs up from all of us!

Seminar in LA with Shawn Williams: Very excited to be back in LA this weekend for the ADCC trials and a chance to see my old friend and comrade Shawn Williams at @5starmartialarts to teach a seminar at 11am Sunday February 10 It’s always a pleasure to show what we are working on and see if we can help improve your game. Check out @5starmartialarts if you are interested 😜😜

Professionalism and dealing with a crisis: There is always a chance in competition that something completely unexpected and detrimental can happen to you mid match - you must have a set of protocols in place to deal with it and have enough adaptability to get this protocols to work in every unique situation and a professional demeanor to apply them in a stressful environment. This weekend, Gordon Ryan had an epic match with João Gabriel Rocha. Near the end of the first period he went to elevate the big man just as Mr Rocha set his weight back and down. There was a sound like ripping canvas audible above the crowd and then time ran out. When Mr Ryan came back to the corner it was obvious from his gait that something was very wrong. When he came close he said matter of factly, “My left LCL is torn, feels like a serious tear. I have no stability in my left leg.” No emotion, no exaggeration. Whenever this kind of thing happens I always begin with one question - DO YOU BELIEVE YOU CAN WIN THIS MATCH? Rule number one of all combat sports is this - NEVER SEND AN ATHLETE INTO A MATCH IN WHICH YOU DO NOT BELIEVE HE HAS A SERIOUS CHANCE OF WINNING. If i don’t believe it myself during a match i will immediately throw in the towel. My approach is that you can always abandon this attempt and go back to the gym and improve and win in the future. Now often times an athlete will SAY yes, when they don’t really believe it to be the case. I always look at their body language when they answer and make my assessment. Mr Ryan looked me square in the eyes and said calmly - yes. Next step is is to use the remaining forty five seconds to reconfigure the game plan. Obviously standing grappling was out. Mr Ryan would have to walk to center without limping (revealing a problem) and sit to guard. His body was running hot so we figured he had another couple of minutes before his movement would be totally compromised. That meant in this rule set he had around two minutes to launch a serious submission attack to either win or score and then hold on with one leg, favoring guard retention via turtle rather than leg pommelling. Mr Ryan got up and did exactly that - professionalism in a crisis

Front triangles - Getting to an angle and breaking posture: The front triangle will always be the most important of the five main varieties of triangle in the sport of Jiu Jitsu due to the disproportionate amount of time spent on guard scenarios relative to other grappling arts. When using the front triangle from bottom position, the two biggest concerns are getting advantageous ANGLE and breaking your opponents POSTURE. The problem is that your opponent usually knows this and thus will do everything he can to prevent you doing this. It is very good therefore, to have a sound mechanical means of getting angle and KEEPING ANGLE AGAINST RESISTANCE. One of the very best methods is a scoop grip under your opponents leg to pull yourself around perpendicular to your opponent. Unfortunately this grip is not always possible due to an opponent’s positioning. An excellent substitute is to under the arm on the same side as your unsuccessful scoop grip attempt on the leg. This has the added benefit of keeping your opponents head broken down in poor posture. Here, Garry Tonon applies a particularly tight reinforced variation to lock in an extremely tight triangle finish on outstanding American grappler Javi Vazquez. Once a triangle is locked on in this fashion escape becomes extremely difficult. Once you lock your opponent head and arm inside your legs - remember - ANGLE AND NEGATION OF POSTURE ARE YOUR TWO MAIN CONCERNS. Focus on them and watch your finishing rate go up!

Heading back to NYC: Sad to leave Texas. It was a great weekend with @gordonlovesjiujitsu giving one of his gutsiest performances to take tight victory that was fought down to the last seconds while carrying an injury. Today Mr Ryan and I taught an awesome seminar at @gracieonejiujitsu I did the demonstrations while an incapacitated Mr Ryan went through a great question and answer session with the attendees where he showed the tremendous depth of his knowledge in Jiu Jitsu and training. It was a real pleasure connecting with the Dallas Jiu Jitsu people and showing our way of doing things. Can’t wait to come back to the Lone Star State. Congratulations to Mr Ryan and his great opponent João Gabriel Rocha for one of the best matches of the year. Congratulations also to @kasaigrappling for putting on another awesome show - these guys are taking grappling in all the right directions. And thank you to the fans in Texas and our gracious hosts here in Dallas who made it such a pleasure to come here and show some squad style Jiu Jitsu 😜😜 Now I’m waiting at Dallas/Fort Worth for my flight back to NYC tomorrow I return to the basement - lots more goals to reach for all of us - let’s get to work! 😊😊

Hard fought victory in Dallas, Texas! Gordon fought off injury and a very tough rival to take a closely contested victory here in Dallas tonight. João Gabriel Rocha is one of the toughest athletes in Jiu Jitsu today with wins over Felipe Pena, Rudolfo Viera and Erbeth Santos among many others. He has won two ADCC silver medals and had a nearly forty pound weight advantage - this was always going to be a tough match. In the first ten minute period, Mr Rocha performed a well executed uchi mata throw that took both athletes completely off the stage. Then Gordon Ryan came back with two beautiful guard seeps to take top position. Unfortunately he then badly tore his LCL in his knee. It was immediately apparent his movement had become compromised. When he came back to the corner to begin the second time period featuring points we noted that it would be prudent to go to bottom position and attack the legs. Mr Ryan did exactly that - scoring the best submission attempt of the fight with a fine outside heel hook that forced a strong defensive reaction from and Rocha and secured points. Now it was question of whether he would be able to hold on to the lead with an injured leg in the two minutes remaining. Mr Rocha did a great job of pressure passing as the seconds passed and tested Mr Ryan’s Guard retention to the limits. Time ended with Mr Ryan still ahead and another tough win in the books! We will have to see the extent of the injury now. Here we back stage with proud Dad, Gordon Ryan Sr and Rich Byrne, the CEO of @kasaigrappling who, along with Rolles Gracie, is doing such an amazing job of promoting grappling nationwide through their organization. Hope you all enjoyed the show!! I am sure these two great athletes will meet again with both looking for a decisive finish to resolve the tightness of this great match tonight

Weigh in complete: Gordon Ryan and João Gabriel Rocha weighed in for their big match tomorrow night. Mr Rocha came in at 263 pounds and Mr Ryan at 226 - his heaviest ever weight, but still nearly forty pounds less than his rival. Mr Rocha is one of the most impressive heavyweights in the world, with two ADCC silver medals, one in his weight class and one in in open weight. He has defeated BJJ legends such as Keenan Cornelius, Nicholas Meregali, Bruno Bastos, Joao Assis, Rafael Lavato, Erbeth Santos and Yuri Simoes. He is the great rival of Buchecha, the man most people believe is the current worlds best, and always has epic battles with him. Should be a fascinating clash of styles made all the more interesting by the size difference. It will be an honor to have a student go up against such a great opponent! Off to the gym now for light workout and then it’s all on tomorrow night! Wishing you all the best from Dallas, Texas!!

Going to the official weigh ins for Kasai Grappling - Gordon Ryan drives like he does Jiu Jitsu 😂😂😰😰😳😳 Wish me luck! 😩😩 Dodge Durango STS 5.7 L Naturally aspirated V - 8 engine 470 Horsepower!! American V8’s 4Eva!! Nothing beats the sound of old school American engines on the loose 😜😜 Looking forward to seeing everyone at the weigh ins!

Heading to Texas with the @kasaigrappling crew for the big show in Dallas Texas this weekend! It’s going to be a great event! On Sunday @gordonlovesjiujitsu and I will teach a seminar @gracieonejiujitsu - it will be a fun weekend! Now it’s off into the big blue sky! See you in Texas 😂

Movement and extension: The two fundamental prerequisites of submission holds are to generate MOVEMENT and EXTENSION in your opponent. Stationary and tightly contracted (limbs pulled in tight) opponents are very difficult to submit. Given that relentlessly seeking submission is the basis of my approach to Jiu Jitsu, big part of what I coach is the ability generate movement and extension and then feed off the opportunities generated by this. This photo shows an interesting situation. Garry Tonon, a master of using his own movement to create movement and extension in an opponent, has used elevation from bottom position as the means of creating movement and extension in his opponent, Kim Terra. Mr Terra is a highly skilled athlete and immediately recognizes the danger of extension and skillfully keeps his legs in a contracted state despite the powerful elevation - mindful of the leg lock danger from Mr Tonon. However, note always that if the movement is there, the opponent can never keep ALL his limbs contracted or he will fall over and lose position, so Mr Terra must keep his upper body extended even as he tries hard to defend his lower body. This choice makes perfect sense given the great proficiency that Mr Tonon has in leg locks - but it simply meant that now Mr Tonon knew he had to switch to upper body attacks. That is exactly what he did - soon after this photo he successfully applied a stranglehold for the win. You must be mindful of creating movement and extension in your opponents as the precursor to your final goal of submission. You must be able to get your opponent moving and extended with equal facility from both top and bottom position. Only then will the submission holds you train so hard to perfect be available for you to use as your opponent offers them.

Variations in intensity - the wisdom of the hunter: When it is time to attack an opponent with the submission holds you favor, make sure to VARY THE INTENSITY OF YOUR ATTACK PATTERNS. Sometimes it is good to attack with all you’ve got in combinations that put an opponent under severe pressure. Be aware however, that when you attack in this fashion, an opponent will immediately put up strong defensive shields and maintain them as long as he feels the danger. I often counsel students to relax their grips and attacks and make their opponents think the danger has passed. As soon as the defenses go down - new attacks break through much more easily. Consider predatory animals hunting prey - those species that inflict a poisonous bite, such as snakes, do not pursue their prey once the venom is injected. Pursuit will make the prey run as long as it can and create an exhausting chase. Instead, once the bite is made, it stops - the prey runs a short distance, seeing that it is not being pursued, sits down and rests - and dies in its place, allowing The predator to leisurely take its prey. So too with submission hunting in Jiu Jitsu. LEARN TO CREATE THE SENSE THAT YOU ARE NOT ACTIVELY PURSUING SUBMISSIONS - AND WATCH YOUR SUBMISSION RATE INCREASE AS YOUR OPPONENTS BECOME NEGLIGENT IN THEIR DEFENSE. Look at the relaxed, almost open grips of Nicky Ryan on the back as he creates a sense of safety that will open up another fast strangle when the opportunity arises.

You’ve got to start somewhere! I was going through some of my old relics from my early days in the USA and came across this gem. When I came to America in 1991 to enter the PhD program at Columbia I needed work to get some money together and worked as a bouncer for my first decade in New York. Early on in this adventure I became for a short time a body guard for a local money lender who went by the name “Fresh Money” - quite positively the greatest name of any person I ever worked for! He would hand out his card to all comers at local clubs as he networked. Being a man who carried cash for a living he was a target for attack and thus lived an interesting life to say the least. I always get a chuckle when I see his old business card and think back on the adventures I went through in those crazy early years 😜😂

The back system - Default principle: A central principle of attacking from the back is the default principle - WHEN BEHIND AN OPPONENT, YOU MUST CONSTANTLY THREATEN STRANGULATION SO THAT IF YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE HANDS AND CHIN SHOULD EVER FALTER OR FALL OUT OF POSITION - YOU WILL BY DEFAULT, TAKE THE STRANGLE IMMEDIATELY. Following this simple principle creates a lot of stress in your opponent. Often one can get so caught up in the constant hand fighting/arm trapping battle and the struggle to maintain overall position that we completely overlook an easy opening right there in front of us to simply slip into the stranglehold when the neck is exposed. Here, stand out junior squad member Frank Rosenthal shows a fine application of the default principle at a tournament in England that he competed in over the weekend. No need to trap arms when the neck is open - just go straight in for the kill!

Gordon Ryan taking on the big men: Next weekend in Dallas Texas, Gordon Ryan will step back on to the big stage in Dallas Texas at @kasaigrappling championships to take on the very powerful and distinguished Ultra heavyweight João Gabriel Rocha - ADCC silver medalist and long time rival of the great Marcus Buchecha Almeida. Mr Rocha will have a forty pound weight advantage - he is a very impressive performer on the competition circuit - he went a grueling twenty five minutes with Buchecha in his last big outing at ACB and lost a close decision. This will be a very tough test indeed and creates a classic contest between the smaller grappler with strong submission skills versus the bigger grappler with excellent positional skills. As Always, Mr Ryan has been training hard in preparation - looking forward to another Kasai show - they are doing a fantastic job of being the best athletes in the sport together in an exciting format and display. We are looking forward to this clash of styles against such a great opponent!

Triangles - Once it’s on - it’s on!! When I coach triangle strangles, I strongly emphasize the two stage approach of first locking a TRAP TRIANGLE (locking your ankles around your opponents head and arm rather like a closed guard) and then adjusting from there to the FIGURE FOUR TRIANGLE that actually strangles your opponent. This creates a very distinctive pattern of ENTRY AND CONTROL followed by ADJUSTMENT AND STRANGULATION. This two stage approach is, I believe, the most high percentage method of practicing and employing triangles in competitive situations. It does mean however, that there is a time lag between the trap triangle and the figure four - once you lock that initial triangle you can fully expect your opponent to go into maximum overdrive escape sequences that can take you on a wild ride that takes you anywhere from off the floor, through three hundred and sixty degree rotations to slams to powerful twisting shrugs. YOU HAVE TO LEARN TO MAKE YOUR ADJUSTMENTS DURING WILD RESISTANCE AND STAY THE COURSE UNTIL THE STRANGLE IS SET. Here, Nicky Ryan follows an opponent through powerful defensive movements to get his triangle submission in the US ADCC trials. Observe the single minded focus as he manipulates his opponents arm during a chaotic time, all whilst progressing further towards his goal. Try to map out your responses to the main directions your opponent can engage in once the trap triangle is locked. What would you do if you were lifted? Spun left? Right? This will help you in sparring as things happen very quickly so the faster your response kick in, the better.

The mount: One of the most cherished positional pins of Jiu Jitsu is doubtless the mounted position. It is a formidable platform for entering submission holds and even more formidable when striking is permitted. It (along with the rear mount) is the zenith of the Jiu Jitsu positional hierarchy. As such, there is a natural tendency among beginners to see the mount as a place to get to and STAY. This thinking is understandable as it it considered by most as the king of positions. However, I always coach my students to value transitions BETWEEN pins as more valuable in a submission grappling context than the pins themselves. MOVEMENT and EXTENSION are the essential prerequisites of submissions. If you get to a pin and remain static, submissions will be difficult. Try moving around from pin to pin - don’t see the mount as a pinnacle from which you cannot move for fear of lowering your value. See it as a good pin among other options and learn to transition in and out of it as the quest for movement and extension demand. You will soon find that submissions start opening for you a lot more frequently than when you get mounted and just try to stay there come what may. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a loose chest over chest positional strategy to encourage movement which he will follow to open up submissions

Developing a devastating triangle: Nothing pleases me more in the training room that the sight of a student latching on to a tough opponent and exhibiting genuine and well directed control over him until he can incrementally convert it into a submission. When it comes to triangle work - the mindset I want you all working on is that of THE TWO STAGE APPROACH. Don’t see the triangle as a single move, but rather as a move with two distinct phases. It begins with the TRAP TRIANGLE. This is the act of trapping your opponents head and one arm inside your legs and locking your ankles. At this stage (for front triangles from bottom position - the most common triangle scenario) you will be square in front of your opponent. Then when you have sufficiently controlled the situation, move on to the second phase, THE FIGURE FOUR TRIANGLE. This is where you switch from square to perpendicular angle while controlling posture and cinch a tight stranglehold. DON’T TRY TO BEGIN WITH A STRANGLEHOLD - begin with head control and only when that is assured do you move on to the strangle. Breaking your triangle attacks up into two distinct phases is the single biggest key to developing it into a devastating weapon with which you can dominate the mats. Here, Nicky Ryan, a young master of the triangle, latches on to a controlling trap triangle. Already he is planning the transition to phase two as his hand reaches to pull himself to a perpendicular angle and the strangle finish.

Linking systems: You all know the basic insight behind my coaching philosophy - BJJ is a systems based approach to unarmed combat. Classical BJJ is a 2-6 step system depending upon the circumstances of the fight (the simplest and easiest rendition to understand is the four step version I outlined on the Joe Rogan podcast). My approach is to refine this by adding SUBSYSTEMS within that overall system to increase athlete performance in high value domains and lower learning times. Best of all is when athletes learn to link those subsystems together to create devastating attack sequences that are very difficult to stop. Here, talented junior squad member Frank Rosenthal links back, triangle and Kimura systems in a beautiful display to take a fine submission win over the weekend. This is how I want you thinking about your technique- rapid but controlled application of movements you know so well that the application looks as natural as breathing. Stopping even one well practiced submission system is difficult - stopping all six in unison is EXTREMELY difficult.

Distance control: Whenever you go in to engage your opponent there will be a standoff distance where neither of you can get a grip on the other. It is from this distance that you will step forward and go into grip fighting and once grips are locked - the battle begins. It all begins however, with the control/management of that initial distance from which you began. LEARNING TO MANAGE THIS DISTANCE AND MAKE IT WORK IN YOUR FAVOR IS A BIG PART OF WHAT DETERMINES YOUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE IN THE INTIAL PART OF THE MATCH. You want to play with distance in a way where you can prevent your opponent easily getting his or her preferred grips on you, whilst jockeying for position and distance that enables you to safely and effectively get your own preferred grips. This takes some experience and skill. Make things easier for yourself by developing a clear understanding of
1 - What you want to avoid from your opponent.
2 - What you want to initiate your attacks with and what grips will be necessary to do that.
Try to avoid being static as you play the distance game, but don’t move around so much that can’t maintain the distance you need to attack. Here, Georges St-Pierre, the greatest master of distance in MMA I ever saw, plays the distance game in grappling (very different) with talented junior Frank Rosenthal. Both athletes have an idea of what they want and of what they need to deny the other fellow - now it’s time to step forward and engage!

The unique feature of triangle attacks - strangles and joint locks: I teach six submissions systems in my no gi coaching work
Back system
Leg system
Kimura system
Front headlock system
Arm bar system
Triangle system
Of these six systems, the triangle is unique insofar as it can be simultaneously BOTH A STRANGLEHOLD AND A JOINT LOCK. The great choice we have in the realm of joint locks is that between joint locks - an attack upon your opponents body - and strangles - an attack upon your opponents brain/consciousness. TRIANGLES LET YOU DO BOTH AT THE SAME TIME. Triangles immobilize your opponents grand and one arm and thus offer many ways to break that arm whilst you strangle them at the same time. It’s a terrifying feeling to be getting strangled and as you fight against that threat, feel your arm being attacked with Kimura, juji gatame arm locks, American locks and wrist locks. Here, Gordon Ryan, a master of the triangle, puts an opponent under fight ending pressure with a triangle hold that he has elected to finish with a juji gatame Arm bar breaking action to take a win at SUG grappling championships. To fully exploit the incredible power of the triangle, make sure you constantly practice it as both a stranglehold AND a joint breaker. Experiment with playing those two against each other - so that AS AN OPPONENT DEFENDS ONE, HE FALLS TO THE OTHER. Training in this way will create rapid progress in your triangle game!

Triangles: For decades Jiu Jitsu students and teachers have reduced their growth in triangle development by talking about “the triangle” as though there is only one type of triangle. What they really mean by THE triangle is the FRONT triangle. There is no question that in the sport of Jiu Jitsu, the front triangle (Omote sankaku) is king of the various triangles (mostly because guard position, the position most associated with front triangles, is so heavily emphasized in BJJ). However, there are other triangles out there that if given more emphasis would also figure heavily in the bout ending business. If the front triangle is king, then I would have no hesitation in naming the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) as next in line to the throne. It is a tremendous weapon from the back and I find it is the best triangle of them all for short legged athletes (like me 😊) as the angle automatically eliminates your opponents shoulder from the lock and makes it easier to capture the head and arm in an authoritative strangle. Here, outstanding junior, Frank Rosenthal applies a rear triangle so tight it looks like a tourniquet around his unfortunate opponents neck. If you currently lack confidence with front triangles - START WITH REAR TRIANGLES- and watch your success rate climb. As you learn more about the general nature of triangles starting from the back there is often a carryover to success from the front - and then the fun really starts!

Very happy to announce the release today of my latest Jiu Jitsu instructional video - the fifth installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series - THE TRIANGLE with BJJ Fanatics. I cover the use of the five main versions of the triangle with heavy emphasis of the king of triangles - the front triangle. I show how I teach them to the squad and how they use them in competition. This is among the most important of the submission systems we employ - both as a control mechanism and a match ender. It is among the most representative of all Jiu Jitsu techniques as it pits the strength of our hips and legs and the opponents head and arm - a fine example of strength asymmetry that allows smaller, weaker people to defeat bigger stronger people. I strongly emphasize triangle training in my classes at all skill levels. It not only increases submission rates across the board but more importantly heavy triangle training will GET STUDENTS IN THE HABIT OF GRAPPLING WITH THE LEGS RATHER THAN UPPER BODY - the single biggest step in speeding development in Jiu Jitsu athletes. I hope to see you working hard on your triangles and matching your lower body against your opponents upper bodies! There is a link to BJJ Fanatics website in my Instagram bio if you are interested 😜😜 wishing you all the best in your triangle development!

Angle and alignment: Jiu Jitsu is a game of prerequisites. UNLESS THOSE PREREQUISITES ARE SATISFIED, THE END RESULT YOU SEEK WILL ELUDE YOU. In the case of the front triangle (Omote Sankaku), quite a bit has to happen before the stranglehold is established. Two of the most important elements are ANGLE and ALIGNMENT. The more you position yourself at a perpendicular angle the easier you will be able to capture your opponent in a well locked triangle - particularly important for those of you (like me 😞) who have short legs. Another key element of the ALIGNMENT OF YOUR LOWER LEGS PRIOR TO THE ACTUAL LOCKING OF THE TRIANGLE. You want both of your lower legs POINTING IN THE SAME DIRECTION. Failure to do so makes it easy for a wary opponent to posture up and out of your lock. Look how Nicky Ryan, a young master of the triangle, works on both angle and alignment as he drills in the blue basement - in this example the alignment is so good the strangle is taking effect before he even locks his legs. So when you fight from guard and you see your opportunity to enter this great attack - think about the need for angle in your hips and upper body and alignment of your lower legs - soon your guard will be a veritable danger zone for your opponents!

Kimura attack! Georges St-Pierre locks in the distinctive figure four grip of the Kimura lock on Shawn Williams in training. Kimura is among the most versatile of submission holds and can be done in a vast array of circumstances. In bottom position however, it can be argued that half guard may be the most practical and effective position to start your training and learning. The angle and distancing, along with the usual circumstances of the situation often make it easier to get to the lock from half guard than it is from more aligned full guard situations. As always - focus on getting the opponents hand quickly behind his back - this will create a huge mechanical and tactical advantage for you that opponents will struggle to deal with.

Start with the head: People always talk about good posture when opening a closed guard. It’s important to actually define what good posture consists of. There are different postures you can use to open a closed guard, but the standard methods that work well in a wide array of situations almost always begin with FREEING YOUR HEAD. Most of your opponents will always try to subvert your posture by controlling your head. It is crucial that you begin the process by freeing your head so that YOUR HEAD CAN LEAD THE WAY TO STRONG POSTURE THAT CAN ENABLE YOU TO OPEN YOUR OPPONENTS GUARD. Look how Gordon Ryan has taken inside position with his hands so that he can free his head from the tenacious grip of Georges St-Pierre. Mr St-Pierre has to settle for an arm grip (still very useful) and you can see Mr Ryan’s head beginning to rise - highly desirable if you wish to stand up and open the closed guard. This is something you can practice every day. Have a partner grip your head and fight to get your hands inside and head free - your first step in learning to get up to your feet and open your opponents closed guard.

Assigning a function to each limb: When I coach I often assign a definitive function(s) to each of your limbs so that you know exactly what you ought to be doing with each in a given scenario. When you lack a clear sense of what each limb should be given at any moment it becomes very easy for Jiu Jitsu sparring to degenerate into a confused tangle of limbs fighting without purpose or direction. Nowhere is this more important than in the case of back attacks. So often I see people in good attacking position get deadlocked and frustrated due to a lack of clarity in what each of their four limbs out to be doing. Let’s begin with the upper body. You will need first a CONTROL hand that goes UNDER your opponents arm. It’s function is to connect you solidly into a cheats to back position and keep you there. Then you have a STRANGLE hand that goes OVER the arm on the other side. It creates an immediate submission threat to your opponent. You play the two together - one protects your own position, whilst the other threatens your opponent. Downstairs to the legs. Together they initially hook into your opponents hips to secure hip to back contact. If you have the length, you can make this more secure with a body triangle. At some point however, you will want to go from control to submission. That’s when we turn one of our legs into a TRAP leg, which hooks over one of the opponent defensive arms to facilitate strangles. The other leg generally remains as a CONTROL leg, keeping you hooked into alignment with your opponent as you work the strangle. Dividing up the work of all four limbs and assigning each a task makes for a very clear sense of direction in your work and also helps your coach call out information to you as you grapple. Try it in all the various scenarios you face in grappling and watch your efficiency improve!

Open wedges and closed wedges: Many of you will be aware that a big part of my teaching is bound up with the study of using our body to create IMMOBILIZING WEDGES around important parts of our opponents body to hold them in place while we perform a given move. A BIG part of what we call Jiu Jitsu is the action of setting these wedges around an opponent in a mechanically advantageous fashion - this one of the main basis of mechanical efficiency in our sport. The best wedges are generally CLOSED wedges, where our limbs lock into each other to securely hold the wedges in place. A triangle is a set of wedges around our opponents head and arm and it is CLOSED insofar as the locking of your legs mechanically locks the wedges in place. Closed wedges are not always possible however. More often we have to work with OPEN WEDGES and now we need a substitute method of holding them in place. Sometimes its body weight, sometimes it is simple muscular exertion. Here I am working with the arm bar (juji gatame) - standard variations of this are examples of open wedges. You can see I have to make up for the open wedges through good body positioning and muscular tightness around the head and shoulders. Directionality of force becomes extremely important now if the lock is to be effective against stout resistance. If you are a shorter limbed athlete like me, learning to work effectively with open wedges is extremely important. Every time you practice your application of them, have your partner try to pull out - that will immediately tell you how effective your wedge placement really is.

What will you do next? It is natural that when we perform any given move in Jiu Jitsu that we apply maximum effort and concentration into it - after all, only COMPLETED moves score points or result in submission. However, it is extremely important for your development that you create a sense of when you have the preconditions necessary to complete a move and when you don’t. We all spend far too much energy and commitment to moves that have long since ceased to be likely to succeed. You must be able to recognize the likelihood of a move succeeding and when it appears unlikely; TO HAVE A VIABLE PLAN OF ACTION TO FOLLOW IT UP WITH ANOTHER MOVE. During the application of any technique there must be In the back of your mind a clear plan of action to switch to should the initial attack falter. How much commitment you ought to put into the CURRENT attack will be determined by your ability to READ THE CURRENT STATE OF THAT ATTACK (do you have the necessary conditions to make it workin this scenario?) AND MAKE A SNAP JUDGMENT AS TO WHETHER YOU SHOULD CONTINUE WITH WHAT YOU HAVE OR PREPARE TO SWITCH TO SOMETHING ELSE. The onus is on you to develop a mindset that constantly asks WHAT IS THE NEXT STEP, rather than the more natural but less successful, “let me give everything I’ve got to this move come what may.” Here, Nicky Ryan goes with commitment after the leg of the great Keenan Cornelius in a spirited training session. The heel hook attempt is at a critical stage - the knee of Mr Cornelius is on the cusp of Mr Ryan’s knee-line. There is a choice now between adjustments to the current move, switching to a new move or abandonment to a neutral restart. Simply holding on grimly could actually offer counter attacks to a skilled opponent like this and so is almost never a good option. Next time you train- go on to the mat with the mindset of a person who fights hard for what they have, but with the wisdom of someone who knows to relinquish what they soon won’t have, so that you can go on to claim something better

Don’t settle for good enough: The sport of Jiu Jitsu allow two means of victory - points and submission. Points are allocated based upon the theoretical usefulness of the move in a fight situation where striking is possible. When you apply one of these moves, you score - how much you score depends upon how much dominance that move would offer in a real fight. Positions like mount and rear mount score the most because getting there in a real fight would very likely have dire consequences to your opponent. Now in a regular Jiu Jitsu competition where striking is not permitted, it’s tempting to use the points you have scored as the means of victory. You could after all, win simply by hanging on to the score you have gained and win on that. In many cases this is totally understandable. In training however, you must train yourself to GO BEYOND THE PIN AND ON TO ISOLATION OF A LIMB (neck, arm, leg) and SUBMIT your opponent. Remember, PINS occur at the TORSO, but SUBMISSIONS occur at the LIMBS, thus they have a very different set of operations underlying them. ONLY BY CREATING THE HABIT OF GOING BEYOND THE PIN AND GOING THE EXTRA DISTANCE OF LIMB ISOLATION CAN YOU BEGIN SUBMITTING PEOPLE. Begin building this habit in the dojo. The highest expression of Jiu Jitsu will always be submission victory. Every time you get dominant position, see it as an opportunity to exhibit that highest expression, rather than as a way to cling to a points lead and hold on until time runs out. Here, Gordon Ryan rests briefly at the world Championships Having briefly consolidated the pin, he will go hunting for the opponents neck - a few seconds after this photo was taken he did exactly that and won via strangulation. Don’t settle for less than the highest expression of Jiu Jitsu. Learn to take risks in the gym so that one day you won’t hesitate to take risks on the stage and people will admire both your technique and your confidence.

Opposing goals: Part of what makes Jiu Jitsu so fascinating is that is many situations the two athletes have diametrically opposed goals - WHATEVER IS GOOD FOR ME IS BAD FOR THE OTHER FELLOW AND VICE VERSA. So if if your goal is to constrict space, you can be sure the other fellow will be working overtime to create space. This can make for some very intense sparring situations where you can end up exerting a lot of effort but with little to show for it. It is important that whenever the match has moved into a situation where you both know what the other wants (the opposite of what you want), that YOU DON’T LET IT DEGENERATE INTO A VORTEX OF AIMLESS STRUGGLE. Take a step back and ask yourself how you can use this mutual stand off to advantage. This is the perfect time to GIVE your opponent what he or she is fighting so hard for switch to an alternative attack. So for example, If you are pinning an opponent from side your basic goal is to restrict space between the two of you as much as possible and create a tight pin. Your opponent knows this and wants the opposite - space between you that will enable him to generate movement towards an escape. As your opponent fights to get arms inside and create that space, give way to the pushing of his framing arms and move back a little to allow his arms to get OVER extended and offer an opportunity for quick arm lock finishes. The moment you get sucked into a battle royal over a simple goal in opposing directions there is a danger of TUNNEL VISION that will rob you of an ability to see other possibilities. All you will see is the simple two way struggle directly in front of you. Look at Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon doing positional sparring. Though it’s clear they have simple opposing goals (space creation vs space restriction), neither is going crazy to fulfill those goals, rather they work calmly so that they can exploit any OVERCOMMITMENT on the part of the other in this situation where both have opposite goals and both know the goal of the other.

Position and submission: Most students of Jiu Jitsu are told from their first class the relationship between position and submission - position first and submission follows. As you grow in sophistication you will learn that the relationship is more nuanced than this - sometimes we can threaten a submission hold and use the opponents defensive reaction to gain a better position. Probably the single biggest problem I see with developing athletes in submission only competition is a general failure to maintain POSITIONAL PRESSURE as they engage their opponent. This creates a floppy looking match where the two combatants roll around for limbs but with no attempt to control the TORSO first. This can have the effect of creating an undesirable meandering look to the action rather than what we should aim for - FAST AND DIRECT ACTION INITIATED BY POSITIONAL PRESSURE TOWARDS CHEST TO CHEST OR CHEAT TO BACK POSITIONS AND THEN DECISIVE ATTACKS TO THE LIMBS WHEN THE OPPONENT FIGHTS AGAINST THE POSITIONAL PRESSURE AND OVER EXTENDS HIS LIMBS. Here you can see Nicky Ryan put the great Masakazu Imanari under strong positional pressure to create reactions (look at the extended limbs) that enabled him to switch from limb attacks (legs) to chest to back position (strangles) - in the end he chose the latter - but the choice arose from the initial positional pressure. As much as we love the drama, decisiveness and action of submissions - never neglect the very thing that makes them possible at high level - positional pressure.

TRIANGLES (Sankaku)- the principle of MULTIPLICITY : So often I hear people in Jiu Jitsu talk about THE triangle stranglehold and it is very clear they are talking about the FRONT triangle (the most common version of the triangle in BJJ). There are FIVE main versions of the triangle
FRONT (Omote sankaku)
REAR (Ushiro Sankaku)
OPPOSITE (Hantai sankaku)
SIDE (Yoko sankaku)
REVERSE (Gyaku sankaku)
ONLY WHEN YOU LEARN TO USE ALL OF THEM WILL YOU MAXIMIZE YOUR POTENTIAL WITH THIS INCREDIBLE MOVE. Learning to use the multiplicity of triangles will enable you to get submissions that would have previously eluded you as oftentimes when you have one form of triangle that is failing, a simple shift to another version will get the breakthrough you seek. Don’t limit yourself to one dominant form of the triangle. The triangle system I teach is composed of all five major triangles and the interaction between them, along with the interaction with other submission holds and pins. Here, Georges St-Pierre works the transition from front triangle to opposite triangle (hantai sankaku) - a move greatly favored by the Ryan brothers - Gordon Ryan used it to strangle Ralek Gracie in competition. When you think about your triangle attacks, try to get out of the habit of thinking the triangle only refers to front triangles - while front triangles are the most important of the triangle family of strangles, that kind of thought process can blind you to other, very valuable alternatives. Why work with one great weapon when you can have five?

@garrytonon gets his Shoot Boxing (striking integrated with takedowns) rounds in today. It is always a fascinating thing to watch the skills of grappling mixed in with the skills of striking. Throughout history the vast majority of martial arts have fallen into one of two main camps - striking or grappling - yet nothing is more exciting, nothing is more effective and nothing is more illuminating than the mix of both together. Thank you to @sanabul for the excellent training gear worn by sparring partner @drewhooper_mma

Excited for upcoming seminars! I am always happy to get chances to teach outside the blue basement when scheduling permits. In January and February I will teach for the first time in Utah and Texas! First up is Utah, where on January 18 at Unified Jiu Jitsu in South Jordan. Check out @utahjitsmama to get information and tickets for Utah seminar. Then in Texas on February 3rd I will team up with Gordon Ryan to teach a big seminar at Gracie One in Dallas. Mr Ryan is super excited to show some of his own latest developments - i am always greatly impressed by the innovations of my students and Mr Ryan has been on a research mission lately - always adding new and deadly attacks to his arsenal. Check out @gracieonejiujitsu for information and booking for Dallas, Texas seminar. It’s always a pleasure to show our style to new friends - looking forward to both these events 🤗🤗 See you there!!

Excited for upcoming seminars! I am always happy to get chances to teach outside the blue basement when scheduling permits. In January and February I will teach for the first time in Utah and Texas! First up is Utah, where on January 18 at Unified Jiu Jitsu in South Jordan. Check out @utahjitsmama to get information and tickets for Utah seminar. Then in Texas on February 3rd I will team up with Gordon Ryan to teach a big seminar at Gracie One in Dallas. Mr Ryan is super excited to show some of his own latest developments - i am always greatly impressed by the innovations of my students and Mr Ryan has been on a research mission lately - always adding new and deadly attacks to his arsenal. Check out @gracieonejiujitsu for information and booking for Dallas, Texas seminar. It’s always a pleasure to show our style to new friends - looking forward to both these events 🤗🤗 See you there!!

Integrating systems - Triangle and Arm Bar systems: A huge part of my work as a coach is creating elaborate systems around a few high percentage techniques. When an athlete has sufficient infrastructure built around his or her best moves, it is unlikely an opponent will be able to follow the unfolding action and successfully resist. Things get even more interesting when you add the idea of INTEGRATING SYSTEMS so that as resistance builds to one, you switch to another. This creates pressure that is very difficult to withstand for even an experienced opponent. The last two installments of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series are Triangle (sankaku) and Arm Bar (juji gatame). Because these two moves both center around the use of your legs to control your opponents head and shoulders there is a LOT of interplay between the two of them. Look at how Nicky Ryan shows his arm bar and triangle mastery by effortlessly switching back and forth between them in live sparring. In thirty seconds he goes from arm bar to a special arm bar variation greatly favored by both Ryan Brothers, the shoulder sankaku, back to a different variation of arm bar (head scissor variation) on to a front triangle that he takes into a mounted finish. This is the ideal you want to aim for - movement both WITHIN a given system and ACROSS systems. In this way you can aim for the ideal of our approach to Jiu Jitsu - TO ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY WITH EQUAL EFFICACY UNTIL THE BREAKTHROUGH IS ACHIEVED.

Organized Knowledge: I am sure that most of you are aware that a big part of my coaching style is to make Jiu Jitsu matches into KNOWLEDGE WARS where the idea is to create sophisticated systems around certain high percentage techniques where if the match can be forced towards those techniques you will have a decisive knowledge advantage over your opponent - even if the opponent may have more knowledge than you (acquired over a longer period of training time) overall. A big part of this approach is bound up with ORGANIZING your knowledge into ordered and simplified chunks that can be remembered under the stress of competition. Remember: ITS NOT HOW MUCH YOU KNOW THAT COUNTS, BUT HOW MUCH YOU CAN RECALL UNDER STRESS. I always encourage my athletes and students to categorize, refine and order their knowledge as they work into coherent forms. That is why we have names for every move and every variation of those moves and sequential applications of each. Here I am getting my presentation ready for the upcoming triangle (sankaku) instructional video - making sure nothing is unclear or omitted. Taking and making notes and check lists works for some people (I am one of them) but not for all. That’s fine, just make sure that whatever method you use allows you to recall information quickly under stress - knowledge wars aren’t won by the forgetful or confused!!

Happy New Year!! Wishing all of you the best in 2019! May you have the imagination and courage to set goals worthy of your potential, the wisdom to formulate a solid plan to actualize them, the discipline to follow those plans through and the time required to let it all happen!! I hope you all get closer to your cherished goals both inside and outside Jiu Jitsu! 🤗🤗 Thank you all for your interest in what we do, our approach to the game and to self development through Jiu Jitsu. Wishing you all a great night and an even better year! 🤗🤗🍾🍾🤗🤗

Getting work done: Just finished fifth and final day of filming for BJJ Fanatics where we completed the ENTER THE SYSTEM series (Triangle system to be released very soon and then subsequently the Arm Bar system to complete the series) and began work on the upcoming BJJ Fundamentals series where I go over classical BJJ in a new light designed to deepen your insight into the sport and shorten your learning time in skill development. Today we worked on the Gi Strangle system that I teach. It’s a blast going over the fundamentals in a new way - this is the heart and soul of Jiu Jitsu and I love it! This was the material that hooked me twenty five years ago and I never lost my passion for it! Now it’s back to the bus station (trains all sold out 😞) and back to NYC - Looking forward to getting back to the blue basement for a day of teaching tomorrow!

Jacket required: Working our way through the first sessions filming the upcoming fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu series that will be released after the completion of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. The intention is give athletes a deep conceptual and technical understanding of the foundational elements of the sport in the traditional gi. The emphasis will be on strong positional skills and strangulation using the jacket. Loving the content so far and having a blast! The fundamentals are the heart and soul of Jiu Jitsu and my favorite thing to teach and train. We go back into action tomorrow! Wishing you all the best from Boston!! 🤗🤗

Finished!! After two big days of filming we just completed the final installment of the biggest selling Jiu Jitsu video instructionals of all time - the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. Today we completed the Arm Bar (juji gatame) installment. This is the sixth and last in the series. These six submissions systems, Legs, back, kimura, front headlock/guillotine, triangle and now arm bar are the main submission systems that I teach in no gi grappling and which my students did such an incredible job of applying in top level competition. The triangle system will be released next (early January) and editing of the arm bar footage will now begin. Thanks so much to BJJ Fanatics for their work in filming over the last two days. My students excel in the use of arm bar attacks - I hope that soon you will too!! 😜😜

The remarkable properties of the triangle: The triangle is among the most impressive moves in all of Jiu Jitsu. It has many manifestations and variations. One of the best and most unique features is that it is capable of being used as both a strangle and a joint lock at the same time. Usually we are given a choice when we go for a submission - it’s either a strangle or a joint lock - sankaku lets us have our cake and eat it too! Not only does it give us a choice - WE CAN USE THE THREAT OF ONE TO SET UP THE OTHER. For example in a front triangle shown here, the general rule is that the closer my opponents head to my head, the easier the strangle. The further his head moves away - the easier the armlock. Triangles allow us to use several different types of joint locks without releasing the stranglehold, creating real danger for the opponent. Learn to use this unusual dual submission threat of the various triangle variations to get your submission percentages rising!

Into the vortex: There are two modes of Jiu Jitsu that must be mastered as you go deeper into your Jiu Jitsu journey. The first concerns the ability to SHUT DOWN YOUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT. This is perhaps the most common approach to Jiu Jitsu. Most of your time on the mat will be devoted to taking an opponent to the floor, gaining top position and getting past his legs into pins and immobilizing him until you can strangle him or joint lock him. There is however, another modality - the opposite of the first - TO CREATE MOVEMENT THAT WE CONTROL BETTER THAN OUR OPPONENT DOES. This is the method of creating scrambles where at the outcome of the scramble we have advantage. Learning to enter into a scramble and emerge with advantage is one of the most fascinating studies in Jiu Jitsu. It looks like chaos - but if you enter with a plan and a skill set you can reliably emerge with profit. Here, Garry Tonon, the best scrambler I ever saw, creates a whirlwind of movement to throw off the great world Champion Gilbert Burns in an effort to turn an inferior position into a dominant one. Later in the same match he would go further and use a similar action to enter into a spectacular match winning leg lock, showing once again his expertise in this thrilling aspect of the sport.

Can an older athlete, working a busy professional career and many other demands from marriage and family etc train to be competitive with the best Jiu jitsu athletes in the world who are much younger and more athletic and who train full time? This is a question i am often asked. Most Jiu Jitsu practitioners are enthusiastic amateurs who try to train as much as they can around their commitments to spouse, family and career while factoring their age and physical condition into the equation. It’s natural to ask - how good can I really get under those circumstances in comparison to the best athletes in the world? My answer is this - how far you go will always be determined by your effort - but if you train hard and intelligently for long enough YOU WILL BE ABSOLUTELY SHOCKED HOW GOOD YOU CAN GET AS AN OLDER PART TIME ATHLETE FULL TIME PARENT, CAREER PROFESSIONAL. Here is a truly great example. This is my student Jason Lees, forty three years old, married and a highly ranked lawyer in a prestigious New York City law firm. He took on the outstanding BJJ world champion Muhamed Aly, one of the most athletic and physically gifted Jiu Jitsu players in the world at a Grapplers Quest US Nationals event in NJ a couple of years ago. After a brief spell of hand fighting and a single leg attack, Mr Lees performed a very nice ashi garami entry from standing and won in around forty seconds via heel hook from ashi garami - an incredible result for an older athlete who trains part time and juggles marriage and a very busy legal career as his primary interest. How many people can show up to work on Monday morning and tell their co-workers they beat a dominant professional world champion in their chosen sport? What an amazing example of a part time older athlete getting full time younger man results!! Don’t sell yourself short on what can be achieved if your training program is a good one and there is passion in your heart backed by discipline in your mind and patience in your soul. I hope this incredible achievement by Mr Lees inspire you as much as it does me. I have so many outstanding older students who I am sure can inspire you all to greater success in your own journey

1000 Instagram Posts! I wanted to thank all of you for taking an interest in my work in Jiu Jitsu - this week I passed the milestone of 1000 Instagram posts. For a decade I avoided social media but finally relented when I took on a trio of extraordinary students who were interested in the rapidly growing sport of submission grappling. Previously I was teaching Jiu Jitsu but mostly known as an MMA coach through Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman and the Ultimate Fighter TV show. When Mr St-Pierre retired and Mr Weidman opened his own school further away from Manhattan I switched attention to submission grappling and the notion of changing the way people thought about training to a systems based approach instead classical methods. In time interest in the squad grew and now I am hoping to expand and add to peoples training methods as we all seek improvement in the sport we love and to link methods of improvement in Jiu Jitsu to our life in general. I am very grateful to you all for your interest and support in my work. Special thanks as always to my incredible students. All of them are truly remarkable people who exude industriousness and innovation - without their courage, hard work and skill in exhibiting these ideas on the big stage I would be nothing. Thank you to all of my dear readers who put up with my random, long winded, paragraph-less (not sure if that’s a real word 😂) and disorganized ramblings - but if they help even a little in getting you a little closer to your goals and dreams in Jiu Jitsu and life - then it’s all worth it. Thank you so much.

Learning from videos: People often ask me if you can learn martial arts techniques from video. I truly believe that insights from video instruction PROVIDED THEY ARE REINFORCED AND DEVELOPED BY REGULAR TRAINING ON THE MAT CAN ABSOLUTELY ADD SIGNIFICANTLY TO YOUR SKILL SET. You may recognize this man - this is Placido Carl Santos - he is the demonstration partner in many of my videos and trains in Boston. One day we were filming some material for IBJJF legal leg locks and I showed him several variations of Achilles locks that I use, subtly different from the standard grips and body placement. Mr Santos took the lesson in the same way any viewer would and we moved on quickly to the next techniques. Then a few weeks later at a local tournament he got the chance to make use of the lesson. Here he is getting a quick submission victory via the Achilles lock he learned in the video shoot 😉

The two ways: Whenever you go out to battle an opponent there are two main approaches you can take with the application of whatever technique and skills you bring to the match. The first is a PROACTIVE approach where you look to initiate the moves and deliberately push the action towards what you want to do. The second is a REACTIVE approach where you let your opponent initiate and you take advantage of any opening created by your opponent’s attack to counter and get the breakthrough. Each method will always have its advocates. As a general rule proactive methods tend to do better in encounters with a short time limit whilst reactive methods tend to do better in longer encounters. However, it will greatly benefit your development to work hard developing your skills in BOTH approaches. This immediately DOUBLES the number of attacks you make in a given time frame and makes you much less predictable in your attack patterns. Here you can see Nicky Ryan approach an opponent. His focused look clearly shows he has an initial proactive goal which he will work hard to enforce upon his foe, but he will also have the creativity to read his opponent’s attacks as he gets close and be ready to go into his reactive counters as well. As much as it’s a good thing to focus on what you want to achieve, remember always that there are TWO people in a bout and it pays to be able to attack off the actions of BOTH people rather than just one.

The remarkable story of a remarkable man: This weekend in Anaheim California the IBJJF No Gi World Championships were held and Gordon Ryan thrilled the grappling world with a double gold medal performance. At the same event another competitor was making his own mark in a way that was equally impressive in its own way. Some of you may have wonder how it is that I have been teaching for over twenty years but it is only in the last seven that my grappling students have gained renown. Before the squad I was mostly known as an MMA coach. What you may not be aware of is that during this early time I had a room full of grappling killers that never competed - that was a major reason why so many MMA stars used to come to my classes years before the squad. Most of my early black belt standouts chose not to compete - perhaps it was because I taught Jiu Jitsu in a way that was not focused on grappling competition in those days - more in line with gym grappling where the focus was on getting submissions and fighting. The result was a room full of unknown killers that often gave serious grief to famous champions. One of the foremost among these men was the formidable Doug Pelinkovic, a former Karate champion who started Jiu Jitsu very late in his thirties. Despite having a very successful and busy career in real estate and a family of three wonderful boys, he always found time for training. Ultimately making his own gym in the Bronx @bxmartialarts where I teach every Monday night. Now fifty, Mr Pelinkovic decided he would do his first ever Jiu Jitsu tournament at the no gi World Championships! Despite having zero Jiu Jitsu competition experience he entered and won Masters 4 super heavyweight!! What an incredible Jiu Jitsu competition debut from a man who trains part time between work and family and who started the game late. I can’t wait to tell you more inspirational tales of success from this older athlete who to this day routinely mangles elite championship level athletes half his age. I can’t think of a better answer to my readers who ask me about whether students who started late or who are getting older can reach a high level - YES YOU CAN!

Double Gold World Champion: Gordon Ryan had an incredible weekend in Los Angeles at the IBJJF No Gi World Championships this weekend. He competed in both his weight class and Absolute divisions and won Gold in both - four out of seven matches by submission and defeating champion rivals Yuri Simoes, Roberto Cyborg Abreau, Jackson Souza and Patrick Gaudio along the way. It was a fine expression of the versatility of his game between submission and positional skill. For so long squad athletes were criticized as having only one skill - leg locks - this tournament did not allow our favorite leg locks but this was not a problem for Mr Ryan. His unrivaled mastery of back and armbar systems was on display along with his absolutely outstanding positional game. Nothing silences critics like success and this was indeed a tremendously successful weekend for this amazing young athlete who impresses me so much in so many ways but with his work ethic and insatiable desire to learn and experiment to gain knowledge above all else.

Young gun: The 2018 IBJJF Jiu-Jitsu world championships are on this weekend in Anaheim California. The blue belt competition was up first and Nick Rodriguez @nickyrod247 was one of the emerging stars. This powerhouse came to us from @smashpassjay who is a long time friend of Gordon Ryan. He only began Jiu Jitsu a short one ago and Jay sent him to the blue basement to work on his submission skills. He soon became a favorite training partner of Gordon Ryan and has been improving rapidly. Even though he is a good wrestler he usually begins all training in bottom position to work new skills. At the world championships he won every one of his matches by submission! He used his favorite finishes - kata gatame variations from front headlock and juji gatame arm bars - to take the gold medal. Keep your eyes on this athlete - what a great start to his Jiu Jitsu training and a real inspiration to all you blue belts out there!

Firas Zahabi back in the basement! It was great to see my black belt student @firas_zahabi back on the mats today! Mr Zahabi is a truly remarkable fellow who has become one of the foremost MMA coaches of the current era. He excels in all aspects of the game - we often speculate that if he had ever competed in MMA he would have wrecked a LOT of big names given what we see so often in training! Through all the years he has always had an abiding passion for Jiu Jitsu and often discusses advances we make in pure Jiu Jitsu and looks for adaptations to the world of MMA. Here he works entries to the back from bottom position with Nicky Ryan - himself just back from the UK after his big win over the great Masakazu Imanari. Mr Zahabi is very inventive in MMA technique and tactics - but he is equally inventive in other aspects of the sport. He has developed a remarkable method of workout recovery called the “TimTam” @timtamrecovery which massages tired and sore muscles and gets MMA athletes back in action during grueling training camps. Great to see him back on the mats and advancing every aspect of the sport he has done so much for 😊😊

Divide and conquer: Some days the task of mastering the many skills of Jiu Jitsu can seem a little daunting - there is an awful lot to learn and new elements seem to emerge all the time. When I see someone struggle to pick up a new move they are working on, I usually encourage them to divide whatever skill they are learning into components and then TRY TO MASTER EACH COMPONENT IN ISOLATION FIRST before putting them all together into a complete skill. This kind of focused training generally makes most tasks easier to understand. Here I am teaching the back system. Often I divide the various skills required into upper body and lower body. By kneeling behind my partner Rather than sitting with hooks in (as you generally would in a competitive match) I can focus entirely on the initial hand control/neck penetration aspects that form an important component of the overall system. This is a simple example of taking a broad and complex skill SET and breaking it down into a series of component SKILLS each of which can be practiced in isolation until mastered. Then they are finally combined and you now are on the way to a genuine skill set that you can use in competitive situations. This week why don’t you take something you are personally working on and try to break it down into sensible components. Work on the components until they feel natural and see how you now perform the actual overall skill - let me know how your work goes!

It all starts in the gym: So many people ask me how Nicky Ryan made such fast progress in developing his mastery of the back attack system our athletes use. Well, it’s the same FOR ANY PERSON AND ANY SKILL. It is a question of IMPLANTING KNOWLEDGE and then transforming KNOWLEDGE into SKILL through physical training. Hard physical training without prior knowledge of what to do is not very productive and the gains you make in performance take a very long time. Knowledge without physical training reduces you to an armchair authority who can’t perform the things you know. When you start with knowledge of what you OUGHT to be doing and train hard to GET YOURSELF DOING IT, then you will see fast and efficient progress. Mr Ryan started with a solid grasp of the back system theory and then spends large amounts of time practicing it in practical sparring rounds. Unsurprisingly he is highly skilled in back attacks as a result. Whatever your aspirations in Jiu Jitsu Improvement - see it as the transformation of KNOWLEDGE into SKILL. Begin with a clear sense of what you are supposed to do ( your coach is your main guide) and then put in the hard and often frustrating work of turning it into a physical skill. Take the time to master it in the gym and one day you will be able to express it on the stage!

Nicky Ryan victorious!! Seventeen year old Nicky Ryan took on grappling and Leg Lock icon Masakazu Imanari in Wales today at the Polaris Professional grappling championships for the 145 Pound world Title. Mr Ryan won brilliantly via rear strangle using a special variation in the back system we utilize. Initially he went in to test the legs of the man the Japanese call “Tenth Dan in Leg locks” and got several solid attacks with heel hooks before opting for the back and the security of strangulation. Here he is backstage with his belt - another amazing performance from this young man. His discipline and drive in the camp leading to the bout were, as always, an inspiration to the room he trains in and led to this, his greatest victory so far.

Big win for Frank Rosenthal in Texas! Junior squad member Frank Rosenthal continued his winning ways tonight at the Onnit Invitational 10 in a super fight against 10th Planet Headquarters stand out Marvin Castille tonight. He used the back system in overtime to strangle his opponent into submission under standard EBI rules and take another great win. Mr Rosenthal has been training very hard and he is a fine example of hard work combined with a plan to get to a goal.

A man that made a difference: There are few people who can claim to have changed the nature of the sport that they play. Maurice Smith is one of the few who can. When MMA first burst into public view in the early 1990’s it was the Jiu Jitsu and submission grappling athletes who dominated the action with unknown ground work and submission holds. Then came the wrestlers who used tremendous physical conditioning with unstoppable takedowns and powerful ground striking to dominate the sport. Standing striking martial arts were disparaged as ineffective in the face of these grapplers and wrestlers. All that changed when Maurice Smith used a devastating arsenal of strikes to beat champion grapplers and wrestlers in matches that shocked the world and which showed very clearly the huge value of striking training as part of a MMA program. This helped usher in the modern era of MMA where athletes look to synthesize all the main skills of the various striking and grappling arts. As always someone needed to show the way before others would follow. What a pleasure to see this MMA legend at Renzo Gracie Academy today still looking like a powerhouse after all these years!

Michelle Nicolini came in to work out with the squad today as athletes prepare for No Gi World Championships coming soon! @miznicolini is eight time world champion and one of the greatest Jiu Jitsu athletes of her generation. Sometimes I am asked who would be the best role models for female athletes - in truth I make no distinctions in this area - I consider top level female grapplers such as Michelle Nicolini and Kyra Gracie (Jiu Jitsu), Ryoko Tani (Judo), Saori Yoshida and Kaori Icho (freestyle wrestling) to be equally inspirational to ALL Jiu Jitsu athletes - not just women. Consider for a moment a females perspective in learning and practicing Jiu Jitsu. Literally every time they go to practice the overwhelming majority of their training partners will be massively bigger, stronger and heavier than them. It would be like you or me walking into a gym as a white belt and every single one of your training partners was a hulking three hundreds on steroids. Imagine how hard it be to learn and perform even the most basic moves under those circumstances. You would have to evolve very efficient mechanics, mostly incorporating your legs, just to survive - and this leg dominant/high efficiency approach is exactly the one we should ALL be aspiring towards if Jiu Jitsu is, as we claim, to be about smaller people defeating bigger people. Due to considerations like these I often study top level female grapplers in various sports and often find they offer valuable insights into problems everyone faces and must overcome. It was a pleasure and honor to see one of the very best get ready for a another shot at a world title today.

The return of Nicky Ryan: Nicky Ryan returns to the big stage in England this weekend at @polaris_professional Polaris 8 grappling event. He will take on Japanese Leg Lock icon Masakazu Imanari. Squad senior Garry Tonon defeated Mr Imanari previously via heel hook but this is a very different situation as Mr Ryan is considerably smaller and only seventeen years old. As always, Mr Ryan has prepared with maturity beyond his years and is well prepared. Can’t wait to see these two high level submission experts go to work!

In a self interested world the only thing that will make someone interested in you is the scarcity and demand for whatever SKILLS you possess and which they find desirable. For most people the only way you can acquire and build those skills is PRACTICE. You can overlook or skimp over many things in your life but one thing you cannot brush aside is your practice time. That time must be sacred to you, for unless you are born with extraordinary good fortune - and the vast majority of us are not - it is only your SKILLS that make you valuable to other people and thus able to advance in life and it is only PRACTICE that creates skills. Remember too that all skills are highly PERISHABLE and that any diminishment in practice will soon result in diminishing skills. So if there is any time in your life that you should truly cherish and protect - it is your PRACTICE TIME - for that time will be the one thing that takes you to your goals and dreams and keep you there. There will be a veritable horde of distractions, demands and interferences as you grow that will conspire to rob you of your practice time - understand that this is one of the most dangerous robberies of them all as it will take from you the one thing that can make you successful - your skills. Protect that time as you would your health, loves and savings for it is every bit as important.

Filming the ENTER THE SYSTEM: TRIANGLES instructional video: Just finished filming the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video series featuring the triangle system that has been used so successfully by my students in competition. I have always had a special affinity for the triangle and believe it plays a tremendous role in athlete development not just as a submission hold but also as one of the best ways to get athletes used to attacking with their legs - a core characteristic of good Jiu Jitsu. Here we are playing around with triangle attacks against a seated guard - I have not done this move since my hip replacement so this was a fun experiment 😂. Now I’m on the train back to NYC - arriving at 2:30am and then back to training in the blue basement early in the morning 😜😜 Wishing you all the best

Change of seasons - changing the game: At Penn Station NYC - Heading up to Boston on the train to film the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series of instructional videos which cover the training methodology, tactics and techniques that my students exhibited so brilliantly on the big stage! It’s a cold North Eastern winter here now - the hot summers that we filmed the leg, back, front headlock/guillotine and kimura systems are a distant memory! I am really looking forward to this video - you all know I have a particular love of the triangle stranglehold (sankaku jime) and always encourage all my students from professionals to newbies to work hard on developing this skill early and often. I always get a special pride when they finish with it in competition and all my students excel in its use - yes - even the short legged ones! 😜😜 Looking forward to seeing @bernardofariabjj and the @bjj.fanatics team along with @fujisportsus representative and Olympic silver medalist @judosilencer Travis Stevens. As always the emphasis in this video will be on giving you a complete system to apply the triangle- remember - IT IS THE DEPTH OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF FEW TECHNIQUES AND YOUR ABILITY TO PUT THEM IN A COMBATIVE CONTEXT THAT WILL DETERMINE YOUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE WITH THEM - everything I teach is done in this manner. My aim in these videos is to change the way the game is taught and understood - in particular YOUR game. Fours hours heading north and then we get to work! Wishing you all the best! 🤗

Gordon Ryan releases strength and conditioning video: I am very pleased to see ADCC world champion and four time EBI champion Gordon Ryan has released a video on strength development for grapplers. It is produced by @bjj.fanatics and features the routine he used prior to winning gold at the world championships. The whole question of strength and physical attributes in Jiu Jitsu is an interesting one. We are constantly told to not use strength and focus only on technique. This is good advice in your early development but don’t kid yourself - physical attributes such as strength, speed, flexibility etc play a BIG role in the outcome of competitive bouts. As such, Jiu Jitsu athletes have a vested interest in developing whatever potential their body has to the maximum degree possible relative to their aims and ambitions in the sport. I never met a Jiu Jitsu athlete whose game got worse by getting a little stronger, faster or more flexible, on the contrary, I have seen MANY whose competitive prowess increased by investing in time developing their physical attributes just as they do their technical skills. Remember - whenever you engage in combat with another person you are fighting two things - THEIR SKILLS AND THEIR ATTRIBUTES. If you want to improve your performance on the mat there are two ways to go - SKILL DEVELOPMENT is always going to be first and the most important, but don’t underestimate the second - ATTRIBUTE DEVELOPMENT. Your body is the vehicle that expresses your skills - THE BETTER CONDITIONED YOUR BODY IS TO DO SO, THE BETTER THAT EXPRESSION WILL BE. Check out Mr Ryan’s method - it helped create the most successful debut performance in ADCC world championship history - I hope it can help you too!

Start strong to finish strong: In any session of Jiu Jitsu, whether in the gym or on the big stage, there are constant cycles of contact. Athletes will engage with each other, make physical contact and exchange various moves and tactics. In the vast majority of cases, neither athlete will be able to get a decisive finish and they will eventually break contact and then the whole cycle will begin anew, with CONTACT, EXCHANGE and BREAKING CONTACT. These cycles continue until either a decisive finish is achieved or time runs out. It is important to understand that this cycle always begins with contact - grip fighting and tactical positioning are keys here. YOU MUST ENTER AND MAKE CONTACT IN A WAY THAT CONFERS ADVANTAGE FOR YOURSELF AND NEGATES ANY ATTEMPT BY YOUR OPPONENT TO DO THE SAME. Don’t be naive and just walk forward into an ambush of grips, tactics and moves. The battle begins before you even grip up with your opponent. Your stance, motion and tactical positioning must correlate with what you want to. Then you must fight for grips, first DENYING THE GRIPS YOUR OPPONENT WANTS AND THEN ASSERTING THE GRIPS YOU WANT. Look as Garry Tonon approaches his opponent from top position how carefully he positions his feet and how he denies his opponent a working grip with his legs whilst holding a stance that maximize his options and minimizes those of his opponent. START THE BATTLE EARLY AND THE VICTORIES COME EASIER - START LATE AND THE DEFEATS COME QUICKER AND HARDER.

Sometimes you are just 100% f**ked: One of our favorite training methods is to begin in poor position and work our way out to develop a good sense of submission resistance. It’s not easy to do this in a room of killers - so there is usually a lot tapping most days! Over the years I have seen some incredible escapes from seemingly hopeless situations - Garry Tonon earns his nickname “the slippery salmon” every day - he and Gordon Ryan pull off semi miraculous escapes on a daily basis. When you play this game however, there are going to be many times when you bite off more than you can chew and it’s wise to tap early and tap often. Here, lightweight Ethan Crelinsten heroically gets himself into a nightmare scenario with back system master Gordon Ryan. Mr Ryan rewards him by pinning not just one arm helplessly behind his back - but TWO! This creates the horrid result of complete defenselessness and at this point there is nothing to do but laugh and tap. Keeping a playful demeanor is important in this kind of training as there is potential for injury and dejection if you take it too seriously. Just do what Mr Crelinsten does - laugh and try again with a better plan next time. Remember - there will be days where you are the hammer but just as many when you are the nail. Those nail days will be much more manageable if you regularly practice being under severe pressure and have to work your way out of a minefield of submissions.

Looking back: Getting nostalgic in the NYC subway - heading home from the Bronx where i taught a local seminar at my buddy Tito’s school. It’s fun coming home from 238th Street Station - I have not been up here since my early days working as a bouncer in the early 1990’s. So much change in both the environment and myself - it’s good to reflect at times like this and see where you came from and where you are headed. One of my earliest NYC memories is from here on these tracks. In 1991, a desperate man blocking the subway at the above-ground section of the tracks between 125th and 137th street on a freezing cold night - the few passengers on the train at that late hour screaming and cursing at him to move or jump so the train could continue. Eventually he walked to the side of the tracks and silently jumped over the rails to his death on the street below. The passengers went quiet - death has a way of shaming the rambunctious into silence. I remember thinking “this ain’t New Zealand” as I peered through the window and he fell into the freezing darkness. It was an early lesson on our need for creating a positive infrastructure of friends and comrades around us - when those leave, so often hope soon follows. Now it’s a different world and a chance to reflect on what was and where
I’m going. Always grateful for the lessons of the past, both the dark and the light, and hopeful for the future.

Vampires: A crucial lesson in Jiu Jitsu and in life is this - You cannot TAKE an opportunity until you SEE an opportunity. All day every day we all have incredible opportunities on and off the mat go right past us and we simply don’t see them for what they are. In a moment the opportunity is gone and lost forever. Only when your MIND identifies an opportunity can your physical body step up and act upon it. In this sense a BIG part of getting submissions in Jiu Jitsu is mental - it begins with the mental action of recognition of opportunity. Every day I coach I see fleeting openings for submission that pass most people by. We all need to train our minds in VIGILANCE TO OPPORTUNITY and the CONFIDENCE TO ACT UPON IT. Increasing your finishing rates is NOT just a matter of developing physical skills. You can have all the arm lock skills in the world, but if you don’t recognize an opportunity for an arm lock when it’s in front of you, you won’t even ATTEMPT it, let alone succeed with it. You all know that i put an extraordinarily heavy emphasis on strangulation. A big part of success is a CONSTANT FOCUS ON THE NECK AS A TARGET. I train my students to see the world like vampires. When a vampire walks into a crowded room he does not see a hundred PEOPLE, he see a hundred NECKS. So too on the mat - WHEN YOU WANT TO WORK YOUR STRANGLES - train yourself to see NOTHING BUT NECKS. You will be amazed to see how your success rate will improve with only a change in mentality...
📸 @behr_dan

Learning from my videos: Often I am asked what is the best way to watch and learn from my instructional videos. Instructional videos have been around from the earliest days of the arrival of Jiu Jitsu in North America. They all followed a similar pattern. They were a collection of an outstanding athletes favorite moves, usually within a given general topic domain, say, guard passing. Despite being present for decades, they had only a sporadic effect on the development of most students - a kind of “flavor of the month” effect where a popular current move was offered in an introductory and rather random fashion and you tried to copy it as best you could. When I went to create instructional videos I wanted to completely split away from this traditional model and instead, capture what is doubtless one of the major themes of my teaching; that DEEP AND COMPLETE EXPLORATION OF A FEW TECHNIQUES WILL GARNER FAR GREATER RESULTS FOR A STUDENT THAN SHALLOW TINKERING WITH MANY RANDOM TECHNIQUES. I teach in terms of sub systems where A GIVEN TECHNIQUE IS EMBEDDED WITHIN A COMPLETE FRAMEWORK OF SUPPORTING SKILLS THAT MASSIVELY INCREASE THE CHANCE OF THAT TECHNIQUE BEING SUCCESSFULLY APPLIED AGAINST SKILLED RESISTANCE. As such, my videos were radically different from the norm. Instead of being a forty five minute sampling of moves they were up to ten hours of highly detailed analysis of every skill required to get a few winning moves to work against the best athletes in the world. The idea was to move away from sampling videos and offer genuine coaching videos that could have a real impact not only on your game, BUT EVEN HOW YOU THOUGHT THE GAME. Because the videos are so different in format and style - I recommend watching them differently. Watch them sections at a time. Only the most zealous students can watch for hours and stay focused. I generally recommend watching a section or two and trying to work those lessons into your next session on the mats. Use it as you would a series of private lessons that you can repeat at will over months and years to get to the level you want. Just as you never learn by reading a book, but only by RE-READING IT, so too with these videos.

Setting a strangle: A big part of our approach to strangulation is TO GET AT LEAST FIFTY PERCENT OF THE STRANGLE SET BEFORE YOU EVEN CONNECT YOUR HANDS/ARMS. Whenever you go to employ a rear strangle without the gi your two arms work in unison. One is the actual STRANGLE ARM that encircles your opponent’s neck. The other is a SUPPORT ARM which solidifies and supports the strangle arm usually via figure four grip or palm to palm grip. Our contention is that your opponent should already be feeling the effects of a strangle from just the one strangle arm encircling the neck - quite often the one handed strangle proves to be enough by itself and there is no need to lock hands/arms - we just finish one handed in the position of this photograph. At championship level however, it is usually necessary to bring the support arm into play to create stronger pressure. Make sure that before you do there is sufficient initial pressure from the strangle arm that the addition of the support arm FINISHES the strangle rather than INITIATES it. Failure to set the strangle hand properly is rarely atoned for by the addition of the support arm. Develop the skill of sinking the strangle arm first and then applying the support hand as A MEANS OF FINISHING A JOB ALREADY STARTED BY THE STRANGLE ARM rather than as the cause of the strangle. Here you can see my partner is already under pressure of strangulation before I have even released the other hand - finishing from here will be easy. There are other approaches to rear strangles (strangling over the mandible for example), but this is always the preferred method.

Happy Thanksgiving Day!! Giving Thanks to you all for your support and interest in our approach to the game! Wishing you all a great day of feasting and overall decadence in preparation for hard day of training tomorrow! 😜😂🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Pleasant surprises: Most days at in the basement are pretty much the same - they have to be - all human greatness is predicated on the idea of routines that build skills over time. Without regularity and routine none of those attention getting skills would ever be developed. Every so often however, the gods of fate throw us a pleasant surprise. Today it was the arrival of one of my favorite people in all of MMA - Demian Maia. He came by to say hello and get a quick strength and conditioning workout. This incredible fellow carried the flag for Jiu Jitsu in MMA so brilliantly for so long - he will always have a special place in the heart of Jiu Jitsu players around the world. He arrived just as Gordon Ryan was beginning his MMA workout hence the nature of the photo. Exciting news from Mr Maia! He has plans to begin a podcast in Brazil starting early next year! A little known fact about Mr Maia is that he was a journalism major in University. He is thus well prepared to start a really outstanding podcast interviewing friends and figures from MMA - I would listen just hear him talk about his career and training stories! Anything else would just be bonus! Keep up to date with this great man @demianmaia and follow his fights and media work. The podcast will be in Portuguese but the YouTube version will feature subtitles 😊 So it was was not just a pleasant surprise for us - but with this news - a pleasant surprise for all of you too! Best of luck to this great man who did such a fine job of representing our sport in the cage - he hopes to fight again in the next UFC in Brazil - that’s a fight I would never miss!

Homeward bound: At the airport in San Francisco waiting for connecting flight back to NYC! Can’t wait to get back on the mat with the squad and all my students in the blue basement Wednesday morning we are back in the saddle - lots of big projects coming up and lots of dreams to be realized! See you there! 😜😜

Last day in Australia: It’s been a fantastic journey that began in Singapore cornering Garry Tonon and seeing third win in MMA for @onechampionship while coaching the super seminar for @evolvemma gym. Then on to Australia to see my dear Mom and family along with seminars for @johndonehuejj @acsamelbourne @vt1martialarts and @kmamartialarts - here i am teaching the last seminar - a night seminar at VT1 gym in Sydney. I was greatly impressed by the progress of Australian grappling. Far from the usual centers of grappling they are growing in skill and numbers. They carry a great enthusiasm and optimism into the game which is already beginning to create champions with many more in the future I am sure. I am sad to leave - so many good people and good memories down here; but I am thrilled to get back home and get the basement fired up with action again. Tomorrow the long flight home and the mixed feelings of sadness and excitement at the airport. Thank you to everyone who came to the seminars - I hope you enjoyed a look at our approach to the sport and that it can help you get closer to your own goals and dreams.

Catching up with old friends in the land of Oz: After a day of teaching big seminars for @kmamartialarts here in Sydney Australia I got a wonderful chance to catch up with two of my favorite colleagues, Greg Jackson and Carlos Machado who by chance were in town. So good to catch up and talk shop with these two and relive old stories and crazy times 😜😜 Both men are an encyclopedia of knowledge and experience that is a privilege to have access to. Now I get ready for tomorrow at VT1 gym night seminar. Wishing you all the best from Sydney and hope this day took you just a little closer to your hopes and dreams in the sport #kaizenftw

Whenever I am in Sydney Australia I always love to see the crew at VT-1 martial arts and catch up! This week I enjoyed teaching group classes and private classes - they have windows and sun light!! I had to run downstairs to to the basement periodically to remind myself of home 😂😂 These guys are awesome and do a fine job of building local talent and growing the sport in positive ways!

Bottom guard position Jiu Jitsu - the essentials of grip, kuzushi (off balancing), distance management, and angle: The TECHNIQUES of bottom guard position in Jiu Jitsu are limitless and often overwhelming to learn - but the essential CONCEPTS of the position are few in number and easy to understand. You must be able to secure an effective working GRIP upon your opponent, generate KUZUSHI to open him up, manage distance well enough to create enough SPACE through framing to move effectively underneath him, create advantageous ANGLE to press an attack home. Whenever you feel overwhelmed by the number of possibilities for technique, go back to the concepts- ONLY WHEN THE GROUNDING CONCEPTS ARE SATISFIED WILL THE TECHNIQUES BE POSSIBLE - so keep them at the forefront of your thinking and let the techniques take care of themselves in time. Here you can see Nicky Ryan exhibit many of these essential bottom guard concepts to make a perfect entry into cross ashi garami from bottom butterfly guard

Reflections on Garry Tonon: Garry Tonon’s recent win in @onechampionship MMA fight takes him to 3-0 in around six to seven months of professional fighting. Even more remarkable is that his sum total of serious MMA training has just passed the eleven month mark. While he still has a long way to go he has made incredible progress in that short time. An interesting thing to consider is this - prior to his first fight, GARRY TONON HAD NEVER BEEN IN A FIGHT IN HIS ENTIRE LIFE. he never had a street fight, never fought even in school - THE FIRST TIME SOMEONE THREW BLOWS AT HIM WITH BAD INTENTIONS WAS HIS FIRST MMA FIGHT. Think about that - fighting is scary enough in itself but imagine your first ever experience of someone trying to really hurt you is thousands of miles from home in front of twenty thousand people with all your friends and family watching! I think it’s fair to say most people would melt under those circumstances. Yet Mr Tonon looked very relaxed and fluid despite zero experience. It’s easy to explain this in terms of character and say simply that Mr Tonon succeeded because HE HAS A GIANT SET OF BALLS. Fair point - he does. The real reason however, and one that is of the greatest importance to all of you now and for the rest of your lives is this - NEVER UNDERESTIMATE THE INCREDIBLE POWER OF THOROUGH TRAINING TO PREPARE YOU FOR EVENTS AND SITUATIONS THAT WOULD ORDINARILY CRUSH YOU. I don’t have faith in many things - BUT I HAVE LIMITLESS FAITH IN THE ABILITY OF TRAINING OVER TIME TO MAKE ORDINARY PEOPLE DO EXTRAORDINARY THINGS. Garry Tonon has remarkable personal courage - I will always be the first person to say that - but much more important than his courage is HIS WILLINGNESS TO INVEST IN TRAINING TIME AND ENERGY SO THAT WINNING HABITS ARE BUILT. Let me tell you in all honesty a message that you must carry with you throughout your Jiu Jitsu career. WINNING HABITS WILL WIN YOU MORE FIGHTS IN A YEAR THAN COURAGE WILL IN A LIFETIME. You can neglect many things in your life and get away with it - but not your training #worksmarter&harder2win

New video instructional release today - ENTER THE SYSTEM -KIMURA: I am very happy to announce that BJJ Fanatics is releasing the next installment of my ENTER THE SYSTEM video instructional series today - KIMURA! Kimura plays a big role in our approach to Jiu Jitsu. We use it constantly as both a devastating submission in itself, or as a gateway to other systems such as back system, arm locks(juji gatame) or triangles (sankaku) or legs etc. It is arguably the most readily available of all the major submission systems - anytime an opponent reaches for you and your head an arms are higher than his - kimura is available- and in a sport where the whole idea is to get a hold of people and grip them, that will happen a LOT! I have included a link in my Instagram bio above for those of you interested in buying the video from BJJ Fanatics - it will give you a great insight into our approach to the Kimura game! 😜😜 As always, it is video whose main intent is to give you a deep training resource that you can come back to for years as a guide to training. It is much much longer than most instructionals as it is a systematic guide designed to take you from the moment you make contact with an opponent all the way to submission and offers a systematic approach to overcoming all manner of resistance along the way. As always there is a heavy emphasis on CONCEPTS that provide a GENERAL SENSE OF DIRECTION, juxtaposed with a great amount of precise DETAILS that enable you to IMPOSE THAT DIRECTION on a tough opponent. Take charge of scramble situations and create fear in your opponents with one of the most versatile and devastating of all the major submission holds - Kimura!

Jiu Jitsu in Melbourne: Had a blast teaching at my friend John Donahue’s awesome gym @johndonehuejj here in Melbourne and then dinner with my family afterwards- it doesn’t get any better than that 😊😊 Always great to get home and see the sport growing! Tomorrow I teach a different topic at @acsamelbourne Nemesis MMA - hope I can help the local talent go further! Looking forward to seeing you on the mats!

On the road again: Waiting for my flight to Melbourne at Changi International Airport - looking forward to coaching at @johndonehuejj and @acsamelbourne and catching up with local Jiu Jitsu and my family 🤗🤗 It’s been a privilege to watch Garry Tonon’s development in MMA - it’s still early days but this hard working young man is making great strides in the worlds toughest sport. It is such a joy to come out to Asia and be part of @onechampionship and see their growth as an MMA organization and teach at @evolvemma gym and see people pick up on our approach to the sport. Can’t wait to return! Hope you all enjoyed the show! Make sure you tune in to @kasaigrappling for Gordon Ryan against the talented champion Matheus Diniz and up and coming juniors Ethan Crelinsten and Frank Rosenthal going in among some of the most highly ranked lightweights in the world in a tournament format! It’s going to be a great show! See you all in Melbourne! 🤗

Victory in Singapore! Garry Tonon won his third MMA bout here in Singapore this evening to extend his unbeaten record. The match was spent mostly in standing position where Mr Tonon took time to work his developing striking skills. At one point in the first round he suffered a cut under the eye - in Asia there is sometimes more pressure to stop fights when there is bleeding, so when the second round began he wisely began looking for the takedown. In a scramble on the floor he went back to one of his greatest grappling strengths - front head system mastery. He made a quick entry to a high elbow guillotine - his opponent Jung Song Lee skillfully got his back to the ground to stop the initial attack - but the great advantage of a systems based approach to submissions is the ability to get around resistance by going to the next step in the system. A second stab at the high elbow got the breakthrough and Mr Tonon won halfway through the second round. It has been just six months since Mr Tonon’s MMA debut - he only began his MMA training around four to five months prior to that debut. He has come a long way in a very short time. Here we all are after getting Mr Tonon’s cut nicely stitched by the @onechampionship medical staff. Wishing you all the best from Singapore! Hope you enjoyed the show!!

MMA star Sage Northcutt works back and triangle systems: we had a blast here in Singapore today working back and triangle systems and got an unexpected visit from Sage Northcutt @supersagenorthcutt who I have not seen since his days at Tristar gym. He did a fine job of working some complex moves - here he works the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) - looks like he killed his partner with it! 😂😂 He is a fine athlete and quickly picked up these new skills. Garry Tonon successfully made weight at 155 pounds - his first outing at the new weight for @onechampionship . Now he is feeding like a lion back at the hotel! 😂😂 I just finished teaching for the day at @evolvemma - I will go back and see if he left any scraps for me 😂😂 Wishing you all the best from Singapore!

Versatility: Among the most versatile of all the major submission holds is KIMURA. it functions equally well as a submission in itself and as a gateway to other submissions and other positions, depending upon how it is used. Used as a submission hold it is arguably the most devastating of them all - it often results in total dislocation/separation of the elbow in gruesome ways that instantly end bouts. As a gateway to the back it is one of the absolute best means of taking control of a scramble situation and turning it into a winning position such as back control. It is probably the most readily available of all the major submissions. Almost anytime your opponent reaches for you with his arm lower than yours - it’s on. As such, it is a true squad favorite. Here Garry Tonon uses a kimura variation primarily as a temporary pinning tool to move into another position. By creating a viable submission threat he distracts his opponent from his real intentions. If his main move should fail he can always go back to the original kimura. Learn to see kimura opportunities in scrambles and take advantage of them whenever you can - you will immediately make yourself more dangerous to your opponent and create a dual threat between the kimura itself and the other possibilities it offers.

Changing the game: It’s wonderful to see how much better students around the globe are improving in leg lock work. Here in Singapore I am teaching a super seminar to people from all over the globe at @evolvemma Years ago it would have been difficult to teach advanced material to a group of strangers as most people were unfamiliar with even the basic principles of keg work. Nowadays things are very different and it’s great to see a room of strangers quickly assimilate information and work as a team to improve their skill - it’s an exciting time to be a coach! Wishing you all the best from Singapore!

Setting the goals: First day of @evolvemma super seminar here in Singapore. Whatever form of training you engage in - ALWAYS START WITH A CLEAR SENSE OF WHERE YOU WANT TO GET TO. Here we begin with an outline of what we want to accomplish over the week of work together. Then it’s a matter of adding the details to get to the goal. When it’s time to make progress, nothing will dismay you more than hard work in the wrong direction that leads you no closer to your goal, and nothing will make you happier than setting a goal, working intelligently towards it and finally attaining it. Thus must you start every enterprise great or small with the question of where you want to get to - only then can you commit yourself fully to the time and effort required to get there.

Big win for Ethan Crelinsten at North American ADCC trials today: A superb performance today by Ethan Crelinsten to win gold at ADCC trials. I will have to check with Tom DeBlass but I think this may have been the largest number of entrants for a weight division in trials history! At the end of the day Mr Crelinsten was the only undefeated contestant - winning all matches except the final by submission - an incredible performance by this young man. Gordon Ryan did a fine job cornering him and other junior athletes for a great days work by these talented youngsters!

On the road again: At JFK waiting for my flight to Singapore to help Garry Tonon prepare for his third MMA bout against Sung Jong Lee on November 9 for @onechampionship. Mr Tonon continues to impress me with his work ethic, creativity and drive towards his goal to excel in his new sport - but every fight gets tougher as an athletes climbs higher. This will be his first bout at a new weight of 155 pounds (his previous two bouts were at 170 - his actual daily weight). In addition I will be teaching a five day super seminar for @evolve gym on our approach to Jiu Jitsu. Hoping to create a bunch of leg breaking, neck strangling maniacs out there 😜😜 Then it’s on to Australia to see my beloved Mom and family and catch up with my Jiu Jitsu friends in Melbourne and Sydney. Australian grappling is really progressing so that should be exciting! As always I will miss NYC and my dear students in the blue basement - but I will be back soon and can’t wait to see improvements when I return! Wishing you all the best from JFK - train hard, train safe and train with a well crafted plan!

All or nothing: One of the toughest aspects of the submission game is its all or nothing nature. NOBODY CARES ABOUT SUBMISSIONS THAT ALMOST WORKED, THEY ONLY REMEMBER THE SUBMISSIONS THAT WERE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED. You can do ninety nine percent of the work well, but if you fail on the last one percent you failed as completely as someone who only did five percent of the work well. It is critical then, that be strong all the way through the entirety of the move from set up through execution and on to the finish. This is why I generally prefer systematic, methodical approaches to submission. Don’t get me wrong - I love a fast and spectacular entry into a submission as much as anyone - but entries that rely on speed and surprise are difficult to apply with regularity on good opponents. In the majority of cases, step by step control will outperform any other style of submission application. Take your time and check off each step in the check list. STAY FOCUSED UNTIL THE END - it’s not over until they tap. Here, talented junior squad member Robert Degle @Robert Degle bjj works methodically from the back in his first Fight2Win show. A few seconds after this photo was taken he won via strangle; yet if you look now he is calmly and systematically working his way through the steps of the back system. There is no hint of excitement, exuberance or anxiety - just a job to be done and the knowledge of what that job consists of along with the discipline to see it through to the end - that’s the mindset I want you working with as you play the submissions game

Very happy to see the incredible success of Kasai grappling @kasaigrappling in NYC - they are now officially sold out for their latest show November 10!! I have always believed that if grappling shows were done right they could get a big crowd pumped with excitement- Kasai is showing how to do it! Very excited to see junior squad member Ethan Crelinsten get on stage with the big boys in the 145 pound tournament loaded with some of the most illustrious names in grappling. Gordon Ryan takes in the might Matheus “King Kong” Diniz the current 185 pound Kasai champion in what should be a titanic match up! Congratulations to Rich Byrne and Rolls Gracie on the success of their show! They are doing great work! I will be in Singapore with Garry Tonon getting ready for his third @onechampionship MMA bout but will be following the action at Kasai! Hope you all enjoy the big show!

Bright lights: One of the biggest issues athletes have is translating the skills they develop in the gym to the big stage. On the face of it, it should not be an issue. The lights, noise and crowd don’t change things physically. No matter where or when the stage, a triangle is still a triangle, an arm bar an arm bar. What changes is our mental state. We feel MORE IS AT STAKE when a crowd is watching. We all have a sense of pride and the thought of failure in front of a crowd stings. Athletes aren’t afraid of pain, suffering and in many cases, even injury. WHAT THEY FEAR IS FAILURE. When we are fearful of consequences we naturally tend to restrict our actions to only those moves and tactics we have the most confidence in. This has an immediate negative effect on our game as you now will only employ a much smaller set of moves than you usually do - it’s as though you just lost half of your game. In addition, fear will make you second guess yourself whenever opportunity arises. Where normally you would jump without hesitation upon an opportunity, now you hang back. By the time you act, the opportunity has passed. Thirdly, fear and anxiety will manifest itself physically as higher than usual muscular tension. This will result in quicker fatigue than usual, breathing problems and slower, clumsier movement. You will be aware of this as it is happening and it will compound the feelings of fear and anxiety and create a worsening cycle where performance degenerates even faster. Avoiding this fall off from gym performance to stage performance is a big part of contest preparation. Obviously it’s a huge topic, and arguably the topic about which there is the least agreement as to what the solution is. One day I would like to talk about it at length. In general my approach is always to de-emphasize the difference between gym and stage. To remind the athlete that most of the differences, lights, noise, crowd etc are illusory insofar as they make no physical difference upon performance and that any negative change in performance is almost entirely the result of our own mental states rather than the event itself.

Australian tour: After teaching the Singapore super seminar @evolvemma November 5-10 and cornering Garry Tonon for his third fight at @onechampionship MMA, I will go to see family and friends in Australia - hopefully avoiding local wildlife. I am delighted to be able to join my old friend and Aussie Jiu Jitsu icon John Donahue in Melbourne on November 11 Sunday at 2-5pm @johndonehuejj for back system and Nemesis MMA @acsamelbourne Monday night for leg system. Then it’s off to Sydney to see my dear Mom (Mum) and then teach a super seminar at @kmasalievski KMA martial arts - they have just announced another session as the first two day session was sold out - check with them to get in the next session if you missed out or feel like extra 😜 In between I shall join old friends at @vt1martialarts with Liam Resnekov and do what I can for local Jiu Jitsu scene. Can’t wait to see you all and catch up with Australia’s incredible growth in Jiu Jitsu! In the meantime I will get The squad ready and practice crocodile wrestling, snake catching, shark nose punching and kangaroo kick counters to ensure my safety while there 😂😂 See you all soon! 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺 PS One day I’m going to have the time to get to New Zealand I promise!

Stay composed - think it through: I always emphasize the idea of problem solving in Jiu Jitsu. The whole sport is essential a battle between your ability to create problems for your opponent whilst solving the problems he or she creates for you and do so a faster rate than they can so that ultimately you create a problem that they cannot solve in the time available. As with any act of problem solving - ANXIETY AND EMOTION DON’T HELP YOU GET TO SOLUTIONS, in fact they usually interfere with that. Jiu Jitsu requires that you do all your problem solving under great stress - no matter what the stress level - YOU MUST CONDITION YOURSELF TO MAINTAIN THE CALM DEMEANOR REQUIRED FOR PROBLEM SOLVING ACTIVITY. It starts in the gym. If you cannot recall what happened during sparring, if you can’t control your breathing, if you feel emotional during the sparring - these are all signs that a calmer physical and mental state is required. Getting there takes time and training. When someone has you in a tight strangle or joint lock it’s natural to feel anxiety, but I assure you that freaking out want get you out of trouble. Only a rational and effective plan of action will - and to arrive at that it helps to be calm enough to figure it out. Here, Ethan Crelinsten is in a scary looking situation with Georges St- Pierre attacking his legs, but his expression is the same as if he were reaching for a cup of tea. As much as Jiu Jitsu conditions the body to move and act in certain ways, it also must condition the mind to act and behave in certain ways if an athlete is to reach their potential

Angle and level: In almost all combat sports there is a need to gain some sort of advantage prior to attack. Two of the best forms of advantage are ANGLE and LEVEL. Attacking from front on almost always gets you strongly countered, but if you can create angle and change levels in some way, you will often be able to successfully press home an attack. Normally level change refers to the act of LOWERING ones level, but if you are flat on your back in some form of supine guard position this is not possible - you are on the floor already. In these cases the level change goes in reverse - your hips RISE UP FROM THE FLOOR. When this is combined with angle - magic starts to happen and submission breakthroughs start happening much more often. Look at Nick Ryan getting both angle and level advantage as he works for upper body submissions from closed guard. The combination of the two creates tremendous wedging effects around the head and shoulders that makes it very difficult indeed for an opponent to pull free. Train yourself to constantly look for angle and level advantage wherever you are - whenever you attain them you will be considerably more dangerous to your opponents

Getting ready: Garry Tonon is preparing for his third MMA bout for @onechampionship in Singapore November 9 against talented Korean MMA fighter Sung Jong Lee. Mr Tonon has been training hard in his new sport - so much new ground to cover but it’s a fascinating journey! Though there is much that is new, the core principles of unarmed combat are always the same - it’s just a matter of training new skills to express them differently in a new context. Always so much going on as everyone prepares for their upcoming matches in grappling, but MMA has a different flavor and asks more from the athlete in terms of breadth of skill. Looking forward to this final week of hard training in NYC and then back to Asia!

The multiplicity principle: An extremely important general principle of Jiu Jitsu is the multiplicity principle. It is seen in many different areas of the sport. The essential idea is this - FOR ANY GIVEN MOVE THERE WILL BE MANY LINES OF RESISTANCE SO IT IS EXTREMELY VALUABLE TO HAVE MULTIPLE VARIATIONS OF THAT MOVE TO BYPASS THAT RESISTANCE WITHOUT ABANDONING THE MOVE AS A WHOLE. The more variations you possess of your favorite moves and positions, the better you will be able to overcome the resistance your opponent offers. Here, Garry Tonon shows his usual masterful back control. Note how he makes use of many variations of leg position as he works the back position. If you limit yourself to one or two back positions it will be easy for experienced opponents to escape. When you can seamlessly switch from one leg configuration to another in response to resistance - using a multiplicity of rear mount leg variations to follow your opponents back you will be able to stay in good position long enough to get the submission breakthrough you seek. For all your favorite moves and positions - research the many subtle variations and configurations so that you can change the character of the move/position, but maintain the same position/move overall.

Getting ready for Australia! Immediately after Garry Tonon’s fight in Singapore @onechampionship and my super seminar at @evolvemma I will head to Australia to see my family and catch with the Australian Jiu Jitsu scene 😊😊 I will probably go first to Melbourne and teach (tentatively) November 11 Sunday afternoon at John Donahue’s school (Back attacks) and then a different topic at Nemesis MMA on Monday evening November 12. After than I will head to Sydney for a big two day seminar for KMA martial arts @KMA salievski on Saturday and Sunday teaching back attacks and leg attacks. Apparently the initial seminar at KMA completely sold out so we will run a second one day seminar on Sunday afternoon for those who could not get tickets for the initial offering - contact KMA for details. In addition I will be teaching friends at @vt1martialarts in Sydney with Liam Resnekov. It will be great to see old friends in Australia- it’s amazing how far Aussie grappling has come since last time I was there - hope I can help it go even further!

Here is a great clip of outstanding grappling and MMA athlete Erin Blanchfield in training at RGA. Ms Blanchfield first started coming to train with the squad in the blue basement from Silver Fox academy in New Jersey and wanted to prepare for an EBI grappling show. She was just eighteen at the time and entered EBI 12 female flyweights as an unknown among several world champions. She stunned everyone by winning the event - the youngest ever to do so. Her primary interest however, is MMA where she is unbeaten and signed with Invicta. On November 16 she fights again. Here she is going through her MMA training and grappling training in NYC. It’s amazing to see her work ethic in operation every day. She comes all the way from New Jersey to toil in two sports every day. Keep up with this amazing young woman as she climbs to the top @blanchfield_mma and exhibits daily the purposeful action that over time produces champions and makes dreams reality. Video by @kahl_one

Georges St-Pierre/Chris Weidman and bottom position: Two of the most impressive athletes I ever had the honor of working with were Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman. Both were UFC champions and both were outstanding wrestlers capable of taking down anyone in the basement very easily and yet, every time they came to train, THEY ALMOST ALWAYS PULLED GUARD AND WORKED FROM BOTTOM POSITION. Why? They KNOW they can take down anyone here and recognize that the value of a Jiu Jitsu room is its Jiu Jitsu skill - so they work exclusively in that domain and thus maximize the value of the session to their development. So often I see a Jiu Jitsu athlete training with a wrestler and just pull guard straight away. Doing so means you miss a fine opportunity to work your standing grappling/takedown skills. Of course there may be times you have to pull guard, perhaps for safety reasons in a crowded training room, or because you have a match coming up soon and you want to mimic your plan for the match etc But under normal conditions use your partners for what they are best at to maximize your development. Mr St- Pierre and Mr Weidman did it for years and both became fine Jiu Jitsu practitioners as a result. Of course they could have played a negative game and just avoided going down to the floor but they did not - THEY IMMERSED THEMSELVES IN THE SPORT THEY WISHED TO LEARN EVEN THOUGH INITIALLY IT PUT THEM AT A DISADVANTAGE. They did not care about that - only about their long term development- and in time, both became great champions. Follow their example - immerse yourself in the new skills of a different grappling style and let your skills grow by letting your concern about winning or losing go.

The single greatest attribute that a coach can build in a student is SELF RELIANCE. You can have a great team behind you, the best coaches, legions of fans, sponsors , whatever you care to name - but at the end of the day the athlete walks on to the stage ALONE. He will be tested alone and his ability to trust in himself, develop himself, motivate himself and assess himself will be what determines success or failure on the big stage.

Multi tasking: As much as we value focus in jiu jitsu it should be quite clear to you that there is a strong demand in many situations in jiu jitsu for you to work on several different tasks at the same time if you are to be successful. In the case of the back position, you must be able at a minimum to satisfy the basic demand to maintain the overall position, while at the same time working diligently to actually attack. In practice, and especially when utilizing the back system methodology that we employ, we have to simultaneously work to hold position and also battle through our opponent’s hands to set up strangle attacks. As you gain in sophistication you will add more and more tasks into the equation - a battle for head position, for left vs right side etc etc. You must master the skills of prioritizing the tasks (position generally takes priority) and of working in two or more at the same time. Here, Georges St-Pierre does a fine job of working control of Nicky Ryan’s hips with his legs to stay aligned and keeping head on opposite side of his strangle arm to exert strong control from head to hips. While all this is going on he is engaged in a sharp hand fight with Mr Ryan. This is exactly the kind of practice you must engage in to master this critical aspect of the sport. Multi tasking at the office is one thing - but doing it preserve yourself from a powerful strangle is quite another!

Get everything in place first - then go: A common problem in the application of submission holds is the tendency most people have to attempt the move before they have the preconditions necessary for the success of the move set in place. Any given submission has a set of preconditions that will make it work. Failing to establish these prior to attempting the actual is asking for failure. You must learn the preconditions for your favorite submissions and have the diligence and patience to set them in place first and only then apply the submission. This will help you in two important ways. The first is physical. When the preconditions are well set your physical performance of the submission will be much cleaner and tighter. The second is psychological. When the preconditions are well set you will enter into the submission with much greater verve and confidence and display the commitment necessary for submission holds at high levels. Look at how Garry Tonon has established perfect head, wrist, elbow and leg positioning before he commits to falling into a bottom position high elbow guillotine. He can fall into the move with full confidence knowing that everything is in place before he enters. Know what you need PRIOR to entering your favorite submissions. Then watch your confidence steeply rise as you enter and enjoy your increased success afterwards.

Back system - two approaches to strangles: When it is time to attack strangles from the back, there are two main approaches. The first is the STRANGLE FIRST approach. Here the idea is to penetrate your opponents chin/neck with your strangle hand as soon as you get to the back and then subsequently get the usual control elements afterwards. The second approach is CONTROL FIRST. Here the idea is to stabilize and control the position first and then work methodically for the strangle second (in our case, by using the hand fighting system we are known for). If you wish to excel in back attacks it’s important that you excel in both. The great problem most people have when attacking from the back is setting their strangle arm in place. You can either use speed to get it set, or control that pins your opponents defensive arms down so you can get your strangle arm set. When Georges St-Pierre fought Micheal Bisping he saw a fleeting opportunity and used the strangle-first speed based method to take the exposed neck and took a brilliant victory. Nonetheless, both are necessary for back strangulation mastery, so here he is today working his control based method with Nicky Ryan and Gordon Ryan - two masters of this approach. Remember - as a Jiu Jitsu athlete your strangle arm is your equivalent of a boxers knock out punch - take pride in your ability to use it in different ways to get the decisive win.

The great under performer among the submission holds of jiu jitsu: There are around fifteen to twenty families of submission holds, each with many many variations in technique and entry. These core submission holds are seen all the time in competition. Arm bars, triangles rear naked strangles etc. are constantly seen successfully applied in all levels of competition. There is however, one well known and foundational submission hold that has a truly miserable success rate. In fact, in twenty five years I cannot think of even a single example of it working successfully in black belt competition at the world championship level gi or no gi. This must make it the single worst performing submission hold among the various foundational submissions in our sport. Most of the other submissions perform brilliantly, but the success rate of this one is utterly feeble - can you guess what it is? It is the Americana lock (ude garami). The only example of it being used successfully that I can recall is by Jon Jones on a badly battered and exhausted Vitor Belfort in an MMA fight. This is very unusual - most core moves of the sport have excellent success rates. The American lock is unquestionably a core lock of the sport. Often it is the first lock we learn and a staple of beginner classes everywhere, yet it scores so few victories that I would understand if an instructor simply stopped teaching it above white belt level. Interestingly the American lock is actually very strong and potentially devastating once it is applied. The failure is not MECHANICAL, an American lock will break an arm just as surely as a kimura or juji gatame or any other (in fact I would argue that the breaking potential of a well applied American lock is superior to most other joint locks) So why the failure to be successfully applied in competition? If it’s not mechanical, the failure must reside in SET UPS/ENTRY and in ability to COPE WITH RESISTANCE/COUNTERS. Do you think this great failure of the submission family can be rehabilitated? Can we improve our set ups to make this lock work in competition? Or is it destined to be forever the under performer of jiu jitsu? Let me know your thoughts!

The pattern of all progress: Be aware that your progress in jiu jitsu and almost any other skill you care to learn proceeds in a very predictable fashion. This pattern is true for both your overall progress in the sport and also for your progress in any given skill within the sport. It will begin an initial RAPID PROGRESS phase as you embark on developing a new skill. This is an exciting time as your level increases quickly and everything is new and exciting. Then you will encounter a slowing of progress that develops into a PLATEAU/FRUSTRATION phase. Here you run into recurring problems and walls that don’t have easy answers. This phase can be very long in many cases. At some point we get to the SUDDEN BREAKTHROUGH phase. A workable set of solutions to the problems we encountered is found and the cycle returns to the rapid progress phase and continues on as a cycle of uneven development. Once you become cognizant of this cycle you will not become disheartened by the reality that there will be times that you feel like you are not going forward at all. Let this knowledge give you optimism in these periods and know that the next phase will come. However it is crucial you under stand this vital point - EVERY POSITIVE CHANGE IN THIS CYCLE COMES FROM A CONCERTED EFFORT TO CHANGE THINGS ON YOUR PART. Change does not come about magically - YOU MUST ACTIVELY MAKE IT HAPPEN BY CHANGING YOUR APPROACH. Don’t expect to get change by doing the same things you have done previously. Understand this fundamental cycle of skill training and let it give you the critical mix of optimism and realism that will get you closer to your goals.

Guillotine attacks: Breaking your opponent’s alignment and structure: A critical part of success in jiu jitsu is reducing your opponents strength by misaligning his spine. This is particularly important in guillotine attacks. If you can put your opponents head and neck into an unnatural, misaligned position you will greatly degrade his ability to defend himself and prevent the strangle. In a well applied guillotine there is a concerted attempt to turn your opponents head and neck into a structurally weak position. Here you can clearly see this in operation as Garry Tonon applies a devastating high elbow guillotine on Kim Terra, the very talented brother of Caio. You can clearly see the turning of the head into a forced and unnatural position that shuts down effective defense and greatly facilitates the strangle. This is achieved mostly by the interplay between your hips and the elbow of your strangle arm - you can see this interplay very well here. Look to add this notion of rotation into an unnatural position to improve your guillotine game - it’s not much fun to drill but the results will assuredly brings smile to your face! Keep working your front headlock/Guillotine game - it is a huge part of your submission potential in no gi grappling

Going beyond position - The limb isolation principle: Traditional BJJ puts positional dominance as the most fundamental goal of the athlete. The reasoning is very sound. Traditional jiu jitsu was predicated on the idea that jiu jitsu was for fighting and if one got to a dominant position one could use strikes to open an opponent up to facilitate submissions. In a pure grappling match however, strikes are not permitted. Many people settle for just getting good position and winning by the points accrued. However, if you wish to become a submission specialist you must go beyond simply pinning opponents in dominant position - you must in addition master the skill of ISOLATING AND CONTROLLING A LIMB. Only when a limb is isolated and controlled is submission possible. This skill, like any other, must be trained diligently. If you wish to improve your submission rates, When you get to a dominant position GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE and work to ISOLATE A LIMB. This is one of the absolute most important general principles of my approach to jiu jitsu. In a real fight you create pressure to open up submissions by STRIKING but in a grappling match you create pressure to open up submissions by ISOLATING A LIMB. The mantra I preach to my students is this: IN GRAPPLING YOU ONLY BECOME DANGEROUS TO YOUR OPPONENT WHEN YOU TAKE HIS BACK OR ISOLATE A LIMB (or best of all - both). This is one of the founding axioms of my approach to grappling training and coaching. Look at Gordon Ryan mounted on the great Josh Barnett. Most people would consider it a huge accomplishment to sweep and mount such a powerful adversary, but Mr Ryan is not satisfied with this at all and immediately begins to work Mr Barnett’s elbow up above his shoulders to isolate it away from his torso. Years of training in our approach makes this a reflex the moment we get to a dominant position. Make if a reflex in your game and I promise you your submission rates will dramatically increase.

Stay with it: One of the most common things I see when coaching is students giving insufficient development time to a new skill and abandoning what could have been a great addition to their arsenal by giving up before they should. Early in Garry Tonon’s time working with me I noted he had no real attacks from front headlock/guillotine. This was unacceptable in my eyes. A strong guillotine attack is not only a devastating weapon in itself, but a tremendous means of opening up a defensively strong opponent to other forms of attack such as back strangles and leg attacks. I thought the high elbow guillotine would be a fine starting point - it is an extremely strong strangle that confounds many of the traditional defenses to guillotines and was well suited to Mr Tonon’s dynamic movement oriented game. It was a a big part of my early training in jiu jitsu as it was the favorite move of one of my main mentors, Matt Serra in the 1990’s. In addition, the great Marcelo Garcia has shown its effectiveness on many occasions at the highest levels. Initially the results were rather poor. Mr Tonon really struggled with the move and on several occasions told me he was not interested in further study of it. I insisted and we kept working on both mechanics and set ups. Mr Tonon is usually a student who sees a move on Monday and by Tuesday is performing it flawlessly so this was a very frustrating experience for him. In time he developed one of the very best high elbow guillotine attacks I ever saw and it became one of his best weapons that he used often in competition and training. Remember - NO MOVE IN YOUR ARSENAL IS BORN INTO MATURITY - THEY ALL REQUIRE A TIME OF NURTURE BEFORE THEY BECOME STRONG. Don’t give up too quickly on what you perceive as a move with great potential. Keep trouble shooting and solving the problems you experience and give it time. That move which today you curse and bemoan may well in time be the move that your opponents fear the most and which you rely upon more than any other. Nothing great is built in a day and many things that became great started inauspiciously. Work hard and intelligently - but exercise patience also.

The two ways: When unarmed humans fight, there are two main ways they can inflict sufficient damage upon each other to attain victory. The first is through the use of KINETIC energy - moving a hard part of the body at speed towards a vulnerable part of the opponent’s body. The second is through the use lever and fulcrum to apply BREAKING FORCES on joints or CONSTRICTING FORCES on arteries. Traditionally the history of martial arts has always divided these approaches to combat into striking arts- boxing, Muay Thai, karate, Tae Kwon do etc etc and grappling arts, jiu jitsu, Judo, wrestling styles, sambo etc etc. The fusion of the two in MMA is the purest and most complete and the one which makes the greatest demands upon the athlete in terms of broadening their skill set. I am always grateful that my sensei Renzo Gracie always encouraged me to remember the link between jiu jitsu and fighting. This made me always put a very heavy emphasis on submission holds in my jiu jitsu teaching as this is the grapplers equivalent of a KO punch. It was in this fascinating interface between grappling and striking that I first worked with Georges St-Pierre and now with Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan who are now both beginning this new journey from one skill set to another. Here, Garry Tonon warms up in the OneChampionship cage shortly before his most recent fight - working on his mixed grappling/striking skills on the floor where athletes get the best opportunities to display the two ways to victory in unarmed combat working in unison.

Having fun training Shane McMahon of the WWE @wwe @shanemcmahonwwe - he is an outstanding athlete and shocked us with the speed with which he picked up complex moves! I have always loved reading about the old time link between Pro Wrestling and submission grappling. Many of the old time pro wrestlers were excellent grapplers who could do choreographed shows and real matches with equal efficacy. There was a much smaller gap between choreographed matches and real matches in those days. Mr McMahon is exploring that area now - learning the submissions we use and doing a fine job picking up strangleholds and joint locks! These big men move incredibly well for their size and are masters of stunt work, high amplitude falls and slams and showmanship - I am confident they could learn to slap on submission holds with style in a short time too!

Overseas adventures: Very pleased to announce three big overseas projects coming up in November. First, Garry Tonon will return to @onechampionship MMA in Singapore to fight Korean MMA fighter Sung Jong Lee on November 9th. That week I will teach a super seminar going from November 5th - 9th two classes a day at @evolvemma gym in Singapore showing the squad style to people traveling in from around the world to learn our approach to the game. After this I will travel to Australia to see my dear Mom (Mum in Aus/NZ 😜) and family and catch up with all my jiu jitsu friends in the Land Down Under. I will teach a super seminar in Sydney and probably in Melbourne if I can get organized! I always love to see how far Australia and New Zealand have progressed in jiu jitsu and would love to do anything I can to assist that development. Mr Tonon is training very hard as always and will be looking to show his progress in MMA skill - this is his first fight at 155 pounds and I am preparing a comprehensive teaching program for Singapore and Australia- I will release more details on the Australia tour soon! Can’t wait to see you all and work to help get you to the next level! Until then, wishing you the best from NYC! 🤗🤗

Changing the instructional video game: Dinner with the great Bernardo Faria and Michael Zenga of BJJ Fanatics. We have some fascinating projects coming up - technique in jiu jitsu changes every year, but TEACHING METHODOLOGY has been largely static for generations- we aim to change that! Big plans for the future - can’t wait to share with you all! Wishing you all the best from NYC!

Benefits of a system based approach to learning martial arts: most of you know that one of the foundations of my approach to coaching jiu jitsu is that of a systems based method rather than the classical move-based approach. The idea is to create sub systems within the classic BJJ system that give a comprehensive and coherent guide to action in specific scenarios that can be learned very quickly and confer a considerable knowledge/skill advantage over an opponent who might otherwise have a considerable OVERALL experience advantage and yet a DOMAIN SPECIFIC experience/knowledge disadvantage in these specialized scenarios. We are all familiar with the idea that someone can have vast knowledge in one area, but be completely lacking in another. Essentially we try to create this situation in jiu jitsu. It begins with a solid positional/fundamentals game - you can never skip that step - and then we get into specific scenarios and build detailed systems and training programs around them. Since there is so much focus on these, experience and proficiency can be accrued relatively quickly in these domains and garner exceptional results in a short time frame. Seventeen year Nicky Ryan showed the results of this kind of training over the weekend. He took on Japanese MMA Hideo Tokoro, who has over sixty MMA fights with wins over grappling icons such as Masakazu Imanari. Yet Mr Ryan was able to secure the back and finish in classic squad style using our method of arm trapping that makes even very experienced opponents vulnerable to strangles. You can clearly see the extent to which his opponent’s defensive arms are pinned down leaving nothing to defend the following stranglehold. Remember - THERE IS MUCH MORE TO THE MOVES THEMSELVES THAT DETERMINE SUCCESS OT FAILURE IN JIU-JITSU. Very often it is THE INFRASTRUCTURE AROUND THE MOVES that determines their value.

After all the action and controversy at UFC 229 on Saturday my favorite moment was Derrick Lewis’ interview with Joe Rogan 😂😂😂 Had the pleasure of watching with @benaskren with whom I taught a great seminar earlier in the day. He is a great athlete, a superb teacher and a great fellow.

The surest sign: A coach always wonders how far a student will go to get to their potential. In truth the degree to which you will rise to your potential is proportional to your willingness to invest time, energy and intelligent planning into your development in the skills required to get where you want to. One of the surest signs of a strong commitment to your growth is the time it takes for a student to return to the gym to renew training after a major competition. I’m not so impressed when an athlete comes back immediately after a loss - everyone feels like training hard after the sting of a loss. Its when they come back immediately to train and grow after a big WIN that impresses me most. Most people will relax and lay off work after a win - but the truly ambitious just see that win as a stepping stone to a still greater self and get back to work and growth as soon as possible.

Ryan brothers dominate in Las Vegas: Gordon and Nicky Ryan were on fire at the Quintet 3 Team Grappling event last night. Nicky Ryan was up first, in a super match with Hideo Tokoro, Japanese MMA star who has gone the distance with Royce Gracie and has an interesting fast paced and scrappy style. Quintet has some strange and seemingly arbitrary rules - heel hooks are forbidden and their passivity/stalling criteria make little sense, so the plan was constant movement to upper body finishes - Nicky Ryan did exactly that - displaying a beautiful back system mastery to trap Mr Tokoro’s arms helplessly and finish the strangle in a few minutes. Then the team competition began. The match up I was most interested in was Gordon Ryan against the great Josh Barnett. Mr Barnett is a legend in both grappling and MMA and represents the art of Catch Wrestling- the traditional American style of submission grappling. He has fought brilliantly against jiu jitsu players in the past and always impressed me with his effectiveness. I know very little about this fascinating historical style, I must improve my knowledge in this area, but I do know that it shares several philosophies in common with our approach to grappling and is very different to classical BJJ - so this was going to be interesting. Mr Ryan quickly swept and mounted Mr Barnett despite a 25-30 pound weight difference and in an ensuing scramble locked a triangle strangle to take an incredible win over a legend. Then Gordon Ryan went on a tear, submitting almost all his other opponents as the event progressed, including visiting team mate Craig Jones via back system strangle and jiu jitsu legend Vitor Shaolin Ribeiro via special arm bar variation that Mr Ryan developed himself. He took his team to victory largely by himself in a truly outstanding performance. These incredible brothers just keep improving and show that the will to learn and grow is the basis of continuing success on the big stage. I am so proud of their diligence, hard work and creativity as they walk the long path to mastery.

Can you learn from a video? This is a question I am often asked. My answer is an unequivocal - YES. I truly believe that video is among the single most useful additions to any jiu jitsu athletes coaching inputs - whether it be study and analysis of great players, technical advice from experts or video self analysis of your own game - all can play a major role in speeding your development in the sport of intelligently allied to physical work in the dojo. Here is a fine example at work. Phil Schwartz @phillschwartz10p is a talented 10th Planet blackbelt on the West Coast who always had a game heavily influenced by traditional 10th Planet strong points like rubber guard and “truck” cross body rides etc. he became interested in the leg lock game after watching the success of the squad in EBI competition. Intense study of the ENTER THE SYSTEM: LEG LOCK videos along with his own hard work drilling and practicing in the gym quickly garnered him some serious improvements. Here he is in action at the recent Washington State NAGA competition where he took gold with three well applied inside heel hooks - in particular this superb example where he used text squad style double trouble principle to control both legs to subvert his opponent’s defense and pave the way for a fine finish. Note the impressive control over his opponent’s movement that allows him to pick the time and method of finishing at his discretion - a superb example of taking theoretical knowledge from a video source and getting great practical results. Well done Phil!! I am happy to see your success and hope it inspires others to see the value that video input can play in an athlete’s development. Hope I get to see more success from you and other students in the future! 🤗🤗 Wishing all my long distance video students the best from the basement where it all began!

The inestimable Matt Serra: One of my most important mentors in my development was Matt Serra. He was an inspirational senpai to all of us on the mat. He is also one of the great characters of the old Renzo Gracie Academy. This guy can light up a room any time any place. This afternoon he came in to catch with the crew. Like all jiu jitsu players, there is nothing he likes more than a discussion of techniques. Here he is playing around and staying current with some reverse X Guard entries into cross ashi garami/inside heel hook finishes. His commentary while drilling had us all in stitches. “What is this? Double trouble? DOUBLE TROUBLE? AM I NOW PART OF THE DEATH SQUAD!!!”😂😂😂😂 Training with Matt Serra was always educational and tough - but the comedy shows afterwards always made our day and made it easy to come back tomorrow for more!! Here we are, Mr Serra, Garry Tonon and myself making leg lock work fun 😜😜😂😂 As much as we all love hard training - it’s a treasure to have personalities like this in the gym to keep it all fun!

My two guillotine mentors: One of the reasons why I put such a heavy emphasis on guillotine training for no gi jiu jitsu is because I saw with my own eyes so many times in my early years of development the incredible effectiveness of a well applied guillotine by two of my most important influences - my sensei, Renzo Gracie, and my senpai, Matt Serra. Both men had outstanding success with guillotines, but in very different ways. Mr Gracie developed the arm in guillotine as his favorite move (tokui waza). He did so at a time when many people thought the move could not possibly work. Experimentation and ultimately success in competition proved them wrong. Though he had a vast array of moves, whenever he was in a highly competitive sparring session that was his go to move. Mr Serra, was an early user of the high elbow guillotine (we actually used to call it a Serra guillotine in those days!). On so many occasions I saw him submit famous visiting blackbelts (when he was just a purple and brown belt!). Mr Serra was extremely agile and from bottom position, jump up and snap his opponent’s head down and lock this devastating hold and either fall back or stand up to finish - even when it did not get a finish it was so threatening that opponents were very reluctant to pressure forward and pass against him. It was a fascinating thing for me to observe as a student - that two people could employ two very different guillotines and get so much success either as a submission or as a severe threat that set up other attacks. There are many great guillotine specialists out there - I was very fortunate to have two right in front of me from the start! They taught me the essential lesson that once you master a version of the guillotine you will be dangerous at any moment in a match and can turn the direction of a match in the blink of an eye from almost any situation.

One day after class we were all sitting around as we always do, making fun of each other and discussing very silly topics very seriously - when it became apparent that Nicky Ryan had NEVER SEEN THE MOVIE BLOOD SPORT!!!! There was a cry of mixed horror and rage from Garry Tonon - I have never seen him get so emotional! 😂😂Mr Tonon immediately laid down the law - no more lessons for Mr Ryan until he watched Blood Sport or some equivalent JCVD movie - to which Mr Ryan replied, “who is Jean Claude Van Damme?” ☠️☠️ Fresh cries of horror and rage from Mr Tonon!! ☠️☠️💀💀☠️☠️ Pandemonium broke out on the mats as it turned out several other squad members had also failed this basic requirement of martial arts training! It took me several minutes to convince Mr Tonon not to instantly demote Mr Ryan back to white belt!! Out came the iphone and the guilty parties all had to watch a YouTube highlight of Blood Sport before next class!! 😂😂 I guess Nicky can’t be blamed - the movie came out almost fifteen years before he was born! 😂😂 What are your martial arts movie favorites? Do you think jiu jitsu could ever translate well to movie fight scenes? Has anyone succeeded so far? If not, why? Watching Blood Sport again reminded me of how under represented grappling arts were in mainstream martial arts thinking in the eighties - it was a paradigm of punching and kicking - how much has changed since then!

A sense of direction: When you have a clear sense of direction and know exactly what you want to do in a bout and have the skills to get it done, you will not only be a difficult person indeed to stop - you will usually get what you want in very little time. Here is Frank Rosenthal going on a leg lock rampage this weekend - ending his match in seconds via outside heel hook. I always look to coach A STRONG FIRST MOVE THAT WILL EITHER GET AN IMMEDIATE BREAKTHROUGH OR CREATE OVERLY DEFENSIVE REACTIONS THAT WILL SET UP SUBSEQUENT MOVES. Very often a well performed strong first move will be all that is required. All my students excel in creating pressure from the outset even when the opponent knows what to expect. This often results in very quick victories like this leg lock blitz. You must train this aspect of the game - know what you want and practice until you can get there quickly - the results can be astounding

Juniors on fire at Rise Grappling Invitational! Last night the squad juniors put on an amazing team display at the growing Rise grappling show in New York. First up was leg locking ace Robert Degle who blitzed his opponent in ten seconds via heel hook. Newly promoted black belt Frank Rosenthal clearly took that as a challenge - he took on an athlete that flograppling ranks number five in the world no gi and heel hooked him in less than ten seconds! Then Ryan Quinn stepped up to win the 185 pound tournament. Nick Ronan had a tough physical match with a Pan Am brown belt double champion and won a thriller in overtime using back system to get the strangle for the win! In the main event Jason Rau took took on the outstanding Mansher Munch Khera and showed his leg locking mastery with several beautiful entries into the legs along with bottom sweep attempts that took him to a tightly contested judges decision win! Before all that, young Trinity Pun, just thirteen years old, showed her skill and tenacity to take a hard fought draw - big future there! Gordon Ryan did great work as cornerman along with my mentor Matt Serra, where Mr Ronan and Mr Rau began jiu jitsu and still teach and train. Great stuff from these outstanding athletes! Always so proud of their development and growth and the story that all of you must write - of someone following their passion and crafting a plan to get there and showing the discipline to stay the course. Well done! 🤗🤗 Legs and back system FTW!

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series of instructional videos THE FRONT HEADLOCK/GUILLOTINE. BJJ Fanatics has finished the editing process and everything is ready for release. If you are interested the link to their website is in my instagram bio. The front headlock/guillotine has always had a strong presence in no gi grappling - there is a reason - it’s among the most readily available moves in the sport and the finishes available from this position are devastating if applied well. We have our own distinctive approach to the position, based as always, around a step by step approach that takes you from all the necessary prerequisites through all the different options needed to overcome resistance and the central problems you will encounter in the position; and then the technical details needed to maximize efficiency in finishing. Thanks as always to my teachers and mentors who got me started on this journey and all my brilliant and hard working students who have shown this approach so successfully in competition and expanded upon it as they make their journey. Wishing you the best on your own front headlock/ guillotine journey!

Great morning training with @chrisweidman along with @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @wonderboymma Three of the most talented athletes I ever met. The application of jiu jitsu to MMA is a theme that my sensei, Renzo Gracie, always encouraged me to pursue and emphasize. I am blessed to do so with such talent as this. What an introduction to aspects of MMA training for Gordon Ryan - working with titans from the start!

Art and martial art - start with a sketch: When teaching I always keep in mind the analogy of the artistic painter. The painter BEGINS WITH A SKETCH and then fills in all the details over time to arrive finally at a beautiful painting. So too, The martial artist must approach every skill that he or she learns in a similar fashion. It’s tempting to jump straight into details, afterall, we are told so often it’s the details that make the difference. I believe it’s essential however, to begin with a general idea of the underlying PURPOSE and CONTEXT of the move first, and once this is clearly established, THEN move into details. Details without direction is just so much noise that won’t improve performance. Start with WHAT are you trying to accomplish and WHY this is a good thing and WHEN you employ it. Then start with an overview of the move and finish with details. So like the painter - BEGIN WITH A SKETCH and in time let the painting fill out the picture into a work of art that all who see it will admire. Here I chat with outstanding youth athletes Mikey Wilson and Liam Zeh before drilling begins - creating an outline that will give the practice session a sense of direction and purpose that they can build towards over the training time.

Gold medal front headlock/guillotine: I constantly push my students to excel in the use of front headlock/guillotine attacks. My reasoning is that it is always available, is highly effective and even when it fails, it elicits such a strong defensive reaction that it functions as a tremendous gateway into other great attacks. All of my students work hard at the skill, in particular Gordon Ryan. Mr Ryan was always devastating in the gym with his front headlock and guillotine attacks. Like all my students he even developed many of his own variations and tricks. Interestingly, Mr Ryan had a similar problem that several of my other students had - he was so successful in his main attacks to leg and back that he never got an opportunity to use his front headlock game outside the gym. Before ADCC I told him this was a good thing as few would be expecting any danger from that direction and the rules of ADCC heavily favor standing grappling/takedowns which increase the opportunity for front headlocks/guillotines even more. In the biggest match of his career so far - ADCC finals for the gold medal - he pulled out his unknown front headlock game during a standing wrestling exchange with the great Keenan Cornelius. Mr Cornelius used all his defensive skills, creating a wild series of rolling attacks, but Mr Ryan followed him through everything and finished mounted with a devastating strangle to take gold. It was an incredible example of the power of a hidden weapon, of systems based training to surpass high level resistance and of the immense tactical value of strong front headlock/Guillotine attacks. If you feel you want to increase your submission rate, invest time and study into the most readily available submission opportunity in the sport - the front headlock/guillotine. There is a reason so many great jiu jitsu athletes have made this move a centerpiece of their game - with study and training - so can you

This ain’t his first rodeo: Check out my sensei, Renzo Gracie sleeping just before his most recent MMA match in @onechampionship in Manila Philippines where he won via submission. Not many people can relax shortly before a main event fight - this photo was taken between Garry Tonon’s victory and Mr Gracie’s bout. So often you will see people expend vast amounts of energy unnecessarily before a fight. Energy is a precious resource - spend it as you ought to spend money - carefully and with an expectation of a return on your investment. Set a time for the beginning of your warm up and put whatever energy into it that feels right for you - but as much as possible, outside of your planned warm up, reduce energy expenditure through stress, worry and expectations to the greatest degree possible. Recognize that endless worry and physical tension won’t benefit your body performance. The only hard work before the fight should be the planned and structured warm up - prior to that - relax as much as you can. Obviously this is an extreme example of this - but it’s something to build towards as you gain experience.

One step at a time: A feature of most of the moves of jiu jitsu is that they can usually be divided up into sequential steps. Until one step is successfully completed, the next cannot be made. In most cases, when a step fails, one has to abandon the move and either start again from the beginning or try something else. This step by step feature makes teaching and learning rather easy. As you go higher in the sport you must learn to use this step by step character to your advantage. Once you begin the first step, a knowledgeable opponent will have a good idea of what you will want to do next. The step by step nature of the sport makes many of our moves predictable to BOTH players. It is important then, that you use subterfuge on occasion to make yourself unpredictable. I will often enter the first step of a given move with aggression to try to elicit a predictable defensive reaction from an opponent who now expects the usual second step of the sequence - and then apply an unexpected second step that slips past whatever defensive structure the opponent built for expected next step. When you first begin your jiu jitsu study, the step by step approach to learning is a great learning aid; but as you advance it can become a liability insofar as you become predictable. Make sure you constantly look for ways to disguise your real intentions by committing strongly to a given move and then having several alternative second steps quite different from the usual one. In this way you will always be an unpredictable and tricky opponent, but at the same time have the solid foundation of a strong step by step game.

Principles versus techniques: The underlying PRINCIPLES of jiu jitsu , and indeed, all combat sports, are as fixed and permanent as the night sky; for they are rooted in the unchanging strengths and weaknesses of the human body. The TECHNIQUES of jiu jitsu on the other hand, change with the speed and fluidity of the waters of a river, as they are based upon the minds of men who forever seek competitive advantage over each other through insight, study and innovation. Accordingly, stay true to the basic principles at all times, they will give you sound direction with the reliability of a compass; but recognize that techniques must be in flux, with constant change and innovation in response to a changing landscape.

As a coach or mentor there are two things I can never give you. Two things that only you can provide. The first is a deep underlying PASSION for what you do. I can deepen that passion, fuel it, strengthen it - but only YOU can CREATE it; and you either have it or you don’t. The second is the ability to PULL THE TRIGGER when opportunity presents itself. I can teach you all manner of techniques, tactics, game plans, risk calculations, strategy, drills etc etc. but in the end, at the crucial moment, ONLY YOU CAN MAKE THE NAKED CHOICE TO PULL THE TRIGGER. In jiu jitsu and in life - much can be offered to you - but these two things, passion and the ability to seize the moment and pull the trigger, these two must come from within you - they are yours and yours alone.

Follow the journey: The most exciting times in your growth in martial arts are the early days of your development. Every lesson seems to offer insights, moves, tactics and strategy that changes your entire point of view. Garry Tonon is going through that phase now in MMA. Today he worked with British UFC middleweight standout Tom Breese @breesemma and @aidenleemma. I first met Mr Breese at Tristar gym in Montreal where he was working with my students Georges St-Pierre and Firas Zahabi. He was a brilliant boxer learning to merge this skill with wrestling and grappling - now he has his own gym in Birmingham England teaching MMA and our approach to grappling. It’s amazing to see his progress and self development every time he visits. He continues his amazing progress in the UFC with another big bout coming up soon! It’s always great to see athletes trading knowledge in mutually beneficial ways - Mr Tonon helps Mr Breese with grappling and Mr Breese helps Mr Tonon with MMA. Both athletes have a tremendous amount to offer in the future. Following their journey as they progress towards their goals will help and inspire you as you progress towards your own goals. We are all beginners at something - it’s a phase that gives rise to much frustration and vexation- but one day you will see that it was those hard times that made you who you are in the sport. Always know that you are not alone in starting out - even the best grapplers start as neophytes in the new sport of MMA and go through the whole beginner cycle a second time. Don’t get frustrated by measuring your progress only by results - measure by your personal growth and you will come to see this as the happiest time in your journey.

The three kings of the scramble: Most of the time in jiu jitsu we are looking to create situations where we have greater control over our opponent’s ability to move than he has over us. Unfortunately our opponents are actively doing the same and are usually just as good at this as we are. The inevitable result is that we spend considerable amounts of time, perhaps the majority in many cases, in SCRAMBLE situations, which we will define as dynamic situations where neither athlete has a greater capacity to control the other’s movement than their opponent does. It is my belief that in any scramble situation - THERE ARE THREE TYPES OF SUBMISSION/CONTROL METHODS THAT ARE ALMOST ALWAYS AVAILABLE AND THE MOST EFFECTIVE - these are KIMURA, FRONT HEADLOCK/GUILLOTINE and ASHI GARAMI based leg locks. In any dynamic, free flowing situation where neither athlete has decisive control - YOU WILL BE ABLE TO ENTER INTO AT LEAST ONE OF THESE THREE SUBMISSION ENTRIES. I put a heavy emphasis on all three in my coaching for this reason (among others). It is almost impossible to get into a hard grappling match for two or three minutes (and usually a lot less) of movement and exchange without exposing the opportunity for one of these three submissions/controls. Proficiency in these three areas of the game is critical to your success in scramble situations. Of course there are many other moves and tactics that work well in scrambles - but in the sport of jiu jitsu/submission grappling, THESE THREE ARE KING. Make sure you work them relentlessly paying particular attention to how you would employ them in quick moving situations. Doing so will give you a clear and effective sense of direction in any scramble.

Enthusiastic amateurs: Much of what I write about is the development of professional athletes in grappling and MMA. The reason for this is because they exemplify the main themes that I push - of PASSION as the bedrock of development, of DISCIPLINE/ PERSEVERANCE as the sustainer of development, of INTELLIGENT PLANNING as the determinant of your speed and amount of development and of the CONFIDENCE and courage to take a risk on stage as the means of showing your development. But let’s get something straight. Professional athletes are very much the minority in any class - including mine. The vast majority of my students are ordinary people just like you who have a job, family and many responsibilities and commitments that come before jiu jitsu. Unlike a professional athlete, they cannot invest all their time and effort into the sport but must instead give it as much time as they can among their other commitments. I have always been very proud of the fact that I have many students who fall into this enthusiastic amateur group but whose skill level is shockingly high - to the point where they can absolutely go toe to toe with great professional athletes and give them a very hard workout indeed. My goal as a coach is to make the ENTIRE ROOM strong, as THE STRONGER THE ROOM OVERALL, THE STRONGER THE ELITE ATHLETES COMING OUT OF IT. So often I am asked whether someone training part time can attain a good level of jiu jitsu despite having a busy job, family, perhaps being older etc. my answer is always a resounding YES! I know because I see it every day. A good example comes from this weekend at the IBJJF Pan Am Championships. Most people were greatly impressed by the performance of Gordon Ryan in taking double gold - but there were two double golds that day. Forty three year old Ryan Bier, married father of two, working a very demanding job in the medical profession also took first place in both his weight and absolute masters division. I am always hugely impressed by people who get to a very high standard as amateurs working around their main commitments. I SEE JUST AS MUCH PASSION AMONG THEM AS I DO AMONG THE PROFESSIONALS - they are the heart and soul of the sport.

Frank Rosenthal strangles for the win!! Outstanding junior brown belt Frank Rosenthal @frankrosenthal11 won his super fight against 10th Planet standout black black belt Ricky Lule with an expertly applied stranglehold from the back in standing position at the Onnit Invitational in Texas. Mr Rosenthal has been on a competitive tear lately, with most wins coming by way of his signature inside heel hook finish. This time he wanted to show his growth and go upper body - that’s exactly what he did. Hard work on back system details paid off against his tough opponent. There is always a certain look of MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS in a well applied submission and Mr Rosenthal certainly shows that here! Great weekend for the squad between No Gi Pan Ams IBJJF and Onnit EBI rules. Hats off to Mr Rosenthal doing what we all should - identifying goals, formulating a plan to attain them, working hard to make them reality and managing/taking the risks to get them done on the big stage! That’s the formula for jiu jitsu and life itself!

Double gold for Gordon Ryan: Gordon Ryan entered the Pan American No Gi championships this weekend in NYC - his first foray into IBJJF competition as a black belt. Despite a rule set that he is still learning he won both his weight division and the absolute - every match by submission. The biggest question of the tournament was what would happen when Mr Ryan matched with the outstanding Atos team champion Kaynan Duarte. Mr Duarte greatly impressed us a year ago at the ADCC world championships and has gotten even better since then. They did not meet in their weight division when Mr Duarte was upset in a close match prior to the finals. Instead they met in the Absolute finals in a very close and tactical match with Mr Ryans pressure proving decisive near the end of the bout when he he utilized the back system once again to win via submission. It was a day of upper body finishes as Mr Ryan used Kimura system and back System to get the breakthrough in every match. When the squad first emerged I would constantly hear people describe them as one trick ponies - I knew that was not true as I teach to attack the whole body - now more and more people are starting to see the same. Great to see Mr Ryan’s family support with proud Mom and Dad. Congratulations to Mr Ryan on another stellar performance and thank you to IBJJF @ibjjf for running such a large show with so many athletes in such an efficient manner and getting such a talented pool of competitors in NYC.

Visitors: It’s always fun having talented visitors come by the academy. This weekend the No Gi Pan Am Championships is being held in NYC so many great jiu jitsu athletes came in for training including two of my favorites @samuelbragagb and @talitaalencarbjj They had a great time working out with the squad and getting ready for competition day. Wishing best of luck to all the Pan Am athletes especially Samuel and Talita!

Like old times: Had a great morning out in Long Island training @chrisweidman along with @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @jasonraubjj89 and friends. Helping Mr Weidman prepare for his UFC title run and victory was a great highlight of my life. When he opened his gym with his primary coach Ray Longo in Long Island there were much fewer opportunities to work together, so it was great going out today and getting back on to the mat! Mr Weidman is unquestionably one of the most gifted athletes I ever worked with. It was fascinating seeing how he has evolved in training methods and approaches. His upcoming rematch with the great Luke Rockhold will be an incredible test for both athletes. Looking forward to more training with this team out on Long Island as fight day approaches!

Passive learning: Normally we think the learning in jiu jitsu is done when WE perform the move on a partner as the active agent in the exchange. I am a big believer in the idea that we can learn a LOT about a given move when it is performed upon us. When a move is performed upon us we get a tremendous amount of feedback about the effectiveness of our partners application of the move. If we are focused and attentive, we can learn from what what we feel to be correct/effective and incorrect/ineffective in their application. From blue belt to early blackbelt I was the main demonstration partner for most classes taught by my sensei, Renzo Gracie. This was an incredibly valuable stage in my development. It gave me from an early period the FEEL OF PERFECTLY APPLIED TECHNIQUE ACROSS A VAST SPECTRUM OF MOVES. It was then my task to REPLICATE WHAT I FELT. I always felt that though it was sometimes a painful experience 😜 It was one of the best learning modalities I had. WHEN YOU ARE THE PASSIVE PARTNER IN DRILLS - DON’T TURN YOUR MIND OFF. Stay focused and identify the good and bad in what your partner is doing and replicate the good whilst eliminating the bad. I promise you it will help speed your learning. BE AN ACTIVE PARTNER EVEN WHEN THE MOVE IS BEING DONE TO YOU - not resisting, but mentally active thinking about the mechanics of the move. A good example of this way of training occurred this weekend. A very talented jiu jitsu athlete @matheusgonzagabjj purple belt world champion, trains with Bernardo Faria and kindly offered to assist in making the Kimura video instructional as the demonstration partner (Uke). After a weekend of having kimuras applied to him he noted his own performance of Kimura greatly improved. He took in all the details despite never performing a single repetition of the move. Later in the week he got his chance and was shocked at his own improvement. Here he is working through a fine Kimura from side position. You can see already the massive tension in his partners arm and shoulder girdle that a well applied Kimura can easily generate. All that remains is to trap the head and move into finishing position - a fine example of passive learning

What do you look for? As a coach my biggest concern is the quest to get an athletes level of performance as close as possible to their potential in the least time. As such, I spend a lot of time looking at and monitoring the performance of the people I coach. I am often asked - what do you look for? Well, obviously there are a lot of things, but among the most important is THE ABILITY TO GET THE SAME JOB DONE WITH LESS EFFORT. Remember, it’s not just that you get the job done that counts; but also HOW you get the job done. There is a LOT of repetition in jiu jitsu training (or any other skill) so a very clear indicator of progress in a student is that he or she IS ACCOMPLISHING THE SAME TASKS AS EVERY OTHER DAY, BUT DOING SO WITH LESS EFFORT AND GREATER EFFICIENCY. The key to this vital form of progress is first, learning when to exert strength and when to relax. Within any match there are many opportunities to lower your energy expenditure- don’t go one hundred percent one hundred percent of the time. You will simply exhaust and defeat yourself. Second, remove any extraneous movement. Third, don’t get tunnel vision and hammer away uselessly at heavily defended points. Whenever you run into walls of resistance ask yourself if there is a way AROUND them rather than THROUGH them. Fourth (and most obvious) The better your mechanical application of technique the less brute force you will need to apply per move. Thinking in these terms will quickly bring your energy expenditure within acceptable bounds in training and competition and manifest one of the most important forms of progress that indicates that your training is working well.

As long as there is memory among the living - there will forever be life for people, times and places who no longer are 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Kimura! When you mention the word “Kimura” to a BJJ student, they normally think of the powerful armlock and hold that is so often seen in competition - but of course there was also the man himself - Masahiko Kimura - one of the greatest Judo athletes of all time, after whom BJJ adherents name the move. Mr Kimura was a renown master of standing throws and ground grappling. On the floor he was most known for his twisting arm lock skills. The Japanese call it gyaku-ude-garami. Usually I like to preserve the original Japanese terms for moves out of respect to the old masters who gave this noble sport its birth, but “ude garami” is too phonetically similar to “ashi garami” and when I’m coaching in a noisy, confusing environment in competition or the gym I can’t risk confusion, so I use the term “kimura” like most others. Today is a special day - it is Mr Kimura’s birthday! Of course he has long since passed away and resides in the pantheon of the grappling gods. I am a huge fan of his so today all my classes were on Kimura! It was great to see new generations of grapplers learning from our illustrious past and innovating and developing for the future. The only reason current generations show so much talent is the fact that they profited from the toil and lessons learned from previous generations. Thanks to Mr Kimura and all the other great historical figures of the various grappling arts who built the foundations upon which we all stand as we work towards our own future goals and dreams.

Big weekend of filming in Boston: I had a great weekend filming another installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series with BJJ Fanatics. This time it was KIMURA ATTACKS. Joining me was the great world champion Bernardo Faria @bernardofariabjj @bjj.fanatics who has recently completed his own video on one of his specialties- no gi pressure passing which should be released soon. Always a pleasure to head up to Beantown and show our approach to the sport. Kimura is such an incredibly versatile move. It functions equally well as a submission hold and as a restraining hold that sets up other forms of attack. My students have long used it as a gateway to other systems as well as a devastating attack in itself. Now it’s back on the train to NYC in time to teach tomorrow and help get everyone ready for upcoming competitions! Hope you all had a great weekend - wishing you all the best!! 🤗

Great day of work today at BJJ Fanatics in Boston: I took the train back to Boston to film the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series - this time it’s KIMURA ATTACKS! It was a pleasure meeting @nicholasmeregali this outstanding young athlete has astounded the jiu jitsu world with his skill and competitive fire - he is also a great character! Today I worked with @matheusgonzagabjj who was and exceptionally good demonstration partner and @bernardofariabjj and @michaelzenga We start work again tomorrow morning to get this project done!

Short term goals/long term goals: Goal setting is among the single most important elements of making progress in any activity- jiu jitsu is no exception. It’s important that we distinguish between our short term, medium term and long term goals. You can set your own time parameters on these. I usually work in one month (usually the minimum time required to make concrete and measurable differences in performance), three-six month (you can realistically bring in an entirely new and important skill in this time), one year (you can radically change your game in this time frame) and five years (you can completely reinvent yourself or start from scratch and attain an extremely good level in this time) time intervals and base my goal setting around these - you can choose your own. The important thing is that you run these distinct goals concurrently and coherently. Don’t choose goals that obviously conflict with each other and don’t focus on one time frame to the total exclusion of others. An athlete who has greatly impressed me with realistic and purposeful goal setting across different time parameters is outstanding Australian grappler, Craig Jones. He came here several months ago with short terms goals of match preparation and improvements in back and mount performance, both offense and defense. Training twice a day every day with the squad he did exactly that. What a great example of coming in with a goal and working hard within a plan to get it done. He leaves today to compete and travel - returning late November for more training and development on long term plans for next year! You can all take inspiration from this young mans example - divide your goals by time and make plans as to how you can realistically reach those goals - then demonstrate to yourself and your team mates that you have what it takes to stay the course and get it done. We will miss this fellow down on the basement - great training, Craig - see you in November! 🇦🇺🇺🇸

Knowing what to look for: Have you ever watched two high level grapplers battle with each other and tried to figure out exactly what each was trying to achieve as they grappled? This is quite possibly one of the most useful activities you can perform outside of your own physical training. This is a very pure form of training your mind in jiu jitsu. When you first begin, you will see only the broad outlines of what they are attempting. Soon however, you will start to see patterns of behavior that occur regularly in certain situations and what was once chaos starts to become a little more predictable - this is a good sign that you are getting better at seeing the second by second goals of each athlete and the physical means by which they are attempting to get to those goals. In time you will learn to see what most people do not - this is what you want. Once you recognize the patterns of behavior you can begin the see ahead of time what they will do as they enter into a scenario - at this stage you know what to look for and thus you will see it. When teaching, I try always to point out the placement and function of the body when performing certain moves - quite often students will come to me afterwards and say that they had always seen my students do this but either not really paid attention to it or not known it’s purpose - my goal as a teacher is to get you to be able to see these things on your own - but this takes time and it’s good to get a little help at the start. Remember that even a little time a day invested in watching great grapplers in action along with ACTIVE ATTENTION on your part will make you a better athlete in short time. Don’t just WATCH the action - SEEK TO UNDERSTAND IT - with the goal of one day being able to PREDICT it. This is in my opinion the single best form of mental training for performance improvement you can partake in.

Using your head: Most people know that jiu jitsu requires us to use all four of our limbs, both legs and both arms, with equal dexterity and skill in order to perform the moves and tactics of the sport. In order to go further than the others, you must recognize the great importance of our fifth limb in grappling - our head/neck. We use our head physically in four main ways in jiu jitsu - PUSHING, PULLING, BLOCKING and WEDGING. The head is incredibly effective in all four roles and often proves to be the difference between a good application of a moves versus a great application of a move. Good head positioning and manipulation is one of the most important features of superior jiu jitsu athletes - you must make a serious study of it if you wish to reach your potential in the sport. There is a reason most good grapplers have a thick and powerful neck - IT’S BECAUSE THEY USE IT HEAVILY EVERY DAY THEY TRAIN. Whenever you feel you can use your head to advantage in grappling - do so - you will be pleasantly surprised how it raises your performance. Here, outstanding junior Ethan Crelinsten uses his head in an unusual fashion - most people erroneously believe the head can only be used to PUSH. In fact the chin can be used to pull - that is exactly what Mr Crelinsten is doing here, working to pull his head up into a better strangle position - clearly it worked well as a few seconds later he won this match via strangulation in fine style. Remember - you are engaged in a sport of FIVE LIMBS, not four - look to incorporate your head/neck more than ever into your game next time you step onto the mat.

Opposing interests: An interesting feature of any zero-sum game like jiu jitsu (a zero-game is one where every advantage you create for yourself must create an equivalent disadvantage for your opponent and vice versa - in short - the better you are doing the worse the other fellow is doing and vice versa) is that it creates very obvious opposing demands among the two athletes. Look at these two photos of the Ryan brothers in training. In one, Nicky Ryan plays bottom position against the formidable passing pressure of Georges St-Pierre. In the second, Gordon Ryan plays top passing game, utilizing one of his favorite methods, a body lock guard pass. You will see immediately the diametrically opposed interests of the two brothers based upon whether they are top or bottom position. When in bottom, our primary interest is in CREATING AND MAINTAINING SUFFICIENT SPACE TO MOVE INTO BOTTOM OFFENSE. As such, Nicky Ryan’s stance and posture is built around framing and extension to be able to move effectively under his opponent. Contrast this with top position, where the primary goal is that of REMOVING SPACE AND CREATING IMMOBILIZING WEDGES AROUND THE BODY TO FACILITATE PASSING THE LEGS OR, HAVING PASSED THE LEGS, PINNING THE UPPER BODY. You can see these totally opposed interests very clearly on these two photos. Once you see clearly that whatever is good for me must of necessity be bad for you, it is very clear what we each need to do in any situation (though be wary of fakes and feints that can take advantage of this kind of simplification 😉). Always remember the very nature of the game - zero-sum where our respective interests run directly contrary to each other. This will answer many questions for the beginner when unsure of what to do in any given scenario.

Variations in intensity: When you have a training room full of talented athletes many assume that every sparring session must look like the world championships. In fact I much prefer to limit the amount of really hard sparring the athletes partake in. Of course it’s good to go hard every so often and test yourself, especially when competition is coming up. But continuous hard sparring lead to two undesirable effects - injury and technical stagnation. When we fight hard against someone of similar size and skill level we usually have to fall back on our favorite moves to prevail. Only when we spar in a less competitive setting do we relax a little and try new moves and tactics and thus make technical progress. Surprisingly then, you will often see more outright physical intensity in a beginners class, where the students lack the technical depth to play a finesse game and have to go as hard as they can, than you will in a more advanced class, where the athletes know how to control their pace. In fact, even in a room full of killers like this, the majority of your sparring sessions should be with people below your skill level so that you can work on new skills in a setting conducive to learning. There is always a chance to go hard when you need it - but don’t neglect your experimental sparring - for that is where much of your progress comes from. Here, Gordon Ryan spars with Craig Jones, even in this case, unless there is a specific need for intensity, the primary emphasis is on skill development rather than banging heads and going as hard as possible

Heading back to NYC: Had a great time teaching here in Reno Nevada at @renzograciereno with old comrade Max McGarr who is doing an incredible job taking the teaching of Mr Gracie and myself to new territory 🤗🤗 Heading back on long connecting flight to NYC for training with the squad back in the blue basement of hope and despair Monday afternoon - got some superstar guests in the room for training 😜 See you there!

Leg locks in the desert: Had a wonderful day teaching at RGA Reno - the new dojo of Max McGarr - an outstanding teacher at RGA New York for many years. He is spreading our methodology out here and doing a fine job!! It’s great to see that as i travel and teach around the nation the overall level of competence in lower body submissions that i witness in seminars is definitely increasing - you guys and gals are studying hard and getting better! 😜😜 Happy to see! Tomorrow I head back to the blue basement for another week of training with the squad - lots of goals, lots of ambition and consequently- lots of work to be done 😜😜 Hope you have a great Labor Weekend!

On the road again: Heading to Reno Nevada out of JFK to teach a seminar at the school of long time friend and RGA colleague Max McGarr. It will be a crazy weekend for travel over Labor weekend 😜😜 Great week of training for the junior squad members- they are doing such a fine job working towards their aspirations - that’s what it all about for all of us. When you have a free moment this weekend, take the time to set some goals, some short term, some medium term and some long term. Then ask yourself what will be required to make them happen. Even a small amount of time spent this way can have a vast impact on your future development- remember it not just about how hard you work - the world is full of people who worked extremely hard but achieved little. It’s about the marriage of hard work and intelligent planning that give DIRECTION to the work. Give it a try this weekend. Wishing you all the best! See you in Nevada! 🤗🤗

Coach the big picture first: The growth and development of any given technique in our repertoire follows the same pattern as the growth and development of our physical bodies. A technique starts off weak and vulnerable, unable to survive on its own. Then it grows into early development where it begins to mature into early adulthood. Finally it enters into a mature phase where it can not only survive on its own, but work with others, improve itself and rise to prominence. When first coaching a move to a student - I always begin with the big picture. What is the general nature of the move? What are it good and bad points? What are the main things to focus upon? What are the broad movements required for its execution? Sketch the outline first - THE DETAILS CAN ALWAYS COME LATER. Just get them moving in the general directions they need. Just as an artist begins with a sketch and only then brings in the complexity of colors fill the canvas and create a masterpiece over time, so too, The martial artist must begin with the rough outline of the move and over time ADD DETAILS AS A PAINTER ADDS COLOR TO COMPLETE A PICTURE. In all technique development , start with general movement and over time refine it with precise movement. Don’t be obsessed with precision at the start - that will come later. Here I work with talented youth athletes Liam Zeh and Trinity Pun on back system details - they already have excellent performance with the general movements so the process of refinement now begins...

Attacking the back - surrounding and immobilizing the head: There are many effective ways to control and attack from the back, but one of the most important if your goal is strangulation is that of forming an effective circle of wedges around your opponents neck that inhibits head movement and positions you to strangle at a moments notice. The fundamental desiderata in these cases is to ALWAYS MAINTAIN YOUR HEAD ON ONE SIDE OF YOUR OPPONENTS HEAD AND YOUR STRANGLE ARM ON THE OTHER. This essential configuration must be locked in place by your CONTROL HAND which goes under your opponent’s armpit to either snare his wrist/hand or lock up with your strangle hand. The combination of tight head position on one side, strangle arm on the other, all locked in place by the control hand makes for a superbly controlling position from where escape is difficult, you are just inches away from a devastating strangle at any moment and from where it is easy to add additional lower body control by hooking your legs into your opponent’s hips or even locking a tight body triangle around his waist. Practicing this fundamental head and arm positioning as the basis of your back control leading to strangles will soon pay dividends in your submissions game.

I am very pleased to announce my participation in another super seminar alongside the great Ben Askren - @onechampionship MMA champion and wrestling icon and Olympian. I will cover jiu jitsu aspects focusing on the squad approach to leg locking and back attacks, whilst Mr Askren covers wrestling applications to grappling and MMA. It will be held October 6 in Schenectady New York. As always, looking forward to showing our approach to jiu jitsu to a new audience!

The stunning power of jiu jitsu upon the uninitiated: In our daily training we work with people who are well initiated with the skills of jiu jitsu. As a result, almost every move we attempt is quickly and deftly countered. This makes it an endless struggle for improvement and innovation if we are to prevail in the training room. Sometimes we forget what it is like to use jiu jitsu on someone who has little or no experience of the kingly art. When it happens, it’s often a surprise just how easy it is to use the techniques and tactics of jiu jitsu to completely and easily overwhelm naive opposition - so much so that jiu jitsu appears like some super power that renders even strong men helpless. I always smile when I think of my own early days in the sport when I would flop around hopelessly while men half my size would easily trap me in holds that i had no idea where even happening, let alone how to escape them 😂😂 These expert versus neophyte displays are instructive to both - to the neophyte they teach what is possible with time and training and give a sense of belief in what they will one day be capable of. To the expert they are a pleasant reminder of just how effective the basic moves and concepts of the sport really (despite our everyday frustrations in the dojo) and a humbling reminder of where we began and what we would eventually devolve back into if we ceased training. Here, my student Claude Levy instructs members of a special anti poaching unit in Africa some jiu jitsu - they use it often, even though they usually use their firearms to deal with opponents armed with semi automatic weapons and hunting rifles, during the arrest and restraining elements of their work they like to use jiu jitsu. Here, Mr Levy runs them through takedown to back control and demonstrates to an amused audience what we all felt on day one of our jiu jitsu careers! Do you remember your first experience of jiu jitsu? What were your thoughts after sparring with a more experienced teacher/opponent?

Looking forward to Singapore super seminar with @evolvemma in early November! The squad always trains at Evolve when we are in Singapore so it’s a pleasure to teach there. Hope to see you there!

A force for good: I am always enthralled by stories of jiu jitsu being used as a force for good in our world. One of my favorite stories comes from my dear student Claude Levy. He is a remarkable example of a student who has a very busy and demanding career (he is a very successful metals trader) yet who always finds time to work hard on his jiu jitsu skills. Mr Levy is also a lifetime practitioner of Muay Thai and Karate - a formidable combination with jiu jitsu. Raised in Africa, Mr Levy often returns home where he charitably trains an African anti poaching force who protect Africa’s big game animals from the constant threat of poachers. These brave men often get into running gun battles with the poachers. Of course most of their training is centered around firearms, but they have found jiu jitsu to be an ideal method of restraining and physically controlling perpetrators in the field during capture and arrest. Mr Levy teaches them whenever he can and the team loves it! Here you can see a security team going out on armed patrol in the magnificent African veldt at sundown. Next is Mr Levy coaching our back attack system (note the nice arm trap to facilitate strangle that you see the squad perform so often!) Here are some of the incredible elephants they protect on this particular area of operations along with basic ground grappling training and team photo) It makes my heart swell with pride to see a student take our teachings and for no reward help those who themselves do good in the world protecting these great and majestic endangered animals from wanton destruction. I am always gratified to see jiu jitsu grow, but to see it grow in ways so beneficial to good people in need as an act of friendship brings a special joy in our sport and its growth.

Strangling with your legs: A strange thing about the back attack system that I teach my students is that the most well known component of it - the strait jacket - was so successful in competition that audiences rarely got to see the other components of the system. As a result most people have a rather limited view of the back system as just a series of hand/arm traps leading to rear naked strangles. In fact, there are four auxiliary systems designed to assist whenever the main strait jacket system fails. One of the most important is the rear triangle - ushiro sankaku- which enables you to use the impressive power of the legs to strangle opponents. This immediately gets you around one the more common problems associated with rear strangles - the difficulty of penetrating under the chin/jaw. The very nature of triangle strangles, using the shoulder to assist the strangle does not require that you get under the jaw to be effective. In addition it offers a multitude of back up attacks if the initial strangle is defended. All of my students excel in this technique as it is a big part of our training. Here, Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones practice their ushiro sankaku finishes. Their long legs make front triangles one of their favorite techniques- both of them excel at it - but the rear triangle is very effective even for short legged athletes due to more favorable angles and positioning.

A sense of progress: I always tell my students - if happiness is what you seek - stay away from jiu jitsu!! Of course it’s a joke, but like most jokes, there is truth in it. Jiu jitsu can be a path to endless frustrations, perplexities, doubts, physical pains etc. Ask any jiu jitsu gym owner what his biggest problem with students is and you will always get the same answer - retention. I find the biggest reason why jiu jitsu has such a high attrition rate comes down to the mind set of the student. Anything good in life will be hard work - jiu jitsu is no exception. It’s easy to get frustrated at the amount of time and effort it takes to improve. This is compounded by the fact that AS YOU IMPROVE, SO DO ALL YOUR CLASSMATES. So you rarely get a sense of getting better than them. If we think in terms of gaining happiness in jiu jitsu through competition with others, you will be doomed to misery and frustration as you all progress at roughly the same rate. The resultant frustration often makes people quit. A much healthier approach is to constantly look for GROWTH as the source of happiness in the study of jiu jitsu rather than competitive progress. A growth centered mindset does not ask how we do against our classmates - BUT AGAINST AN EARLIER VERSION OF OURSELVES. Once you internalize the quest for progress happiness is much more attainable. A little reflection reveals that in most cases (unless you are suffering from serious injury) we know a lot more, and can satisfactorily perform a great many more moves and have a deeper sense of tactics etc now than we did say a year ago. Structure your training around this mindset. Constantly set small goals for yourself to accomplish that are concerned with acquiring a new technique, improving an old one, or combining techniques together in new ways. The worst feeling in jiu jitsu and in life is that of STAGNATION. Focus your mind and training on incremental progress against yourself rather than others and the feelings of frustration and stagnation that are the most likely to make you stop training are much less likely to occur.

Restricting options: The pattern of all good jiu jitsu is the same - JIU JITSU IS THE ART OF SYSTEMATICALLY AND PROGRESSIVELY RESTRICTING YOUR OPPONENT’S OPTIONS THROUGH TACTICS, GRIP AND POSITIONING. AS MORE AND MORE OPTIONS ARE ELIMINATED HIS MOVEMENTS BECOME MORE AND MORE PREDICTABLE AND IT BECOMES PROGRESSIVELY EASIER TO ANTICIPATE HIS REMAINING MOVES. THIS PROCESS CULMINATES IN SITUATIONS WHERE HE IS LEFT WITH JUST A FEW UNDESIRABLE OPTIONS OF LIMITED EFFECTIVENESS AT WHICH POINT YOU END THE MATCH. The moment you put hands on an opponent you should be thinking in terms of controlling him in ways that create predictable reactions. As control increases, his options with regards tactics and movement decrease until they reach a point where submission victory is inevitable. It is this ability to restrict options down to a few predictable responses that makes the use of SYSTEMS possible in jiu jitsu. Here you can see a superb use of aspects of the back system - in particular the main strait jacket system that enables Ethan Crelinsten to completely immobilize a very tough and talented Junny Acasio and leave him with so few movement/defensive options that the resultant submission win via strangle seemed easy. Note the excellent head position of Mr Crelinsten and the elimination of Mr Ocasio’s defensive arms and hands and the deliberate use of what most people call the “weak” side of rear mount - in fact both sides are only as strong or weak as your use and understanding of them. In this case the understanding is strong and thus so was the finish.

Friendship first: We all have our own reasons for walking in the door for our first jiu jitsu lesson, but the reasons that keep us COMING BACK inside that door day after day, year after year are more interesting to me. Of course we all seek skills and improvement in the kingly art of jiu jitsu - but I sincerely believe that the single biggest reason is the unusual strength of friendships that we form as we work at our varied speed towards common goals. Our experience as we make that journey has so much in common with our peers - so much desire, frustration, happiness and sadness that we become very close over time. Whilst every match you have, whether in competition or in the dojo, is an individual affair; almost all your preparation for those matches is a group affair among like minded peers who probably know more about you than anyone outside your family. Every day I see remarkable stories of sacrifice and camaraderie among training partners that are rare outside the training hall. When Craig Jones got notice to take on Rousimar Palhares, his friend Mikhael Yahaya came all the way from Melbourne Australia to help preparation and corner him if necessary. Such a massive journey to help a friend with no prospect of reward. He trained alongside Mr Jones every day with the squad in the lead up and helped in every way he could despite having the pressure of his own match to prepare for. He was there in the warm up room and cornering Mr Jones on the night. After training today with the squad it’s back on the long long flight back to Melbourne. I am always so impressed by this kind of selfless help that I see so often among jiu jitsu athletes. Of course there are exceptions, but for the most part, the positive effects of shared experience, sacrifice and goals makes for strong human relations that I don’t see much outside of combat sports. I am certain all of you have many similar experiences of people around you that you know you can count on - cherish those people - in a world of superficialities and image they are among the most substantive and real gifts that we have.

Very excited to announce another super seminar in Reno Nevada at Renzo Gracie Reno - the school of Max McGarr - a distinguished black belt instructor at RGA in NYC for many years. He has opened a great school in Nevada where he does a fine job showing our approach to jiu jitsu. Can’t wait to give our fans a detailed look at our systems based approach to jiu jitsu and training methodology. September 1st at Renzo Gracie Reno - three hours of leg attacks and back attacks starting at 10:30 am. Contact Renzo Gracie Reno for details! All welcome

The day after: Great to see Kasai 3 @kasaigrappling competitors Wagner Rocha and Marcin Held stop by the blue basement to talk about future projects and catch some technique and training. It’s always impressive how competition often builds camaraderie. At the end of the day we all lead similar lives and have similar goals and dreams. There are far more similarities between athletes, styles and schools than there are differences, so it’s natural that friendships and respect grow easily even between rivals. It was a fine chance for the squad juniors to see elite competitors up close as they work towards their own goals - just as all of you work towards yours - same idea - just a different place and environment.

When the action’s over: The time immediately after a tough match, whether on stage or in the gym, is always instructive and important. Last night at @kasaigrappling 3 Australian grappling star, Craig Jones fought to a tough tactical win over Rousimar Palhares. Initially Mr Jones expressed disappointment in the match - like all true submission grapplers, he greatly values action leading to a decisive finish. He tried hard to make that happen, but the conservative leg positions both athletes had to maintain due to the danger both presented to the other, combined with a massive size and strength advantage for Mr Palhares, meant that it would a tactical win rather than decisive one. It’s important in these after match situations to assess what was good and bad. Remember that not every match will be highlight reel of action. The important thing is that every match represents some kind of growth and improvement in the athlete. Understand that improvement comes in many different forms. In the case of Mr Jones last night it was about mental aspects of the game. He took on one of the world’s most dangerous and strongest grapplers, giving up a huge size and strength advantage, with total confusion and disarray in the week leading up to the match as to what would happen and all far from home - yet he went out and attacked as best he could to battle to a tight tactical win. This was a win for the young Australian’s athletic maturity. Under tough and intimidating circumstances he showed the improvements in his quiet, understated but impressive mental toughness- that is one of the best kinds of growth an athlete can experience and which will benefit him or her the rest of their career. When you come to judge yourself after your matches - don’t be too kind, but don’t to be too harsh either. Remember that not every match will be fireworks but that EVERY MATCH HAS SOME ELEMENTS OF POSITIVE GROWTH FOR YOU WHICH WILL HELP BRING OUT FIREWORKS FOR FUTURE MATCHES. Focus on those, incorporate them into your training and step forward to your next challenge knowing you are a better athlete

On the train coming back from Maryland to NYC after the big seminar 😊😊 - watching the juniors step up at @kasaigrappling 3 show! Well done to all of you! Nick Ronan won a well controlled decision, Frank Rosenthal lost a heartbreaker in golden score sudden death over time - but a great performance nonetheless, and Ethan Crelinsten won over Junny Ocasio, an extremely tough and talented competitor from NYC, showing his ever growing back system mastery with a beautifully performed sequence to the back with squad signature arm trap to tight strangulation with our distinctive rotational finish mechanics! Amazing! This qualifies Mr Crelinsten for the next Kasai 4 featherweight event! Amazing win for the young man from Canada who travels so far to train and compete! Gordon Ryan and I are freaking out on the train and people are staring at us like we are total maniacs! 😂😂 So proud of these guys and their success and individual brilliance showcasing our approach to jiu jitsu! Looking forward to seeing Jason Rau, Jon Calestine and Squad buddy from down under Craig Jones! Hope you are all enjoying the show as much as us!

Teaching one of the biggest seminars of the year in Maryland - Two hundred strong learning leg and back systems. So proud to watch Gordon Ryan teaching like a college professor to a fascinated audience and showing jiu jitsu maturity far beyond his years. Thank you so much to the people of Maryland and surrounding districts for their enthusiasm!

Excited for Kasai Grappling 3 Tomorrow night! A great night of grappling tomorrow night in NYC @kasaigrappling in the Hammerstein Ballroom. The headline bout will be between outstanding Australian grappler Craig Jones and Brazilian powerhouse Rousimar Palhares. Mr Palhares was supposed to weigh in at 185 pounds but showed up at 218, apparently unaware that he had to make a weight limit. Mr Jones will probably weigh a little over 200 pounds. They have very different body types, demeanors and styles, so it should be a fascinating match. Mr Jones has been training in the basement with the squad - in addition to being one of the most talented grapplers on the circuit, he is also a genuinely good person - wishing him the best of luck in what will doubtless be one of the most anticipated matches of the year. The squad juniors are out in force - doing what we like to see - working on their skills and letting hard work, skill development and ambition get them to a higher level. Ethan Crelinsten, Nick Ronan, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau all take on very tough opponents in this elite level event as they continue their drive to the next level. Two former RGA students, Gianni Grippo and Jon Calestine will showcase two very different styles in a great match up as well. Congratulations to @kasaigrappling for getting a such a great card in such a great venue. While the athletes work hard to take themselves to a new level, Kasai are helping take the sport as a whole to a new level. Thank you for giving all these outstanding athletes a venue to showcase their skills.

It starts before you even make contact: The moment you slap hands in a competitive match - it’s on. Even before you make contact you should be scheming for advantage. Too often we just lackadaisically reach for grips without thinking and take a “let’s see what happens” approach. This is fine for daily training with friends, but make sure that kind of thinking does not permeate into your actions in a more competitive setting, for it will quickly expose you to problems. Even as you approach an opponent you should be looking for advantage and positioning yourself accordingly. As you approach, you should be FORMULATING A PLAN and POSITIONING YOURSELF TO ENACT IT. If you cannot see an opening, this is the time for minor delaying tactics until you do formulate a plan or see an opening develop. Remember always, THE FIRST CONTACT YOU HAVE WITH YOUR OPPONENT IS VISUAL CONTACT - use that to begin the battle for advantage from the outset.

The component principle: A very important principle of coaching jiu jitsu (and almost any other skill) is THE COMPONENT PRINCIPLE. The idea is that EVERY SKILL OF JIU JITSU CAN BE BROKEN DOWN INTO COMPONENT SKILLS, WHICH, WHEN BROUGHT TOGETHER INTO A WHOLE, BECOME THAT SKILL. This simple insight has big ramifications for anyone trying to learn and/or coach the sport. It means that whenever we come to learn or teach a new skill our first step should be to break in down into its component parts and then to study each component in detail. In this way we gain a deeper understanding and mastery of the entire skill. Now there is a point of diminishing returns here. If we just keep breaking it down into pointless minutiae we get needless complexity that does not benefit the performance of the original skill - so put a limit on the breaking down element - once you no longer derive performance benefits in the overall skill - stop. Now start working each component skill. You will soon see that THERE ARE SKILLS WITHIN SKILLS and that MUCH OF WHAT WE CALL MASTERY IS THIS ABILITY TO IMPROVE EACH OF THESE COMPONENT SKILLS AND THEM PUT THEM BACK TOGETHER SEAMLESSLY INTO AN OVERALL SKILL. Whenever you find yourself struggling with a new move - go back to this insight. It helps a lot to feel some sense of progress as you train - even if the overall skill eludes you for a while, you can make progress in some of the components and feel validated as you keep working towards getting the overall skill.

Can’t wait to teach this super camp in Singapore at Evolve Gym @evolvemma 🤗🤗

There are a lot of uncertainties in any grappling situation - but there is always one certainty you can stake your life on - EVERY GRAPPLING EXCHANGE YOU EVER ENTER INTO WHETHER IN TRAINING OR COMPETITION WILL BEGIN WITH GRIP. The skills of GETTING, MAINTAINING and USING an effective grip and CORRELATING IT WITH YOUR INTENDED PURPOSE is probably one of the least taught skills in the sport - YET IT IS PROBABLY THE SKILL SET MOST RESPONSIBLE FOR VICTORY AT ELITE LEVELS. At elite levels, EVERYONE IS HIGHLY SKILLED AT THE TECHNIQUES OF THE SPORT, so it is the PRECURSORS TO THE TECHNIQUE THAT SEPARATE THE GOLD MEDALLIST FROM THE OTHERS. Of all the precursors to the successful application of technique, few, of any, are more important than GRIPPING SKILLS. Yet strangely, they are the least taught. Do yourself a favor - next time you watch elite grapplers in action, switch your focus from the techniques they score or finish with, and instead, FOCUS UPON THE GRIPPING SEQUENCES THEY USE TO ENTER THOSE TECHNIQUES. I promise you that your study, though it may not be the most exciting, will have very positive results upon your mat performance.

The single biggest problem that beginning jiu jitsu students face: When people begin the study of jiu jitsu they often see it as a matter of learning a sufficient number of moves in sufficient detail to be able to hold their own on the mat with their classmates. Certainly there is a lot of truth to this. When coaching however, I see the main problem a little differently. The human body has some fundamental and very important ASYMMETRIES. An obvious example is the left side/right side asymmetry. People are either right handed or left handed and will be stronger and more coordinated on their strong side. Another extremely important asymmetry is that between UPPER BODY AND LOWER BODY STRENGTH AND COORDINATION. We are all much stronger in the lower body than upper body. If I asked you to walk several times across the dojo you could do this easily and with little effort. If I asked you to walk several lengths of the dojo on your hands in a handstand, even if you had the balance skills to do so, it would be a strenuous and tiring workout. If I asked you to sign your name on paper with your hand, you would do so easily; if I asked you to sign your name holding the pen in your toes it would be a real struggle. HUMANS ARE MASSIVELY STRONGER AND LESS COORDINATED IN THE LOWER BODY THAN UPPER BODY. This has clear ramifications for jiu jitsu. We must learn to grapple predominantly with our lower body (legs). This means we have to overcome the lack of lower body coordination that most of us bring into the sport. As a beginner, YOU MUST PUT YOUR PRIMARY FOCUS UPON DEVELOPMENT OF COORDINATION AND DEXTERITY IN YOUR LEGS SO THAT YOU LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH YOUR LEGS IN ORDER TO MAKE USE OF THEIR SUPERIOR STRENGTH AND ENDURANCE. You must overcome the natural beginners tendency to grapple with the upper body and learn to let your legs do most of the work. Every time you drill moves, BE MINDFUL OF LETTING YOUR LEGS DO THE MAJORITY OF THE WORK INVOLVED. There is no shortcut here - it will take time; but let me assure you that FORMING A STRONG CONNECTION OF YOUR MIND TO YOUR LEGS (knowledge to action) WILL BE THE SINGLE BIGGEST DETERMINANT OF YOUR PROGRESS IN JIU JITSU

The originals: Most people these days know me as a grappling coach working with the squad. In fact, the first part of my career - long before the squad - was the interface between jiu jitsu and MMA. It began with the young Georges St-Pierre in his quest to become UFC welterweight champion and went from there to the incredible title run of Chris Weidman to take on and defeat the other main contender for UFC greatest of all time, Anderson Silva. In that time i has the honor of working with so many incredible visiting athletes such as Rory MacDonald, Frankie Edgar and Roger Gracie - it was only when Mr St-Pierre retired and Mr Weidman opened his own gym deep in Long Island that I switched to focus to pure grappling with the squad. I consciously avoided social media throughout this time. These MMA fighters were genuine superstars so there was no need for me to write about them and their achievements. When the squad began, first with Eddie Cummings and then Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, they were unknowns in a fledgling sport, so I joined social media to see if i could help get them recognition for their amazing achievements in the grappling world. From there the squad grew and interest in our philosophies and methods expanded. Still, I never forget where I came from and the thrill of those early days in MMA. This is a shot taken during the mature part of Mr St-Pierre’s career, when Mr Weidman was making his remarkable unbeaten run through the middleweight division with his eyes on Anderson Silva (an epic story that we can all draw inspiration from). Practice is over and UFC athletes @georgesstpierre @chrisweidman @davidbranch32 and @johncholish relax with @renzograciebjj and JZ Calvacante @gesias and Magno Garma and other RGA athletes. Great training days - different priorities, same passion, different problems, same methodology of solutions. I am blessed to have been a small part of that time and those people - their quests, drive, brilliance and hard work carried me far higher than could have done alone. Your training roots will give rise to future flowering branches as you grow and change in the sport- cherish and remember them.

The great divide: There are two approaches to winning in jiu jitsu. The first are PROACTIVE methods. Here the idea is to INITIATE THE ACTION. You set the goal and start the work towards it. So if I favor arm bar attacks, I will begin with set ups that PUSH THE ACTION TOWARDS ARM-BARS. This stands in contrast to REACTIVE approaches. Here, I passively observe my opponent’s actions. He initiates and as I observe I see OPPORTUNITY ARISE IN THE COURSE OF THE ACTION. I then match the opportunity with the appropriate technique and score. Let’s understand something very important about these two different approaches. Proactive approaches generally require A SMALL SET OF FAVORITE MOVES ENCASED IN A LARGE COLLECTION OF SET UPS THAT ENABLE YOU TO FORCE THEIR APPLICATION AGAINST SOMEONE EXPECTING THEIR USE. Reactive approaches on the other hand, generally require A LARGE SET OF MOVES TO COVER ANY SITUATION OUR OPPONENT PUTS US IN, BUT VERY LITTLE SET UP AS THE OPPONENT CREATES THE OPPORTUNITY FOR US. This means the stylistic difference between the two can be quite dramatic. Proactive games are all about creating the conditions for a few favorite moves. Reactive methods are all about patience, pacing, sensing opportunity and having the breadth of technique to cover whatever opportunity emerges in front of you. There have been great champions using both approaches - and indeed - great champions who merged both approaches together. Understanding which approach you want to master will help give you a sense of what kind of training program you must adopt to make good progress.

Soul of a champion: This past weekend saw one of the greatest UFC champions ever lose his belt in an extraordinarily close bout after a record eleven title defenses. This post is not about the match, how it should have been scored or whether Demetrious Johnson is the best pound for pound fighter in the world. This is just about how we all can improve ourselves by looking at Mr Johnson as a role model. When I first started seeing Mr Johnson at UFC events he showed inconsistent brilliance. He beat Japanese Superstar Norifumi Yamamoto to show he was a great talent. Then in his next match against Miguel Torres he showed great takedowns but then got swept into mount on multiple occasions. Yet despite the early flaws - EVERY TIME HE WENT OUT TO COMPETE YOU COULD LITERALLY SEE THE FLAWS BEING REPLACED BY NEW STRENGTHS. He had the work ethic and in conjunction with his coach Matt Hume, the wisdom to see what needed to be improved and the best way to do it. This was an athlete who was not satisfied with winning. He recognized that only flawless wins would give him the resources he would need later at championship level. The second great trait that I saw in him was his overall positivity. Mr Johnson had a hard upbringing and many personal difficulties in his life that he never talks about. He could legitimately feel encumbered by them - but never does. I have never met a person so strong in his ability to see positive elements in challenging circumstances. For him, everything was a blessing and a test of his character to be surpassed through self improvement. This is a man who dominates the circumstances of his life through his positive attitude rather than allow the circumstances of his life to dominate him. We don’t know much about the future - but for person with traits like these - it’s always forward

I am very excited to announce that I will be teaching at the Evolve Gym super camp 2018 in Singapore November 5th to 10th. Over the five days there will twice daily training culminating in a three hour seminar Saturday - twenty three hours of work to cover techniques, tactics and training methods that will not only create performance increases, but enable you to make progress on your own long after the camp has finished. @evolvemma is hosting this event with people from all over the world coming in. This is an exciting opportunity for me to help spread our approach to the sport made famous by my brilliant students. Evolve Gym provides the perfect location for a well run week of training and fun with people from all over the world united by a love a jiu jitsu and a desire for self improvement in their sports performance at whatever level they bring and aspire to. Hope to see you there!

Getting ready: Craig Jones has been training hard in the blue basement getting ready for his showdown against the formidable Rousimar Palhares at @kasaigrappling in two weeks in NYC at the Hammerstein Ballroom. That’s a very glamorous venue for the outstanding athletes that Kasai has brought together - until then it’s the much less glamorous blue basement 😜😜 Mr Jones has shown admirable drive in training and is making rapid progress. There is a sense in which his experience now is also your experience as you battle towards your own aspirations - just on a lesser scale for now. The idea is the same - CHOOSE A DATE AS A DEADLINE FOR A PERFORMANCE- WHETHER IT IS PUBLIC COMPETITION OR PRIVATE GYM PERFORMANCE IS NOT IMPORTANT - THE REAL COMPETITION IS WITHIN YOU - CREATE A PLAN TO IMPROVE YOUR PERFORMANCE BY THAT DATE AND EXHIBIT THE DISCIPLINE AND WISDOM TO GET IT DONE. It’s a wonderful opportunity for the juniors to train with a such an outstanding grappler and a good daily test for Mr Jones every day in a very leg lock heavy room to test the skills he will need to build and exhibit against such a tough and talented opponent. This is the notion of mutual benefit in action. Remember always that best kind of benefit is MUTUAL BENEFIT. Only then can the relationships needed to build skills and strength over time be sustained long enough to make significant progress in any enterprise in which you take part.

Finishing mechanics: A distinctive feature of my coaching style is an unusually heavy emphasis on FINISHING MECHANICS for all the major submission holds my athletes use. So often I see talented athletes do a fine job of entering into a submission and controlling their opponent, but then exhibit weak finishing mechanics at the crucial moment when submission victory was within their grasp. You must have a very clear understanding of the mechanical details that make a given submission work against determined resistance. Perhaps more than any other aspect of jiu jitsu - the submissions game is the one where the smallest errors of placement of lever and fulcrum and application of directions of force will have the most detrimental effects. Study your favorite submissions with an eye for detail that surpasses all other aspects of the game and you will soon find that opponents who used to easily slip away from you are now trapped and helpless when you get to your finishing positions. MAKE YOUR PRIMARY FOCUS TIGHTNESS, RESTRICTION OF MOVEMENT AND PRECISION IN PLACEMENT OF FULCRUM AND LEVER RATHER THAN APPLICATION OF POWER. Observe the impressive tightness of the rear strangle used by Garry Tonon to win his second MMA fight - it looks as though a tourniquet has been wrapped around his opponent’s neck, such is the precise placement of hands, Head and elbows, along with the rotational direction of force that we favor. Take pride in your finishing mechanics - once you master them you will have a set of weapons that opponents will fear and upon which you can attach great faith.

New England summer: I spent the weekend with Bernardo Faria and the team at BJJ Fanatics filming the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series - THE FRONT HEADLOCK/GUILLOTINE. Two days of filming in a beautiful New England/Boston setting - a ton a footage featuring the squad’s approach to the front headlock/guillotine game. I always insist that my students have strong attacks out of front headlock - all of them excel at it. In the gym it is one of our most successful systems when our students spar each other and has been featured in some of the squad’s biggest successes. Can’t wait to see how this one comes out - I feel this one will have very wide applicability for many students as guillotine attacks and other strangles from the front are among the most popular and successful in the sport. Our step by step approach to the position will make it easy for you to use them in a more systematic fashion. Now it’s back to the train station and five hours back to NYC - a wonderful ride through New England in summer - for a full day of teaching tomorrow in the basement of hope and despair- wishing you all the best from Boston!

Mentors: I am a huge believer in the idea of taking on grappling mentors - outstanding figures in the sport who you believe have some characteristics that strongly appeal to you or which you believe could greatly improve your performance and direction if you were to implement them. A truly great grappler who dazzled the sport when he entered ADCC and blitzed his weight division on several occasions was the inestimable Jean Jacques Machado. It was not just that he won that was so impressive- it was the WAY he won. There was not a moment wasted on the mat - he embodied what I take as the ideal of jiu jitsu - PURPOSEFUL MOVEMENT DIRECTED TOWARDS CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUSTAINED ATTACKS CULMINATING IN SUBMISSION. Nobody demonstrated this ideal better than Mr Machado. If you wanted to show a curious friend what great grappling looks like and were looking for exciting and technically flawless matches you could not do better than those world championship winning performances. From the start of the match until the inevitable submission finish it was a hustling bustling flurry of well directed attacks in combinations that flowed evenly between position and submission and created tactical pressure rather than physical pressure - watching this pressure crack his opponents was one of the most instructive lessons of my own development. Trying to recreate that sense of efficient and unrelenting attack has been a big part of my work - and it should be yours too. What a pleasure to see the great man visit the blue basement and show his knowledge to new generations of students alongside my Sensei Renzo Gracie - they grew up together in jiu jitsu - now they share it and improve it on opposite sides of America I will always be grateful to the mentors who provided insight, inspiration and example to me - through study and training their work can become yours - find them, study them and cherish them.

I am very pleased to announce a mega seminar featuring Gordon Ryan and myself teaching four hours of leg attack system and back attack system hosted by ace seminar organizer Mike Stewart Jr August 18th Gracie Jiu-jitsu Maryland . 9570 berger rd columbia MD 21046 . Register at www.realjiujitsu.com. They are putting a limit of two hundred people on the event and have around twenty spots still available. I am very much looking forward to showing details of our work in a new venue. Looking forward to meeting up with our jiu jitsu friends and doing our best to improve your performance on the mats!

Knowing what to expect: This is a photo of Garry Tonon roughly three hours prior to his second MMA fight practicing his outside hook (kosoto gake) takedown against the fence. Most fight promotions allow the athletes access to the cage prior to the event so they can warm up and get a general feel for the arena prior to their bout. Later that night, Mr Tonon would use that exact same takedown to good effect on multiple occasions. Remember this - TO A DEGREE, COMBAT SPORTS ARE CHAOTIC AND WE DON’T REALLY KNOW WHAT WILL HAPPEN - BUT WITHIN THAT CHAOS THERE ARE MANY THINGS THAT ARE VERY LIKELY TO HAPPEN - WE NEED TO FOCUS A LARGE PERCENTAGE OF OUR TRAINING TIME UPON THOSE. However confusing the game may seem at times, there are many things about it that are known and predictable. Patterns of behavior that are often repeated. TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS FOREKNOWLEDGE AND USE IT TO HELP YOUR DEVELOPMENT AND EFFECTIVENESS. There are certain moves, scenarios and movement patterns that occur in almost every match - KNOW THEM WELL AND TRAIN THEM AND THEIR COUNTERS MORE THAN OTHER TECHNIQUES. once you think this way some of the mystery goes out of the sport and you will soon see performance increases.

Back in the blue basement: Great to see outstanding Australian grappling sensation Craig Jones @craigjonesbjj back training with the squad in preparation for his upcoming super fight in the upcoming @kasaigrappling show in NYC against leg locking powerhouse Rousimar Palhares. Senior squad member Garry Tonon had an epic match against the Brazilian juggernaut that showcased the leg lock game probably better than any other match. Mr Tonon did it weighing only 168 pounds that night in England. What better place for Mr Jones to prepare for the same challenge than the basement of hope and despair at RGA? This should be a fascinating match up. Mr Jones has a much bigger and longer body than Mr Tonon so there will be both differences and similarities in the preparation- should be extremely interesting. Today he mixed it up with the squad juniors in some great training. Here, he and Oliver Taza get into a great sparring session and exchange attacks. Next few months has a slew of tournaments with various rule sets to make for very interesting training sessions

Techniques differ - Principles don’t: At the @onechampionship event this past weekend it was my pleasure to work the warm up locker room next to an athlete I often make my students watch as an example and role model for their striking development - the great Giorgio Petrosyan. Mr Petrosyan was at the event to corner his brother. It was fascinating watching them workout and prepare and to note the similarities in the combat principles he embodies to those found in jiu jitsu. Jiu jitsu’s fighting methodology is based always upon the core concept of attaining positions that allow you to strike whilst restricting your opponent’s ability to do the same back to you. In jiu jitsu this is done via takedown to dominant positions. Mr Petrosyan is a master of doing the same - but given the nature of kickboxing- he does it entirely in standing striking exchanges. He excels in the art of striking with effect, whilst denying his opponent’s the ability to do the same - he uses an dizzying array of subtle footwork patterns, distance control, angle, level, clinching and other means. The result is he hits with tremendous power and effect while offering very few opportunities for an opponent to do the same back to him. He dazzled the room as he went to work and showed the depth of his knowledge in his art. It was a real treat to see the same principles we espouse being applied in a totally different context and with such skill.

From one mat to another: Teaching yesterday in the Philippines- then twenty seven hour flight home - now teaching back on the mats of the blue basement in NYC 😜 From mat to mat the game is the same - keep learning and keep improving- no matter how small the progress, have faith that it will accrue over time to become something substantial. No matter where you are or who shares the mat with you; there is something you can learn and practice so that the next time you step on the mat, wherever it might be, you are better than the previous time. Looking forward to upcoming projects with the squad and all my students at RGA starting tomorrow! 😊😊

Teaching time: What better way to cap off a wonderful weekend watching my student and teacher decisively win their respective MMA fights in the best tradition of jiu jitsu, than to partake in the pleasure of teaching local jiu jitsu students our systems based approach to the sport. I was very impressed to see the high interest level in our leg lock game and the enthusiasm and dedication of local students. It’s always a wonderful experience coming out to Asia and being in the home of the great martial arts traditions that gave so much to the West - it’s an honor to give a little back. The Philippines has a unique distinguished history of martial arts development and the great show put on by @onechampionship gave local fighters and fans an opportunity to show that. Heading to the airport now for the long twenty five hour journey home. Tired but happy. Thank you to our Filipino hosts, thanks to all the local students who came out in force to learn our game and thank you to you my loyal readers for your interest and support for what we do. Best wishes from the Philippines and see you soon to my students back in the basement in NYC 😊😊

What a night! Sensei Renzo had an amazing comeback tonight! He finished Yuki Kondo here in Manila tonight in the second round with a beautifully applied strangle from the back. He controlled the action from standing to ground and showed his immense knowledge by switching grips to break through against strong resistance. We are all so proud to see him prevail so convincingly against such a tough opponent. Also great to to see two generations of Renzo Gracie Academy athletes showcase their winning ways 😊😊 I am always very proud to be a student of this great man - but tonight was something special to behold. Thanks so much for all your support. Can’t wait to see all our dedicated students back at RGA in NYC and tell the full story of sensei’s amazing night! See you all soon! 😊😊🤗🤗

Victory in Manila! Garry Tonon won his second MMA fight here in the Philippines tonight. He took on a very tough and big Rahul Raju and won via rear strangle in the third round. It was an interesting bout, Mr Raju had a big reach advantage and staked his chances on a powerful counter rear hand. Mr Tonon attacked the legs hard in submission exchanges looking to cause enough damage to prevent him sitting on his heavy punches. As the damage to the legs accrued the takedowns came easier and then Mr Tonon switched to back attack system to get the break through. This ends only the seventh month of his MMA training - I am happy he got more time in the cage in this fight and got to feel some of the adversity of a longer fight - all important steps in an athlete’s development. Congratulations to Mr Tonon on a very nice win and deeper progress into the game. Thanks so much to all the sparring partners who helped the preparation - and thanks to all of you for taking an interest in our approach to the game and your support of what we do - hope you all enjoyed the show! 😊 Wishing you all the best from the Philippines!

Garry Tonon gets in his last workout prior to @onechampionship in two days here in Manila. Tomorrow he will focus on the small weight cut. He is very small for 170 pound division - in the United States he would fight at 145, but the rules of One Championship forbid big dehydrating weight cuts. Now it’s back to hotel for light meal and discussion. Wishing you all the best from Manila!

Press conference: The rise of OneCampionship show: You can always tell a lot about the interest level for a given show by prior media attention. The media presence is a strong indicator of initial public attention and then they amplify that through their channels to compound it. In the main press conference yesterday, @onechampionship CEO, Chatri Sityodtong presided over a veritable horde of media correspondents here in Manila. There is a sense of real growth in Asian MMA. Mr Sityodtong expounded his long term vision for growth of the sport in Asia and beyond. His main goal is to reconcile the modern sport of MMA with traditional martial arts values to create greater social acceptance and support in a way that can create massive growth over time and make MMA a true mainstream sport. The vision for the athletes is one of killers in the cage, but gentleman outside; and where the athletes are the draw both as fighters and as people. It is very interesting to observe the differences from American MMA culture where a much more confrontational attitude outside the cage is seen as essential to selling a show. Here in the Philippines this approach seems to be working very well, as a sold out show projected to a huge television audience across Asia and covered by a media swarm bigger than I ever saw in North America takes shape. I have always believed that to get to the top you have to stand out and represent something different from the others. Mimicry can get you only so high - at some point you have to do things your own way if you want to reach your full potential. OneChampionship looks to be doing exactly that. Excited to see them setting up the big show!!

I am very excited to announce the release of my new instructional video BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM today from BJJFanatics - the second video in the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. There is a link in my instagram bio that you can follow if you wish to order it. Most of you know that I greatly favor the back as the ultimate attacking/safety position in grappling and fighting. Whenever my students take on bigger and stronger opponents I always counsel them to make their primary focus attacks upon the back and the legs - everything else is secondary. I present here the complete system. As always, I teach the “why” of everything so as to give a clear conceptual understanding in addition to the “how” via explicit techniques. The video is around nine and half hours long. It covers all the main aspects of working from the back with a particular emphasis on finishing skills. My intention is to give you all a complete systems based training resource you can keep coming back to for years rather a “flavor of the month” collection of moves that will amuse you for a while and then be forgotten. As always, this work is dedicated to all my teachers and mentors along with my outstanding students who have always done an incredible job of displaying the techniques and concepts in this video. Without their hard work, dedication and individual brilliance I would just be a fool tinkering away in my sensei’s basement. I was always very proud that in the numerous EBI competitions that my students competed in, they had by a landslide the highest rate of wins and submissions in the tricky overtime rules - on every occasion they chose the back - now you will see why.

First workout in Manila: Garry Tonon goes through his drills in preparation for his bout Friday night. It’s always a good thing getting that first workout behind you after a long flight, different climate and unfamiliar environment. There are two mild typhoons close by, so there is constant heavy rain making a wet and humid atmosphere that makes warm ups easy. Thanks to local BJJ gym metacore for hospitality and venue. It’s a great place to train while here In Manila. Now it’s back to the hotel to recharge and get ready for tomorrow 😊😊 Excited to see the big show @onechampionship arriving in force tomorrow- there is always a special feeling of anticipation and purpose when all the athletes and coaches and officials fly in. Wishing you all the best from the Philippines!

Bound for the Pacific: At JFK airport bound for Manila, Philippines via Korea. Mr Tonon has trained hard as always. Thanks so much to all our team mates, sparring partners and mentors. Looking forward to getting back to the Asian martial arts scene and the team at @onechampionship as they continue to showcase MMA throughout Asia and growing in the West as well 😊 looking forward to doing what I can to help the BJJ scene in Manila while in town and catching up with comrades Tom DeBlass and Sensei Renzo’s team. Wishing you all the best! Thanks so much for your interest in what we do and how we do it! Back system video will be released next week - I won’t be here for that, but hope you all enjoy it anyway! 🤗🤗

Sparring with a purpose: The vast majority of jiu jitsu athletes enter every sparring session with a “let’s see what happens” attitude. Let me tell you something - whenever you enter sparring with a “let’s see what happens” attitude, YOU WILL SIMPLY END UP DOING THE SAME THINGS YOU DID IN ALL YOUR PREVIOUS SPARRING SESSIONS. Left to their own devices, ATHLETES WILL ALWAYS GO BACK TO THEIR HABITS. The idea of progressive training is to create NEW habits, not simply repeat old ones. Change within yourself has to be FORCED, it won’t happen by itself. The best way to make this happen is to have a clear goal(s) when you spar. Usually the goals are very modest - a new grip, a new set up for a favorite move, perhaps a new move you think has potential. Only by bringing in new material and improving old material will you make progress. This is best done by having a notion of what you want to accomplish before you slap hands and commence sparring. Of course there are days where you just want to spar with an open and relaxed mind and have fun seeing what happens - that’s fine and healthy. However, make sure a healthy percentage of your sparring sessions involve clear prior goals to prevent them degenerating into “more of the same” sessions where you walk out the same the same as you walked in the door.

Study: Every Jiu Jitsu athlete studies moves. Remember this - ANY GIVEN MOVE HAS FOUR CRITICAL STAGES
First- set ups and precursors
Second - entry
Third - execution
Fourth (if the move should fail (and realistically the majority of your attempts will fail on someone your own size and skill level)) - exit/entrance to subsequent move Only when you study moves in this four step pattern will you realize their depth and use that to succeed with them.

The neck: An essential feature of jiu jitsu is the idea of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE UPON A VULNERABLE TARGET THAT, IF SUCCESSFULLY ATTACKED, WOULD END THE FIGHT. There is no part of the human body that is more vulnerable to the attacks of grappling than the NECK. The neck is relatively small in circumference- around fifteen to twenty inches for most male athletes - yet within it are packed together some of the most vital components of the hum body. The body does a good job of protecting key components like heart and lungs behind the bony rib cage. The crucial spinal cord is well protected by the spine. The brain by the thickness of the skull. The neck on the other hand, houses the critical carotid arteries, vertebral arteries, jugular veins, trachea and the spine itself, along with a host of other very important components- all packed in close to each other with NO PROTECTION and close to the surface. As such, the neck is the single best target for attack when grappling (when strikes are involved you can argue that the jaw and other targets becomes more important). All jiu jitsu students must make a serious study of neck anatomy and the means of attacking the vulnerability of this greatest of all targets. In grappling, The human body is CONTROLLED at the head, but it is best FINISHED at the neck. NO OTHER PART OF THE BODY OFFERS SUCH A DENSELY PACKED MASS OF CRITICAL COMPONENTS HOUSED IN SUCH A SMALL SPACE AND SO UNPROTECTED BY ANY OTHER ELEMENTS OF OUR PHYSIOLOGY. I teach my students to fight like vampires - the neck is always the first target. Once opponents fear your neck attacks their defensive reactions will often make other favored targets such as legs, much easier to snatch.

Here is a short clip from my upcoming video instructional BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM. As you know from the incredible work of my hard working students, I put a very heavy emphasis of back mastery in my training programs. In particular, my students have shown remarkable finishing prowess from the back. This is the result of a specialized system of subtle arm traps that make breakthroughs with the single most important submission hold in the sport - the rear naked strangle - much easier to achieve. So many students come to me expressing frustration with the common problem of being able to get to the back quite readily, but then failing to finish successfully from there. I teach the complete system (I believe this is a nine hour video) on both a conceptual level (to give students a clear understanding of the WHY of their actions) and a technical level (to give students a clear understanding of the HOW of their actions). I actually had to film this video twice as the first one had faulty audio, but now it has superb audio and much improved production 😊😊 It was fun going up to Boston to film with Bernardo Faria and his team at BJJ Fanatics. I hope you have as much fun watching as we had making it, and more importantly, the happiness of good results on the mat. As always, thanks so much to my sensei, Renzo Gracie and my students, who made the grappling world take notice of the back system and whose innovative brilliance keeps it growing and improving, and to all of you, my students outside the basement for taking interest in our work. Video should be released early next week 😊😊

Getting ready: Garry Tonon goes through another sparring session in preparation for his upcoming bout in One FC @onechampionship in Manila Philippines in two weeks. He will take on Rahul Raju. On the same card, my sensei, Renzo Gracie will take on the great Yuki Kondo in a battle of masters. Working the interface between grappling and MMA has always been one of my greatest interests so its a pleasure to watch over the preparation of Mr Tonon. He is only seven months into his MMA training so every day something new is learned. It’s rather similar to our first days in jiu jitsu, where every class you see and try things you have never done before and everything is completely new. That spirit makes for exciting training sessions and a great sense of development and growth. It can be frustrating at times - new skills never come easily, but so long as a person has a sense of forward progress towards a desired goal , I believe they can endure any frustration and disappointment and keep in the game. Just one more week of training in NYC and then it’s off to the Philippines! Another marathon plane fight - any person raised in Australia or New Zealand is used to that! It will be nice to be back in the Southern Hemisphere again! Keep that spirit of your first six months of training alive within yourself - keep those feelings of amazement, growth, frustration/desire and your game will never grow stale and will grow alongside you.

Victory in London! The squad has a great night in London at the O2 Arena @polaris_professional grappling Championships. Nicky Ryan made superb use of his triangle (sankaku) and armbar skills to take a fine submission win over UFC veteran Phil Harris and advance to the next stage of the Polaris 145 pound championship. Oliver Taza defeated talented Australian grappler Lachlan Giles via decision after dominating most of the action through a great match - he now moves to the final for the welter weight title. Both Mr Ryan and Mr Taza will have bouts in a future Polaris event to try to win those titles. Outstanding work from these two youngsters- great to see their hard work in the gym paying off on the stage 😊😊 I have been telling people for the longest time about the skills of the Ryan brothers in triangle attacks - good to see them going public with it! Oliver Taza has some of the best gym performances I see every week - great to see him taking those on stage more and more. Both athletes work in the best spirit of jiu jitsu - constant attacks looking for submissions at all times. Well done!

The back - Reconciliation of two fundamental approaches: There is no question that the single most successful attack from the back in jiu jitsu is the rear naked strangle (mata leao/hadaka jime). The essential nature of this attack is one of A SINGLE HIGH PERCENTAGE MOVE ATTACKING A SMALL AREA IN AN ENTIRELY PREDICTABLE MANNER. Such is the positional control afforded by this method of attack, that even though it is known to all, it is still very difficult to stop. When it DOES fail, we need to shift our method entirely to DIVERSIFIED ATTACKS OVER A WIDE AREA - the very opposite of the initial approach. Learning to play these extremes of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE with rear naked strangle in one hand and DIVERSITY OF ATTACKS AND LOCATION OF ATTACKS on the other, is the heart of a successful back attack program. We have to recognize the simple fact that one submission deserves the majority of our attention, but that we need back up attacks in different areas to get a breakthrough when the big gun fails. Learning how to reconcile these two different approaches to the back is crucial for your success. Here, young athletes Mikey Wilson and Liam Zeh show how it is done with excellent switches between rear naked strangles and rear triangles (ushiro sankaku) both essential elements of our back attack system. Everything begins with the rear naked strangle, but where things finish is often determined by the directions of resistance.

Young guns in London: This weekend in England, Nicky Ryan will compete in Polaris Grappling @polaris_professional feather weight championship. Four outstanding athletes, Mr Ryan, Masakazu Imanari, Ashley Williams and Phil Harris will match up to determine the 145 pound title. Mr Ryan is matched against UFC athlete Phil Harris, who has also competed well in previous Polaris grappling shows. The same night, squad junior Oliver Taza will take on the outstanding Australian grappler Lachlan Giles, who has put on excellent performances in EBI and ADCC and is a stablemate of Fellow Australian dynamo, Craig Jones. Gregor Gracie of RGA takes on UFC and ADCC standout Gilbert Burns - it will be a great show in London! Everyone has trained hard and are now ready for action!

Squad hangs out with Sensei after class: Training is always tough - it’s always great to have someone light up the room after a tough session. No one does it better than my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie! Great to see Georges St-Pierre get the latest grappling material under his belt with the squad. Garry Tonon is working hard in preparation for his next MMA bout - who better to get advice and tips from than Georges St-Pierre? It’s the exchange of expertise that helps make this place so special. Another tough but fun day in the blue basement!

Working from neutrality to advantage: The basic insight behind all martial arts is that of gaining some form of prior advantage before committing to an attack. In truth however, our opponents strongly and craftily resist any attempt on our part to gain any form of advantage and so we spend the majority of our time on the mat in neutral positions. It is important to understand that EVEN WITHIN POSITIONS THAT ARE CLASSIFIED AS NEUTRAL (no points scored) THERE CAN STILL BE MINOR ADVANTAGES GAINED THAT CAN ACCUMULATE TO A DEGREE WHERE A BREAKTHROUGH CAN BE ATTAINED AND POINTS SCORED OR A SUBMISSION APPLIED. Often it may be something small, an advantageous grip, foot position, head placement - anything that affords you a greater degree of control over him than he has over you, no matter how small. Understand this - ANY GIVEN NEUTRAL POSITION IS IN PRACTICE, ONLY AS NEUTRAL AS THE RELATIVE SKILL LEVEL OF THE TWO ATHLETES. Learn to go beyond seeing POSITIONS as dominant or advantageous and start to look for ACTIONS AND PLACEMENTS that are advantageous. These are less obvious, less well defined, but against skilled opponents, they will be the resource you call upon more than any other. Here, Georges St-Pierre and Garry Tonon work from neutral position for leg control. Small nuances in grip, limb positioning, placement of wedges and directionality of force will determine winner and loser in these situations.

What do you look for? Though i write in copious amounts about my work as a coach, The basis of any coaching program can be put in a single word - PROGRESSION. Everything I do is simply an attempt to take a group of athletes from one level to higher level, no matter how small that uplift may be be - every single day - and then let time work it’s magic as days become weeks and months and years. Those small daily progressions will make big changes. Just as seemingly small interest rates compounded over time can make you wealthy, so too, can daily changes where each new skill compounds with existing skills until you go from unknown amateur to someone whom people will pay to watch. What is required more than anything is A CLEAR SENSE OF WHAT IS DEFICIENT OR PROBLEMATIC TODAY AND A CLEAR PLAN TO FIX THAT FOR TOMORROW. My job is to see where the problems are now and address them tomorrow and then check short term progress in those areas. All this is done on a daily basis - but this has to be reconciled with long term goals and a vision of what the athlete wishes to achieve in the long run. This daily log of problems and deficiencies is the basis of my observations. Then instruction and drilling of potential solutions followed by more observations, this time looking for results compared with previous days. ABOVE ALL THERE MUST BE A SENSE OF CONTINUITY FROM DAY TO DAY SO THAT PROGRESS CAN BE MADE OVER TIME. If the observations of today are not linked to yesterday and tomorrow they are without value. Don’t observe for entertainment or excitement - observe for PROGRESS - only when observations are linked to past and future can you do this.

When Chuck Norris does leg locks he doesn’t bother with ashi garami - he just tells your leg to break itself...and it does...Great to see Georges St-Pierre meet the man who has done so much for the growth and popularity of martial arts around the world and who played a key role in the early development of BJJ in North America. He was a kind and gracious host to my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie along with many other members of Gracie and Machado families back when no one in the United States even knew what BJJ was. I remember him coming to do a class with Mr Gracie in NYC and being impressed by his quiet and thoughtful demeanor and his incredible work ethic in In continuing to learn new aspects of martial arts despite already being an established legend - an amazing example to us all. Though he is mostly remembered for his martial arts movies, he was a Karate tournament champion in the early days the martial arts explosion in the late sixties and early seventies and had the adaptability to stay at the forefront of martial arts development through the nineties and beyond. Great to see him meet the face of the modern multi-discipline approach to MMA. 😊😊

The back - coaching a mindset: Most of my coaching work is the development of physical skills. These will always form the backbone of any training program since without them, all the other aspects of the game - tactics, strategy, game plans etc etc cannot be enacted. Nonetheless, you must recognize this fundamental truth - EVERY DELIBERATE PHYSICAL MOVE ON THE MAT MUST BE PRECEDED BY THE MENTAL ACT OF RECOGNIZING THE OPPORTUNITY TO EMPLOY THAT MOVE, WHETHER IT BE CONSCIOUS OR UNCONSCIOUS. If you never identify the opportunity, you will never attempt the move. It is crucial therefore, THAT YOU TRAIN YOURSELF TO SEE AND IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITY, for only then will the physical action follow. The more opportunities you see, the more that move will fire for you. SO JUST AS IMPORTANT AS THE VARIOUS TECHNIQUES FOR TAKING THE BACK IS THE SKILL OF RECOGNIZING THE CONDITIONS THAT MAKE TAKING THE BACK A POSSIBILITY. An athlete who can see opportunities and who has the physical skill to make it happen is a dangerous opponent indeed. Conversely, an athlete who has well developed physical skills but who is blind to opportunity to actually employ is harmless to his opponent. Since I favor the back above all positions, unsurprisingly I constantly emphasize to my students the need to see opportunities to get there so that they see opportunities where others don’t. This heightened state of awareness for the back is a big part of your success rate in actually getting there in a match

Nothing beats the back: When it comes to control and submit a tough and dangerous opponent- nothing will beat getting behind him and strangling him. The back is the single safest place to be in a one on one fight without weapons - whether it be grappling, MMA or a real fight. Nowhere else is there such a massive imbalance between your ability to attack them and their ability to attack you. Of course other positions have their own great value, especially when striking is permitted, but the back will always be my favorite due to the imbalance in attacking potential between the two athletes and the incredible power and success rate of the main weapon used from the back - the rear naked strangle (mata Leao/hadaka jime). No other weapon in the jiu jitsu submission arsenal offers such variation in severity of application as the back/strangle combination. It can go from a mild hold-down/immobilization to a safe means of rendering an uncontrollable opponent safely unconscious; to a truly brutal elbows-to-the-back- of-the- head beatdown position to a lethal strangle in a life or death struggle. No other submission offers this mix of versatility allied with safety and high percentage success rate. As such, the back and the mata leao strangle are the most symbolic representation of jiu jitsu. If I could only pick one submission hold for the rest of my life - unquestionably I would choose this one and I believe the overwhelming majority of other jiu jitsu players of all levels and all sizes and skill levels would do the same. Understanding the many nuances of the back - both the positional element and the submission element is a huge part of my coaching program. Nothing shows me more clearly the speed of a student’s progress than A PROPENSITY TO RUTHLESSLY HUNT FOR THE BACK AT ALL TIMES IN A MATCH, THE PHYSICAL SKILLS TO GET THERE AND STAY THERE, ALONG WITH THE KNOWLEDGE AND INTENSITY TO BREAK THROUGH DEFENSES AND FINISH IN THE MOST DECISIVE AND CONTROLLING WAY POSSIBLE FROM THERE. Here, Gordon Ryan, who has truly devastating control to submission sequences from the back, locks in a characteristically tight stranglehold from behind.

Happy Fourth of July from the Blue Basement! Many great things start from a revolution - down in the basement we constantly work to revolutionize ourselves and aspects of the game - but today we also celebrate the most important political revolution that gave rise to the great nation inside whose framework, solidity and freedom we can work to improve ourselves in whatever field we choose. Hope you all have a wonderful 4th of July! 🇺🇸🇺🇸🤗🤗🇺🇸🇺🇸

The dualities of jiu jitsu - part two - top and bottom position: Jiu jitsu is unusual among the main grappling style insofar as it is neutral between top and bottom position. There is no penalty for simply coming out at the start of match and sitting down. The core assumption of the sport is that TOP AND BOTTOM ARE OF EQUAL VALUE PROVIDED THE BOTTOM ATHLETE CAN MAIN CONTACT WITH HIS OPPONENT WITH HIS LEGS. Only when the top athlete clears the legs is it understood that he has advantage with his top position. As such, the sport is played almost entirely with one athlete working from top position trying to clear the legs (guard) and a bottom athlete trying to maintain control with his legs and attack from underneath with sweep/reversals and submissions. Most athletes have a preference for one over the other - BUT NOBODY CAN ONLY BE SKILLED AT ONE AND RISE HIGH IN THE SPORT. As early as possible in your development you must make a commitment to excellence in both top and bottom positions. If you feel your development is uneven in this regard and your skill in one is noticeably higher than the other - YOU MUST ADDRESS THIS, for continuing on without resolving this issue will prove a real problem in the future. Make your first goal the ability to HOLD AND MAINTAIN your guard against passing pressure from bottom and MAINTAIN BALANCE, POSTURE AND TOP POSITION against sweeping and submission pressure from underneath. All the other moves - sweeps, passes, submissions etc have to be built upon the bedrock of GUARD MAINTENANCE on bottom and BALANCE/POSTURAL MAINTENANCE on top. Only when you can retain your guard for long periods of time against pressure will you be able to employ the various moves from guard - you won’t sweep or submit anyone from guard if your opponent blows past your legs in seconds - nor will you pass anyone’s guard if you are immediately knocked out of balance and posture broken. Remember always that jiu jitsu requires excellence in both top and bottom - don’t fight against this basic truth - train and develop in accordance with it.

The dualities of jiu jitsu: Much of the essential nature of jiu jitsu is revealed by its many notable dualities. One of the most fundamental and important is that between offense and defense. It is critical that you become equally adept at both as inadequacies in one will make you incapable of revealing your strengths in the other. If i know my defense is weak I will always be unwilling to take the risks required for strong offense for fear of ending in a vulnerable position that I cannot defend. If my offense is weak I will hide behind my defense and never exhibit the ability to carry the fight to my opponent and take victory. It is your duty then, to approach the learning of every move from BOTH the viewpoint of offense and defense - THE MORE YOU LEARN ABOUT ONE, THE MORE YOU WILL UNDERSTAND ABOUT THE OTHER. Every move in jiu jitsu has two faces - offense and defense - if you see only one you are growing at only half your potential.

Elevating: There is an essential prerequisite if I wish to enter into ashi garami from bottom position - MY OPPONENT’S KNEES MUST BE OFF THE MAT. Due to the fact that many athletes pass guard in standing positions, this creates many opportunities to leg entries from bottom. In cases where my opponent keeps two knees on the floor IT IS UP TO ME TO GET HIS KNEES OFF THE MAT. The single best method of doing so is some form of ELEVATION. This is a truly essential skill that must be thoroughly mastered if you wish to be considered proficient in the leg lock game. Daily drilling getting a partner up into the air will quickly get you proactively creating opportunities to enter the legs from underneath so that every day you have numerous opportunities to attack and develop your skills. Get your opponent up high and watch your leg locking skills go higher still!

Body Tension: Your ability to judge when to relax your body and when to lock it tight in maximal tension is a critical factor in your development in the sport. Tension in the body is absolutely necessary WHENEVER YOU ARE TRYING TO INHIBIT THE MOVEMENT OF YOUR OPPONENT. In most other cases it is undesirable, as it costs you greatly in endurance and efficiency of movement. The clearest examples of a time when you want to shut down your opponent’s movement is during the application of a submission hold - so unsurprisingly, this is a time when there ought to be considerable tension locking your body into the hold until the application is complete. This explains why failed submissions, particularly in long combinations, are among the most tiring aspects of a match. Learning to keep your body relaxed when you want to generate movement, and then switch to maximal tension when you want to lock the opponent down and complete a given move is a big part of your shift from beginner to expert. Jiu jitsu is a typically played out as long cycles of relatively relaxed periods interspersed with short bursts of maximum tension as critical moves are attempted. Just make sure those periods of great tension are kept short and spaced apart or you will quickly exhaust yourself. The most dangerous part of maximal tension is the natural habit most people have of HOLDING THEIR BREATH UNDER TENSION - be very careful - once you go into oxygen debt it is very hard to get out of debt under the stress of a tough match. Monitor your breathing careful and keep breathing even when your body is fully locked in a deep submission hold. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows an excellent degree of body tension as he locks in a tight inside heel hook in an inside sankaku variation of cross ashi garami. Notice that although his BODY is exhibiting strong tension, his FACE is not - this is usually a good sign that breathing is uninterrupted and that the tension is being applied in the correct places.

The iron law of competence and context: One of the most commonly asked questions I receive runs like this, “I love what the squad does in grappling competitions with leg locks, but would those leg locks work in MMA?” There seems to be an odd conception among many people that leg locks are somehow DIFFERENT from all other grappling techniques insofar as they are workable in grappling, but unworkable in fighting. I never hear people say for example, That arm-bars work in grappling but don’t work in MMA, or Darce strangles, or half guard passes etc etc. Here is a point so important it ought to be written in large bold letters on the wall of every jiu jitsu academy in the world - THE COMBAT EFFECTIVENESS OF ALL THE MAIN MOVES OF JIU JITSU, INCLUDING LEG LOCKS, IS NEVER DETERMINED BY THE MOVES THEMSELVES- THEY ALL WORK WELL - BUT RATHER BY THE COMPETENCE AND CONTEXT IN WHICH THEY ARE EXECUTED. The truth is, ANY jiu jitsu move can result in catastrophic failure if applied incompetently or at the wrong time or on the wrong person. This is just as true of arm bars and strangles as it is of leg locks. Worry less about your technique selection and worry more about your technique execution - do you perform it well? Do you select it at the appropriate time and against an appropriate opponent? Do you make the necessary adjustments to lessen the danger of striking technique being used as you apply it? Do you have a realistic follow up if it should begin to fail? These are the more important questions. Here, Outstanding MMA fight Joao Zeferino, who has trained regularly with the squad for a long time, shows great execution of heel hooks in MMA at WSOF lightweight Grand Prix in 2015, submitting to two opponents in one night, including MMA legend, Jorge “Macaco” Patino with fine technique well adapted for the different pressures of the cage

The higher you go....The higher you go in the sport of jiu jitsu, the less you will concern yourself with the standard techniques of the sport. Your first challenge when you begin jiu jitsu is to develop strong skills in the basic operations of the game - to develop skill in the basic MOVES. So for example, you work hard to develop a good arm bar, a tight triangle, a reliable elbow escape etc etc. By the time you get to a good level you will come to realize that in the majority of cases, THERE IS NEAR UNIFORMITY IN THE ABILITY OF MOST ATHLETES TO PERFORM THE BASIC MOVES OF THE SPORT. If you watch the current world champion perform a basic move, say for example, an arm bar from closed guard, there is little to distinguish it from a local black belt. At the higher levels, IT IS MUCH MORE ABOUT YOUR ABILITY TO OUTPERFORM OTHERS AT THE SET UPS AND PRECURSORS TO THE TECHNIQUES RATHER THAN THE TECHNIQUES THEMSELVES. Among competent black belts, EVERYONE has a strong arm bar, a strong kimura etc. What makes one stand out from the others is mostly about the small and subtle skills and tactics that enables him or her TO GET INTO A SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN ACTUALLY APPLY THAT MOVE. Due to the fact that the vast majority of your opponent’s defense to any given move comes from the integrity of his stance, the single most important skill at the higher levels becomes THE ABILITY TO SUBVERT, NEGATE AND DEGRADE YOUR OPPONENT’S STANCE - only then will you be able to actually apply the basic moves of the sport. Beginners must focus on moves, but as you gain in expertise, YOU MUST SHIFT YOUR FOCUS TO BREAKING YOUR OPPONENT’S STANCE AND STRUCTURE - only then will the opportunity to apply those moves arise. My teaching reflects this fact - moves are taught in great detail, but always embedded in a coherent system of preliminaries that make them work in competition.

Learning from a distance: You guys know I am a firm believer in the possibility of a mentor having a massive influence on the direction of your life even in a short meeting - Dean Lister played this role in my leg lock development - for me, he provided the spark from which the current leg lock blaze burns. I am also a tremendous believer in the power of self starting, independently minded individuals to see information from a distance and USING THAT AS A STARTING POINT, GO ON TO MAKE INCREDIBLE PROGRESS ON THEIR OWN OVER TIME. That is why I am so enthusiastic about teaching seminars and making instructional videos - I truly believe in their ability to make a difference in your grappling life. Here is an amazing example all the way from Australia. A few years ago I went to visit family and taught some impromptu leg lock seminars in Sydney and Melbourne - turn out and enthusiasm was fantastic. A young man named Jeremy @jeremypaulskinner came to one of them and impressed me with his movement and thirst for knowledge. Since then he went on to greatly develop his game, based on seminar notes, watching the senior squad members in action and most importantly, his own hard work. Now he teaches alongside Craig Jones at @absolutemmamelb Here he is the recent boa super 8 tournament in Australia demonstrating a perfect rendition of a classic squad maneuver into cross ashi garami utilizing double trouble to completely control his opponent into a fine finish! What a fine example of long distance learning married to hard work and initiative to get super results! Great to see this and I hope it drives you to be confident that an initial help can be the impetus to create something great within yourself and get you to your goals and dreams. Well done, Jeremy! 🤗

Stay compact: Probably one of the biggest problems beginners in jiu jitsu face is that of extending their bodies at times that make them very vulnerable to attack. Most of the fundamental postures of jiu jitsu, particularly the defensive ones, involve CONTRACTION of the body - spine rounded, elbows and knees tucked in tight. Learning to trust in this contraction as the best means of slipping your limbs INSIDE your opponent’s limbs as the most high percentage route to escape and evasion is a big step for the beginner in jiu jitsu. As you progress the problem will change from that of GETTING TO a safe contracted posture to that of MAINTAINING this strong posture throughout the course of a long tough match against a skilled opponent who is doing everything he can to subvert that posture - either way, learning and fighting to keep your limbs in tight at the appropriate time will be a constant theme of your training. Just as a good boxer constantly keeps his chin tucked, shoulders high and rounded to protect his jaw and elbows in tight to protect his torso when in danger; so a good jiu jitsu player puts his or her primary effort into sound defensive structure before anything else. Here, young Nicky Ryan presents me with a wall of knees and elbows that prevents me exploiting the angle I have gained. His well rounded spine will give him the mobility he needs to quickly recover his legs and square up to me so that he can immediately shift from a defensive cycle to an offensive one. Posture before all - and in defense - when in doubt - contract and pull everything in tight. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Changing the leg lock game: Probably the single biggest influence on the leg lock game that myself and my students had was to promote the idea that the leg lock TECHNIQUES employed by an athlete were not as important as the overall SYSTEM of tactics, supporting techniques and mechanical details that actually make the basic techniques work repeatedly against skilled opponents; so that the standard leg lock techniques are seen as being only as good as the support system in which they are embedded. They say it takes a village to raise a child - well, similarly, it takes a system to land a heel hook. If that was the biggest influence - there is another that could well be a strong second place. When i first began a serious study of leg locks almost twenty years ago, the overwhelming majority of leg attacks were done from top position as a means of attacking someone who was playing from guard position. Thus leg locking was seen as contrary to spirit of jiu jitsu, which always strongly emphasized passing guard first and submissions second. The few people using leg locks at high level scored all their greatest successes from top position or standing position. What I did was to push the leg locking game from bottom position. Many popular and proven guard positions such as butterfly guard, X guard, half butterfly guard etc are based on inside position that can easily be adapted to ashi garami based leg locks. Using these inside control based guards as a starting point, I added the notion of kuzushi (off balancing) from guard position, rather than the standard idea of sweeping from guard. This forced opponents to base out wide with arms and legs and made entries into leg locks from bottom position very easy. You can clearly see that among all my students, the vast majority of their leg lock entries are from bottom position. This nullified the old criticism that leg locking was a bad idea because it would result in loss of top position if it failed. It also meant that people stopped seeing leg locking as a weapon to be used AGAINST guard position (anti jiu jitsu) and started seeing it as I do, as a weapon used FROM guard position that only makes jiu jitsu stronger.

How much can I really learn from a video? Quite often I am asked whether someone can learn technique from video instruction. An interesting insight into answering this question comes from my demonstration partner (Uke) in the new version of my leg lock instructional video. Placido Carl Santos was a great partner to film the series in Boston, where he trains with my black belt student, Travis Stevens. This weekend he entered a local grappling tournament and won via...leg lock! A very nicely applied heel hook sequence that he learned by having it demonstrated on him by me during filming! It is a good example of how I believe video instruction can greatly help a student and provide new directions in their mat work. Now, let’s be clear - watching a video and then doing nothing will do little to help you improve performance. What is need is TO GAIN INSIGHT, TECHNIQUES, AND TACTICS THAT IN CONJUNCTION WITH YOUR OWN PRACTICE CAN HAVE A DRAMATIC IMPACT ON YOUR SKILL LEVEL OVER TIME. Think of it as an extra teacher or mentor. Just as even the finest teacher/mentor will be unable to help you if you do not put time and effort into your training, neither will a video instructional. However, if you take that video as a teaching resource and work hard on the material i am extremely confident you will get great results. I base this confidence on my experience as an instructor. I was very fortunate to begin my training in the 1990’s with one of the best senseis in the world, surrounded by world champions, so I never needed outside help, but I knew MANY people who lived in other parts of the country with no teachers. They learned almost entirely from video instructionals and many had excellent results. Nowadays I often see visiting students come by RGA and exhibit skills they tell me they learned from online courses and demonstrate very good skills obviously learned from the various champions whose video courses they follow. Wonderful to see Placido show how he learned from being there at the filming of the video and wishing the best to the all long distance video students who follow their favorite jiu jitsu teachers spreading their message to a wider audience!

Handicapping yourself to make yourself better: One of the most valuable methods of improving your skills is to handicap yourself in same way that forces you to adjust in some way that encourages skill development in other critical areas. I usually find that most beginning students are HAND and ARM dominant in almost every aspect of the game. This is a natural consequence of the fact that most tasks we perform in everyday life are predominantly performed with hands and arms. However this usual hand/arm bias is not acceptable in jiu jitsu. Trying to perform the moves of jiu jitsu with hands and arms quickly leads to fatigue and failure. THE SOURCE OF ALL POWER AND ENDURANCE IN THE HUMAN BODY IS IN THE LEGS AND HIPS. Only when you become leg and hip dominant in the performance of jiu jitsu moves will you excel. In the case of heel hooking, a simple test for me as a teacher as to whether or not a student is performing the move predominantly with legs and hips is to make him or her perform the heel hook with ONE HAND. This immediately forces the student to properly apply legs and hips in the move - they cannot compensate for failures in hip and leg work with their hand strength. When you can easily submit an opponent with a single handed heel hook, breaking an opponent with two hands is easy work. There are MANY ways to use this simple training principle in jiu jitsu. Use it often. It will teach you a LOT about how the other parts of your body are involved in any given move. When you remove the handicap and come after your opponent with full force they will feel the jump in performance you have made.

Re-release of LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM: Today BJJ Fanatics puts out the new and greatly improved version of my leg lock instructional video showing the complete approach to leg locking as it was taught to my students and used so brilliantly for so long by all of them. The first edition had some problems with audio quality so I completely re shot them and added almost two hours of new bonus content along with faster delivery of information. My intention is to change the nature of video instruction in this ENTER THE SYSTEM series. Instead of showing a few random moves I want to put out longer videos that package a complete set of moves IMBEDDED IN A CONCEPTUAL AND TACTICAL FRAMEWORK THAT ALLOWS YOU TO ACTUALLY GET THEM WORKING IN LIVE SITUATIONS IN A SHORT TIME. Because the videos are longer they can can function as a learning resource for years to come rather than be a “flavor of the month” superficial input. In addition you actually get FAR more minutes of instruction per dollar spent than a conventional video - twelve hours for two hundred dollars vs two hours for eighty dollars. The production quality is outstanding this time. It is free for anyone who bought it already and anyone buying now will also get the original as well for free. Hope you all enjoy the new look video and I look forward to seeing the skill level of leg locking massively increase around the world over the next few years!!! 😊😊😊 There is a link above in my instagram bio if it is something you are interested in.

Knowing what you want to do: Imagine a Genie came to you and said he would give you both a tremendous blessing and a tremendous curse. You ask him what the blessing is and he says, “ I will give you all the skills to accomplish whatever you want in life!” You are overjoyed at this wonderful news and the powers it will give. Then you ask, “So what’s the curse?” He replies, “ You will have no ability to decide what you want to do.” Will you ever accomplish anything with those new incredible skills of yours? No - not a thing. SKILLS CAN ONLY BE IMPLEMENTED WHEN YOU HAVE A NOTION OF WHAT YOU WANT TO DO. That is, A SENSE OF DIRECTION IS A NECESSARY PRECURSOR TO SKILL IMPLEMENTATION. So often I see people teach and learn jiu jitsu as though it were only a set of skills. THOSE SKILLS ARE ONLY AS USEFUL AS YOUR ABILITY TO CLEARLY IDENTIFY WHAT YOU WANT TO ACCOMPLISH. It is worthless to teach skills without giving an athlete a general sense of direction so that he or she can actually put them into operation. That is why I always imbed skills in general tactical plans. The best way to do this is in short and simple sequences that give order and direction to the skills. So for example, in ashi garami based heel hooking skills, there are four basic tasks arranged in a sequence that are necessary for the successful completion of the move. First, you have gain entry and connection to the opponent’s legs and hips. Second, you have to expose the heel. Third, you have to negate the various lines of resistance, usually by undermining the defensive potential of the secondary leg. Then last, break the opponent. When the athlete is absolutely clear conceptually as to what needs to be done - he or she will naturally exhibit the skills they have trained to get it done. CONFUSION AT THE LEVEL OF DIRECTION WILL ALWAYS PARALYZE THE STUDENT AT THE LEVEL OF EXECUTION. Here, Gordon Ryan has clearly formed a solid connection, exposed the heel of Keenan Cornelius, compromised resistance by interfering with secondary leg - all that remains is to go for the finish. Crystal clear sense of direction creates quick and positive action- one without the other is worthless.

No one does it alone: One of the best things you can ever do to advance your level in jiu jitsu is create strong partnerships with other people of similar dispositions and goals to use as feedback for ideas and skills that you work on to improve yourselves. The most productive relationships in life are almost always based on the concept of MUTUAL BENEFIT. Nobody likes a parasite - try always to give as much as you receive and these friendships will last years and create more advances in you than you could ever have done alone. Partners on the mat can be so much more than drilling and sparring partners - try to form bonds where they become RESEARCH PARTNERS as well - I promise you it will benefit you greatly. I was always greatly blessed in this regard. I had truly outstanding senseis and mentors. My senior class mates where outstanding and after twenty five years I still know and see and learn from almost all of them. So to with my students past and present. They are an incredible means of testing ideas and the feedback I get from their adventures on the mat and the stage is a huge part of my own advancement in knowledge over the years. Don’t do it alone - THE GREATEST RESOURCE YOU HAVE IS YOUR OWN INQUIRING MIND - AND THE SECOND GREATEST IS THE PEOPLE AROUND YOU WHO ENABLE YOU TO MAXIMIZE ITS USE. Here I am scheming some dastardly improvements to my front headlock game with trusted partner in crime Shawn Williams - himself a great innovator and one of my favorite people to run ideas by and test theories and concepts. Sharing the journey not only makes it more fun - it takes you further than you could have gone alone.

Ryan Gracie and the navigation principle: I have had the benefit of one great sensei, Renzo Gracie, and many fine mentors in my years of development in jiu jitsu. A very important mentor was Ryan Gracie. It was from him that I saw the great value of what I call (for want of a better term) the “navigation principle.” Mr Gracie was one of the most explosive, dynamic and intuitive grapplers I ever trained with. He had an uncanny sense of first creating a scramble and then in what appeared to be a chaotic situation where neither person had control of the other, somehow navigate himself directly into a submission hold. This made him very dangerous at all times in a match and lead to a very high submission rate per minute of sparring. I was very impressed by this and worked hard to implement it into my game and that of my students. Let’s define a scramble as ANY SITUATION WHERE THE TWO ATHLETES HAVE CLOSE CONTACT WITH OTHER IN DYNAMIC MOVEMENT, BUT NEITHER HAS A GREATER ABILITY TO CONTROL THE OTHERS MOVEMENT. Most people just follow their instincts in these situations and hope something good emerges in the course of the movement. Better athletes may work with a general insight that confers some form of advantage in a scramble, such as keeping higher position throughout the scramble. In the sport of jiu jitsu, the best outcome in any situation is submission - so it is very valuable indeed to train your mind to SEE SUBMISSION ENTRIES IN THE CHAOS OF A SCRAMBLE SO THAT YOU EMERGE AT THE END IN A WINNING POSITION. This is no easy task. We are not born with this as an instinct. It has to be developed. The way to develop it is to choose one submission. Understand what the PRECURSORS to that submission are and then start training yourself to see those precursors in the midst of dynamic scrambles and move into that submission. When you are confident with one, add another, until you have an arsenal. Your aim is to be able to automatically navigate in a fast moving scramble straight to a preferred submission. Once mastered, this will prove a truly valuable skill to you. It will make you a very dangerous opponent on the mat and give you a sense of direction in chaos.

Frank Rosenthal wins Onnit Invitational in Texas: Outstanding junior, Frank Rosenthal won the prestigious Onnit Invitational grappling event last night - two matches by heel hook and one by strangle- to take gold and shekels in fine form. Mr Rosenthal has been on a leg locking mission of late, doing an incredible job of embodying the core themes of my system to secure numerous impressive victories. The Onnit Invitational was always one of the big hurdles used by the squad to prepare developing athletes for big endeavors. It seems like yesterday that a young Gordon Ryan was preparing himself for this challenge - it’s great to see Mr Rosenthal taking those same big steps on his journey towards his goals and dreams. This theme of planned development and progress is critical for all of you. Everything works better with a coherent and rational plan. Of course there will be impediments and derailments along the way, that’s to be expected; but adapt to each one and keep pressing forward and you shall get there with results like this.

Seven fundamental axioms of my leg lock system: Nowadays most people are willing to admit that the new approach to leg locking that I teach and which was so brilliantly exhibited by my students, is a highly effective addition to the jiu jitsu arsenal that I am confident will make jiu jitsu even more effective as a martial art that prides itself upon its ability to defeat opponents by submission. It can be very instructive to ask - what did we do differently? Why did it suddenly happen that a group of people were able to do so well with techniques that were considered low percentage for generations? My approach is built around some core insights that motivate and give substance to the system overall.
1 My approach to leg locking is HOLISTIC. The effectiveness of a leg lock will be proportional to the system of set ups and follow ups and a vast array of tactics and techniques in between. Teaching leg locks as MOVES was largely ineffective for generations. Teaching them as a SYSTEM around a move was extremely effective.
2 I strongly distinguish between the means of CONTROL (ashi garami) and SUBMISSION (the actual lock employed eg heel hook)
3 Doing so encourages the use of MULTIPLE ASHI GARAMI PER LOCK so that the different respective tasks of each heel hook can be covered by a different ashi garami well suited to that task.
4 The direction of force of the ashi garami must DIRECTLY OPPOSE the direction of force of the lock so as to immobilize the opponent and create ideal breaking conditions
5 The break must involve opposing forces BOTH UPON THE KNEE THROUGH THE ASHI GARAMI (against the direction of the lock) AND THE FOOT (through the grip you employ to create a simultaneous push/pull)
6 I also seek to control BOTH LEGS whenever possible. By distinguishing between a PRIMARY leg to be attacked and a SECONDARY leg to be controlled, athletes can immobilize opponents and attack at their own pace.
7 I strongly emphasized BOTTOM POSITION ENTRIES (usually from butterfly, X and half guard) over traditional top position entries so that POSITIONAL LOSS was never an issue for my students. All they had to do was establish grips and inside position on bottom and attack

Angle: A theme that runs throughout all the combat sports is that of ADVANTAGEOUS ANGLE. The human body is constructed in such a way that it deals well with threats from directly in front, but poorly with threats from behind. Any angle to one side that gets us closer to inherently advantageous rear positions is generally a good thing. Defensive positions that seem impervious from the front often prove quite easy to attack from an angle. This is particularly true of leg lock attacks from bottom position. Typically we begin encounters facing square to our opponent. After an initial engagement to secure grips and kuzushi (off balancing), LOOK IMMEDIATELY TO SECURE AN ANGLE TO FACILITATE ENTERING THE LEGS AND THEN EMERGE WITH THE LEG UNDER YOUR CONTROL (via ashi garami) AND AT AN ANGLE WHERE YOU CAN EXPLOIT THAT CONTROL WITH A STRONG ATTACK. Here, you can see that I have elevated my opponent and forced him to carry his own weight on his hands. This frees me up to turn to an angle that makes entry easier and creates a dilemma between straight and cross ashi garami attacks (he can only avoid one by giving me the other). In addition this greatly reduces the need for flexibility and athleticism on my part to lock a tight ashi garami (that’s a good thing for a fifty one year old with a hip replacement and soon to be knee replacement 😉😜). Make ANGLE a serious part of your study of submissions. Identify which holds require it and make a study of how you can attain it under the conditions you can expect when hunting for it - you will soon find situations that used to frustrate you bring success.

What is your best skill? Yesterday we looked at the problem of lagging skills in our game. Today we shall look at our strong points. What is your best skill on the mat? Is it a positional move? (Eg a guard pass or sweep) or a submission move (eg Americana lock). How did it become your best skill? Was it a natural result of your body type? Your personality? Perhaps some technical insights from a coach, a mentor or self experimentation? We are all proud of our best skills - they give us confidence and direction on the mat - when we go against a tough opponent we naturally gravitate towards our best moves and when things get tough we work in the hope that we can bring our best and biggest guns to bear. Now ask yourself three sets of questions. However happy you might be with your favorite skills - first, DO YOU REALLY MAXIMIZE YOUR POTENTIAL SUCCESS WITH THAT MOVE? OR COULD YOU DO MORE WITH IT?Second, DO YOU USE THAT SKILL/MOVE AS A LEAD IN TO OTHER MOVES AND SKILLS TO BROADEN YOUR REPERTOIRE? Third, WHAT DID YOUR EXPERIENCE LEARNING AND DEVELOPING THIS FAVORITE MOVE OF YOURS TEACH YOU ABOUT LEARNING IN JIU JITSU? COULD YOU USE THIS KNOWLEDGE TO HELP YOU LEARN OTHER MOVES AND FURTHER YOUR PROGRESS FAR BEYOND YOUR CURRENT STATE? It’s natural (and healthy) to feel a sense of pride and contentment about your best moves. SAVE YOUR CONTENTMENT FOR YOUR DEATH BED. KEEP WORKING HARD TO MAKE FORWARD PROGRESS AND LEARN TO USE PAST LEARNING SUCCESS NOT AS A PLACE TO REST AND BE HAPPY, BUT AS A SPRINGBOARD TO FURTHER PROGRESS AND DEVELOPMENT THAT WILL ELEVATE YOU FAR ABOVE THE LEVEL THAT CURRENTLY MAKES YOU HAPPY.

What is your worst skill? Every jiu jitsu player,
you, me, everybody, has a worst skill - some part of the game that lags far behind their other skills. We all carry it around as a burden and hope it does not show up in sparring or competition. A great project for all jiu jitsu students is to identify the worst element of your game. It can be a MOVE, say for example, kata gatame (arm triangle); or a POSITION, say, left side bottom half guard. Whatever it is, identify it. Then study it. Ask your instructor about it, study great athletes who have a reputation for excellence in that area. Then set a very manageable goal. For three weeks, START EVERY SPARRING SESSION IN THAT POSITION OR MOVE AND SPEND AS MUCH TIME AS POSSIBLE WORKING IN THAT SPECIFIC AREA. Initially you will feel awful. Don’t get dispirited. Understand this - IN ALL LEARNING ACTIVITIES THE GREATEST JUMPS IN SKILL LEVEL OCCUR EARLY IN TRAINING AND THEN DECREASE OVER TIME. I promise you that after a rough start you will make astounding progress in that area in a relatively short time. Will you be a world beater? No, but you will be considerably better and put yourself in a position to improve over time. Most importantly, YOU WILL NO LONGER SEE THAT SPECIFIC AREA AS A WEAKNESS,
BUT RATHER AS A GROWTH AREA WITH POTENTIAL FOR THE FUTURE. Once you see it in that light, then you can move forward with that move/position as part of your overall progress, rather than make progress in some areas and just leave that one behind and hope it never gets exposed.

The shared spiral: All joint locks are divided into linear locks and twisting locks. Arm bar (juji gatami) and knee bar would be good examples of linear locks, where the joint is hyperextended in a straight line. Twisting locks rotate the joint in directions it cannot follow - figure four toe holds and Kimura would be good examples. The HEEL HOOK is a classic example of a twisting lock. Many people experience failure with the heel hook due to THE PROBLEM OF THE SHARED SPIRAL. There are two aspects to this problem. The first is that many athletes make the mistake of applying the direction of force of both the ashi garami they use to control the leg they are attacking AND the heel hook IN THE SAME DIRECTION, thus they are only able to apply a turning force in one direction upon the joint, rather than applying them in OPPOSITE directions so that they can apply a true tearing force. The second aspect is that your opponent will want to turn in the same direction as your heel hook’s rotational force to relieve pressure - so that you spiral together. It is crucial that you create a spiral force on the leg, BUT THAT YOU PREVENT OR LIMIT YOUR OPPONENT’S ABILITY TO DO THE SAME. This is done by the sophisticated use of ashi garami controls, switching from one ashi garami to another, or using some form of ashi garami that enables you to interfere with your opponent’s ability to turn with you. Your goal is to slow and control your opponent’s spiral and ultimately STOP it - even momentarily- so that a breaking force can be applied long enough to get the job done. Here, Katya Leontyeva gets to an ashi garami variation and then works to slow down her opponent’s strong turning defense until she can finally stop it long enough to apply a powerful force in the opposite direction of her ashi garami to get an impressive win.

Juniors cover all options on route to victory: Outstanding junior squad members, Frank Rosenthal, Katya Leontyeva and Danny Hernandez had great wins in Global Grappling League super fights yesterday in Phoenix NY. All three won by submission- an arm bar, a leg lock and and a strangle - covering all three of the major possibilities of submission- arm, leg and strangle. Always the idea is to threaten the whole body with submission- it’s much harder to defend a wide expanse of territory than a narrow one. It’s great to see the juniors doing exactly that in competition. This is an important lesson for all of you - of course it’s desirable to have favorite moves with which you can smash through determined opposition even when they expect it coming, but it’s equally desirable to be versatile enough with your attacks that an opponent never really knows where the next one is coming from and thus has to scatter his or her defenses and fall prey to feigned attacks on one area only to be caught in another. LEARNING TO PLAY BETWEEN FOCUSED CONCENTRATION OF FORCE AND WIDE RANGING VERSATILITY IS A KEY PART OF YOUR DEVELOPMENT AS A STUDENT OF SUBMISSIONS. Work hard on this crucial theme and soon you will see similar results as these outstanding students!

The Renzo Gracie Academy lost one of its most beloved members today. Mr Anthony Bourdain was an enthusiastic student of the art and loved by all for his kind and quiet demeanor that made it a joy and privilege to share the mats with him. He was a gentle soul and traveler who traversed borders and generations bringing the gift of conversation and story telling - gift wrapped in cuisine - but whose real effect was to make listeners from every strata of society, from the greatest to the least, reflect upon themselves in ways that when the talk ended, you knew yourself a little better and felt a little wiser. In a harsh, competitive and divided world he was a spokesman for the power of simple joys to bring people together, initially at the table, but ultimately at the mind. Food was just the medium - not the message - the deeper lesson was always harmony based around the insight that the pleasures of the dinner table are the same for one and all, and thus that division can be broken down by the simple joys of life that can make us see what is the same in all of us instead of what is different.
Peace to the departed and strength to those who remain

Mechanical tightness vs muscular tightness: One of the most basic demands of good jiu jitsu technique - particularly submission holds - is the demand for TIGHTNESS. Your body must be tightly woven into your opponent’s body to prevent slippage and escape. Unfortunately most beginners misunderstand this need for tightness as MUSCULAR tightness and quickly exhaust themselves locking in to their opponents and squeezing for all they are worth until inevitably they fade and fail. The key to tightness is not to squeeze your opponent, but to FIT THE SHAPE AND GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THAT OF YOUR OPPONENT and then exert your tension into YOUR OWN BODY in order to hold that geometric shape around your opponent, rather than try to squeeze him into the shape you want with your strength. The only way to make your body conform to the shape of your opponent is to RELAX until you have the desired positioning and THEN lock YOURSELF tight - not him. Thus you must learn to put yourself through CYCLES OF RELAXATION AND TENSION until you get what you want. Try to break the natural, but harmful, beginners habit of maximum tension from start to finish that is both exhausting and unlikely to work. Begin your experiments with these cycles of relaxation and tension in drilling moves and then try to extend them into live sparring where their application is more difficult. Learning to manage these cycles of tension and relaxation is a huge step in the jiu jitsu journey

Auxiliary systems: Most of you know that I am a big proponent of a linked subsystems approach to jiu jitsu. Classical BJJ is a system based approach to combat. I build upon this through the use of subsystems - systems built around specific areas of the game that create tremendous expertise in that domain that can enable an athlete (often with less overall experience than his opponent) to trap his or her opponent within that system where they have a significant knowledge, skill and experience advantage due to specialization and can win from there. As these subsystems grew in complexity I divided them up further in various ways that aided students in learning and applying them. One of the more interesting types of division was that between MAIN systems and AUXILIARY systems. In the case of our BACK SYSTEM, the main system is built around a set of arm traps that allow an attacker to pin his opponent’s defensive arms to facilitate the use of the most high percentage back finish - the rear naked strangle (mata leão/hadaka-jime). There is no question this is our main method of attacking the back and the one that has garnered the most success in competition. However, in cases where we cannot get the breakthrough by this main route, there are four AUXILIARY systems that go in a totally different direction. Instead of facilitating the breakthrough of one submission in one area (rear strangle around neck) they employ a diverse array of submissions OVER THE WHOLE BODY. This play between the narrow focus of the main system and the diverse applications of the four auxiliary systems is a big part of what gives our overall back system its character. Here, Garry Tonon shows his skills with one of those four auxiliary systems- the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) as he locks in an impressive looking strangle in training.

Two is always better than one: A founding principle of my approach to leg locking is that of double trouble - given that most of your opponent’s resistance to a lock on one leg comes from the OTHER leg; if we can somehow restrain the second leg, this will make resistance far more difficult for him. There are many ways to restrain that second leg. Which method you choose is mostly determined by the version of ashi garami you find yourself in (though there are other factors also). Here, Gordon Ryan works on a version from reverse ashi garami, binding up both his opponent’s legs as he works between a knee bar and toe hold. Constantly looking to manifest this important principle will pay big dividends in the leg locking game. Having a clear understanding of the underlying PRINCIPLES behind the main movements of jiu jitsu will enable you to improvise during a match and innovate in the training room - two things that will greatly increase your prowess

There’s no heel hook without a heel: A critical part of success in jiu jitsu is that of SEQUENCE. Most of the moves have essential preconditions without which the move simply will not work. As such, YOU MUST ALWAYS HAVE A CLEAR SENSE OF WHAT THOSE PREREQUISITES ARE AND HOW TO ATTAIN THEM. In the case of one of my favorite moves, the heel hook, HEEL EXPOSURE is one of the critical prerequisites. If I cannot expose my opponent’s heel, any other leg locking skills I might have are worthless. As you deal with better opponents, they will also understand what the prerequisites to your favorite moves are; and they will fight hard to prevent you getting them. At this level, you will have to fight not only to perform the move you want, BUT EVERY PREREQUISITE STEP THAT MAKES THE MOVE POSSIBLE. Your journey to prepare yourself to win these battles will create depth in your jiu jitsu game. It will mark your rise from beginner to expert. No matter what your favorite moves are - research the preconditions that underlie them and make a serious study of those as well as the move itself. You will be rewarded with a move that you can impose upon even expert defense. Here, Garry Tonon opts to hook his opponent’s exposed heel even before he fully controls his opponent’s leg in an ashi garami - usually I prefer a tight controlling ashi garami first and work to expose the heel second, but reversing the order of operations can also be very effective in some cases, but in either case, KNOW WHAT YOU NEED IN ORDER TO GET WHAT YOU WANT.

Pace: A critical factor in competition success that gets surprisingly little attention is PACE. There are two main types of pace that are of importance. The first is the pace that i impose upon MYSELF. This concerns my efficiency with regards my energy expenditure. Often i see athletes working themselves very hard when there is no need. Consequently they fatigue rapidly and after a strong start, fade in effectiveness. The second concerns the pace i impose upon my OPPONENT. For any given match there will be a pace set by the two athletes that is usually a compromise between the desired pace of each of them. Every athlete has a pace they feel comfortable with as they perform their techniques. If I can force them to work at a slower or higher pace than their comfort zone, this will often lower their performance and fatigue them. Learning to use pace as a weapon is often neglected in the gym where the sparring is usually (and understandably) a level below competition. Thus the great value of competition experience as the primary means of learning this skill (though it certainly can be learned in the gym also). Here, Nicky Ryan works to impose his desired pace in a tough match against the talented Geo Martinez. His victory was largely a result of an advanced use of pace control - VARIATIONS IN PACE THAT CONFUSE AN OPPONENT AND ALLOW A SUDDEN INCREASE IN PACE AFTER A LULL TO HELP GET A BREAKTHROUGH. Learning to set your techniques in the context of pace signifies a well developed game - work on it like all your other skills - it will soon reward you.

Nicky Ryan seminar in Los Angeles this Sunday: Nicky Ryan will show our fans in LA the intricacies of our approach to the game this Sunday at one of our favorite LA gyms @dynamixmma on 6/3 at 3:30pm. Not only will he show the essential squad approach to the game, but his personal approach to it. All my students are innovators and researchers. All have their own specialty moves that they developed independently and which figure prominently in their game. This independence is the most exciting thing for a coach to witness and to see it in such a young man is truly remarkable. If you are within distance of Santa Monica on Sunday - Check our this amazing young athlete and teacher and see for yourself the knowledge and skill that I am lucky enough to witness daily. As always - a big hello to our West Coast followers 😊😊

Coaching memories: Georges St-Pierre vs Josh Koscheck 2 - One good move begets another: A theme that I often push upon my students is that of DEVELOPING AT LEAST ONE STRONG MOVE THAT PEOPLE KNOW AND FEAR YOU FOR. In truth - IT DOES NOT EVEN MATTER IF YOU ACTUALLY SCORE WITH THAT PARTICULAR MOVE - YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE OVER REACTIONS TO THE MERE THREAT OF IT WILL OPEN MANY OTHER ATTACKING OPPORTUNITIES THAT YOU CAN EASILY EXPLOIT. A very fine example of This occurred when Georges St-Pierre took on the very tough wrestler Josh Kosheck for the second time. The first match was hard fought, but Mr St-Pierre dominated with his takedowns - shocking given that Mr Koscheck was a two time NCAA champion and three time finalist. When we did the Ultimate Fighter show, Mr Koscheck made it clear that he would not be taken down this next time. When the second time came, Mr St-Pierre took him down in the opening seconds with one of the fastest double leg entries I ever saw. Mr Koscheck did a good job of recovering back up to his feet - but the damage was done - he now had to focus all his defensive skills into stopping that dangerous double. Mr St-Pierre immediately took notice of this - and went to phase two. He was always a lead hand dominant striker - strong jab and left hook - much less so a rear hand striker, that was never his strength. He began to mirror his level change to a fast and powerful rising jab to that of his double leg. From Mr Koscheck’s perspective it was nearly impossible to tell whether any given level change signaled either a double leg or a rising jab. Immediately the jab starting scoring. One was so powerful it broke Mr Koscheck’s orbital bone and caused a gruesome eye injury that essentially sealed the outcome in the first round. To his credit, Mr Koscheck showed the heart of a lion and stayed the course, getting back up every time he was taken down, but the lesson is clear - THE THREAT OF ONE BIG WEAPON WILL ALWAYS FACILITATE THE USE OF ANOTHER. Take this lesson from this great man and make it yours - PUT TIME AND ENERGY INTO DEVELOPING A POWERFUL ATTACK THAT INVOKES STRONG DEFENSIVE REACTIONS IN YOUR OPPONENTS AND BUILD AN ARSENAL AROUND IT

Taking notes: I am a big believer in the notion that to a large degree, jiu jitsu is a knowledge game. Of course knowledge is not the whole story. Until KNOWLEDGE is translated into SKILL it is of little practical value to the athlete (though it can still be of great value to the coach). Like any knowledge based enterprise, there is a lot of memorizing and, unfortunately, a lot of forgetting! 😖😂😉 As such I believe it is of great value to many people (not all people - some learn in very different ways) to keep notes on their progress. At the end of every day I make sure I write down in some form the main things I learned that day. I don’t suggest writing vast amounts (you wouldn’t guess that given my lengthy instagram posts would you!? 😂😂) - just the NEW elements that you believe have potential for the future. I believe that JUST THE SHEER ACT OF WRITING AIDS RETENTION. In addition to helping retention, IT HELPS ORDER YOUR THOUGHTS INTO MORE COHERENT STRUCTURES THAT WILL HELP YOU WORK THEM INTO YOUR DEVELOPMENT. Thus even if you never peruse those notes again - they will have helped you. I remember once coming across an old journal of mine from 2002 and seeing an entry on an “interesting concept that may be of considerable value for further research and wider applications” - it was the notion of double trouble applied to ashi garami based leg locks - how ironic that this would go on years later to be of such value to my students. Let the time, orderliness and discipline of note taking work for you - just as you did in school - it can help you take the lessons of today into your improvements of tomorrow.

Isolating limbs: In an MMA or fighting context, what makes the dominant pins of jiu jitsu such as the mounted position dangerous IS YOUR ABILITY TO DO DAMAGE WITH STRIKES. All this changes in a grappling match however, where strikes are not allowed. The single most important ability you can develop to make yourself dangerous from a dominant position in a grappling context, is THE ABILITY TO ISOLATE AND CONTROL A LIMB. An isolated limb can be controlled and broken (or in the case of the neck - strangled (the neck is the fifth limb in grappling)). I always encourage my athletes to go the extra distance when they get to a dominant position - DON’T BE SATISFIED WITH THE PIN ITSELF - GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND FIGHT TO ISOLATE A LIMB. The day you start doing that you will begin SUBMITTING people from dominant positions rather than merely HOLDING them. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of pinning down Ralek Gracie’s right arm from a variation of the mounted position, thus isolating one arm from the other allowing complete isolation and control of the head and left arm in ways that lead directly to a variety of submission holds.
Respectful Memorial Day to all 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

When the day is done: The re-filming of the instructional video BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM is done - two long days of filming covering all the main features that my brilliant students have had so much success with over the years. Now it’s back on the train to NYC and get ready for teaching tomorrow. There is a sense in which our day is never really done - it’s just preparation for tomorrow. The important thing is always to keep a sense of progression, so that the lessons of today make us wake up tomorrow a person better skilled to deal with whatever challenges the new day should bring.

Great day of filming back attack system in Boston: I returned to Boston today to reshoot the BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM video instructional (another part of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series detailing the systems based approach to jiu jitsu that I teach to my students). The original filming suffered from the same audio issues as the original leg lock video so there was only one thing to do - start over again and do it right. Filming at Bernardo Faria’s academy in Boston all day today - just finished day one at 10pm and begin day two tomorrow at 8am. Can’t wait to show our approach to finishing from the back and change the game! Wishing you all the best from Boston and a happy Memorial weekend to all of you!

Georges St-Pierre on Joe Rogan experience: For those of you who have not heard, my student Georges St-Pierre @georgesstpierre
appeared on the world’s biggest podcast - The Joe Rogan experience @joerogan yesterday. Mr St-Pierre is usually very guarded during interviews, but Mr Rogan did an amazing job through his informal chat based method of getting this amazing athlete and human being to open up and tell his story in his own words to a greater degree than anyone has ever done in the past. All these years I have known what an incredible person, martial arts athlete and innovator Mr St-Pierre was - now you will see it too in this remarkable interview! Hats off to Mr Rogan for accomplishing what no one else could in showing the humor, interests and methods of this truly great MMA athlete. In less than six hours it already passed a million views. If you have time this weekend - check it out - it’s both a fascinating and funny expose of a great man; but also A STUDY OF THE MIND AMD MINDSET THAT MADE HIM GREAT, and thus of great value to all of you as you work towards your own goals and dreams - check it out!

Just got a sample clip of the new and improved LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video. This time they got it right with perfect sound quality and camera work and initial reviews have been significantly higher than any other in company history. In addition I added quite a lot of new material and presented at a faster pace to give the video a leaner and faster look with same overall length. Complete editing is estimated to be around two weeks. Anyone who bought will get it for free ( and keep access to the original Darth Vader/Bane voice version as well) and anyone buying now or in the future will also get both (though I suspect most will focus on the way more audio friendly second version 😉). I’m happy and proud to offer a video that has the best content now matched with excellent production value - link to buy is in the bio of my instagram if you are interested. Now I will do the same with Back Attack system (hopefully this weekend though I did have some relapse with my perennial body issues this week - hoping I’m good enough to go this weekend). Hope you all enjoy good sound quality and overall production/presentation improvements!

Closed wedges: The essential feature all of jiu jitsu is control that leads to submission - this is the foundation of my approach to the game. Any deviations from that mindset are abhorrent to me and my students. The most fundamental form of control is that over movement - AND THE MECHANICAL BASIS OF IMPEDING MOVEMENT IN JIU JITSU IS THE WEDGE. The human body can be positioned as a SET OF WEDGES around another body to restrict movement and make possible the control required for submissions. Our favorite form of wedges are double sided reinforced wedges. That is, wedges positioned on both sides of the limb or torso we are trying to control and where something locks the wedges in position. Usually BODYWEIGHT is the thing that locks wedges in place - That’s is how most conventional pins work - but ashi garami does not involve bodyweight since you are usually sitting on the floor when you apply it - so we need another method. That method is CLOSED WEDGES where ONE OF OUR LIMBS LOCKS OUR OTHER LIMB IN PLACE SO THAT THE WEDGES ARE REINFORCED BY YOUR OTHER ARM OR LEG AND NOT EASY FOR A RESISTING OPPONENT TO DISLODGE AND GET AROUND OR OVER. In the case of leg locking in particular we greatly favor locking our legs around an opponent’s leg either with crossed feet or triangled legs. Most of our favorite finishing positions have this feature. The highest ranked in our leg locking hierarchy are those variations within the cross ashi garami featuring triangled legs - we call these variations “inside sankaku” (inside triangle). Here, talented junior, Drew Hooper, takes a brilliant win last weekend at Rise Invitational 4 in Manhattan. Notice the extremely solid connection he has achieved with the use of this inside sankaku variation and how it immobilized even a tough, competitive opponent in a way that gives him very few defensive options. This is exactly the kind of leg and hip control you should be looking for as you make your progress in the leg game.

Victory for the Bronx Bombers: Those of you who have been following me for a while will know that every Monday night I travel up to the Bronx to teach at the academy of one of my first and best black belts, Doug Pelinkovic, who runs his own excellent academy @bxmartialarts Originally I started going there when Mr Pelinkovic was badly injured and saw the dedication of the students and stayed on after! Now fully recovered, Mr Pelinkovic does a very fine job of teaching his students our approach to the game. This last Friday night his extremely talented student, Stanley Rosa @stanleyrosa put on a superb display of submission directed jiu jitsu. Mr Rosa has built a tremendous game in a shockingly short time that is testimony to his hard work and learning capacity; and the teaching skill of Mr Pelinkovic. He has a distinctive movement style - like a leopard - that when combined with the mechanical tightness of our approach catches everyone’s eye. Enjoy this excellent display from over the weekend. Tonight I head up to see the Bronx team and hear the full story.

It’s a wrap folks!! Just finished a crazy weekend of filming the re-shoot of LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM in Boston. Two hectic days - eleven hours on Saturday and nine hours today to produce around 10 hours of video content. Filming went well - I added a lot of new content. We stay on many of the same techniques and topics as the first video, but with many additions. The general sense of the new video is a leaner, faster paced, more action oriented production. Of course you will also have full access to the original as well so you get both styles. Now I’m on the train back to NYC back before midnight and then it’s a long day tomorrow - 6am alarm and get home from work around 11pm - it’s a good thing I like what I do! 😜😜 It’s beautiful to take a train ride through New England at dusk in spring - always a reminder that there’s more to life than gyms and jiu jitsu. Next weekend I return to Boston and do it all again as I reshoot the entire Back Attack series (it had similar audio problems to the leg lock series). It’s tough, but not as tough as going to sleep knowing you didn’t give your best to get an important job done - so come next weekend - back on the train bound for Boston to get it right! Wishing you all the best from the tracks in New England 😊

Juniors take Manhattan: Outstanding squad juniors, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau had fine victories last night at Rise Invitational grappling 4. Mr Rosenthal won the multi grappler tournament - winning both his matches via heel hook and using one of his favorite cross ashi garami finishing sequences to devastating effect in the final against 10th Planet standout Rey Rey to win gold. In the nights headline superfight, Jason Rau took on the outstanding Mike Padilla and won via back strangle and showcase his impressive skills. So proud to these outstanding developing athletes using back and leg systems so well in competition and developing their resumes in spectacular fashion. Keep your eyes on these young men - their rate off progression is impressive!

Bound for Boston: Waiting at Penn Station in rush hour - always an experience wading through the Manhattan commuters as everyone flees work and spills out of the city for the weekend! My goal is a little different - I’m going TO work - about to completely re-do the entire leg lock instructional to overcome the audio problems and bring the production quality up to the standards of the content. Four hour train ride then two days of filming over ten hours of content/usually double that time of actual work, then four hours back to NYC Sunday night and then 6:30am start Monday finishing teaching around 10pm - should be quite a weekend! 😜😜 Looking forward to getting everything right this time!

Angle: The human body is set up to deal well with threats that are directly in front of it. It is very poorly adapted to deal with threats from BEHIND it. Thus in all forms of combat there is a constant battle to get to an advantageous position behind an opponent. We can’t always get fully behind a good opponent - they will always resist our attempts by constantly squaring up to us. That fine - you don’t have to get all the way behind to gain advantage - usually even GAINING AN ANGLE on an opponent - a PARTIAL movement towards the back - is enough to secure sufficient advantage to score in some fashion. ANGLE IS ONE OF THE BEST AND MOST READILY AVAILABLE FORMS OF ADVANTAGE IN ALL COMBAT SPORTS - YOU MUST DILIGENTLY TRAIN YOUR MIND AND BODY TO SEEK IT AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY AND TO SCORE FROM IT. One of the more obvious examples of angle advantage in jiu jitsu is standing guard passes, where an initial angle makes completing the task of passing the opponent’s guard much easier. Here, Nicky Ryan does a fine job of getting a good angle to set up a standing guard pass that puts his rival, Geo Martinez under strong pressure.

Experimenting: The single greatest means of creating innovation and positive change in your game is a sense of experimentation. THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF THE INNOVATIONS THAT I BOUGHT INTO THE GAME CAME FROM IMMERSING MYSELF IN A GIVEN POSITION/SCENARIO AND USING TRIAL AND ERROR TO FIGURE OUT OVER TIME ANSWERS TO THE VARIOUS PROBLEMS I HAD IN THAT POSITION. All that is required is a partner, time and thinking. The hard part will come afterwards- when you test your findings in live sparring. If an innovation shows potential- it will be subjected to further experimentation and testing until it either passes and is accepted or fails and is discarded. Most people use only two modes of training - drilling and sparring. Add a third - experimental problem solving - a hands on approach to solving the myriad puzzles of the sport that will make you a much more involved student of the sport and convert you from a passive learner to an active learner.

Big news on Leg lock instructional video - PART 2: I’ve always preached a commitment to excellence among my students- I wouldn’t be much of a coach if i didn’t follow my own advice. I would have done it this past weekend but I had a prior coaching commitment with Georges St-Pierre. I will also add new material not shown in first video and seek to improve my delivery of information to make a leaner and better viewing experience and help atone for the initial problem. Never having shot a video before I just assumed the production company would be the experts to trust with the technical matters while i did the coaching- I’m not sure what went wrong as even a simple phone camera takes better audio than some of the scenes on the instructional. I am greatly heartened by the many messages i have received from people who loved the content of the video and are seeing improvements in both their performance and understanding - now I hope to do even better by bringing production up to the same level 🤗🤗 Apologies to you all for the initial mishap and looking forward to setting it straight this weekend!

Big news for my leg lock instructional video - PART 1: Last week my leg lock instructional video was released and within hours became the biggest seller in BJJ Fanatics catalogue by a landslide. Unfortunately it has become apparent that certain aspects of the production quality - in particular the audio (but some other aspects too) were not up to acceptable standards. The general consensus is that the content is great but the sound production is at best adequate and at worst lame. While nothing is lost on the audio, it’s not fair to subject you all to my voice sounding like some leg locking mix of Darth Vader and Bane! It’s doubly unfortunate because the whole idea of the video was to be dialogue/concepts heavy rather than just another video with a collection of moves. If a viewer were watching for extended periods of time, say on a plane or train or just at home, it could definitely be distracting or annoying. I want people to ENJOY watching the video and repeat view/review often - not ENDURE watching the video because they really want to know the moves! BJJ Fanatics tried to get sound engineers to rectify the problem. The best they could do were slight improvements. I believe if there is a serious problem with something - attack the whole problem rather than put a band aid on it and pretend it’s not an issue. Accordingly I have decided to go up to Boston on the train this weekend and reshoot the entire video from start to finish and have BJJ Fanatics offer it free to all those of you who bought it (you will also be able to keep the original Bane voice version as well if you wish - Also anyone buying in the future will have access to both versions). In addition we will make some improvements based on my experience with the first shoot - two cameras this time instead of one and less zooming from main camera. Whenever my students make mistakes in competition I always tell them to work hard to improve and rectify the error. In this case a mistake was made - whose fault it was is unimportant- the bottom line is that my name is on the product and therefore the right thing for me to do is work hard to fix it.

Looking out over a crowded training hall - I am always struck by the thought that potential champions are everywhere - it’s just a matter of good coaching married to ambition and discipline that creates the actual champions. Most people have complex lives that take them in many different directions. Thus their ambitions in jiu jitsu are usually more modest, since they have other priorities and approach the sport as a recreation. That does not blind me to their potential however - I have recreational students who can give even champions a very hard time indeed on the mat. Never lose sight of the fact that we all have roughly the same potential to excel in the sport - the actual differences are mostly due to lifestyles choices and time committed to training. Have faith that even a recreational approach can produce a shockingly good student in time. Never think that because you are not a full time professional athlete that you cannot excel to a level that even the best will be impressed by.

Always training/always learning: So often I am asked how to increase progress in learning jiu jitsu. The real question they are asking is “how can i get good quickly?” While I definitely believe there are ways to learn more quickly than most, there is simply no getting around the fact that you will need to invest large amounts of time and effort if you wish to gain competence in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. The better question then, is not, “how do I get good quickly,” but rather, “how do I sustain progress over time.” The danger is that as time passes, progress can be destroyed in two main ways. First, by extended periods away from the mat. Second, by showing up and training without a clear sense of purpose for each session, just complacently showing up and thinking that’s enough. The first will cause you to lose skills you once had; the second will simply maintain whatever skills you do have and no more - guaranteeing a plateau in performance that can go on for months or even years. If you seek excellence - as time passes make a concerted commitment to the idea of MINIMIZING TIME OFF THE MAT AND MAXIMIZING THE VALUE OF YOUR TIME ON THE MAT. Do this by having at least one clear goal every time you go to train and a plan to work towards that goal - showing up is not enough to avoid stagnation. The single best example of this mindset in operation over long periods of time I ever saw was Georges St-Pierre. Despite winning the success that could have easily made anyone else kick back and relax, he trains constantly and learns constantly. This week he caught up with the squad and went though all the latest leg lock work. Now he is flying home to work with some European tournament Karate champions to work on distance and movement skills. This constant push for volume and progress in training is deeply impressive and an inspiration to us all.

Teaching seminars is one of my favorite ways of getting our message out to students outside our gym. I love the personal interaction and the novelty of it all for new students. Note that all my students, particularly Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and the Ryan brothers, Gordon and Nicky, can do just as good a job (in many ways better - as they do not have my physical limitations). We all love to teach when we travel. If this is something you are interested in at your school, contact us at our individual social media and make arrangements. We love to form a bond with the schools in which we teach - not just come in teach some moves and go home, but come back again often to check progress and see developments. For example, I often teach at Dynamixmma in Santa Monica, LA and work with Josh Fiore and Antoni Hardonk to keep them progressing forward in our approach to grappling and watch the progress of their students. If this kind of long term teaching relationship of our style is of interest to you and your school - contact us. We would love to share our knowledge and have you learn what we do and share it to your students. Our goal is create coaching bonds with schools that mean a student who wants to learn our approach to the game can join that school and be confident that he or she is learning the same technique and tactics that we employ in our own gym. Here, I run an enthusiastic group of students at dynamixmma LA through squad leg locking work - they did a great job of learning and improving their skills!

My teaching method - The dynamic problem/Systematic Solutions model: My proudest achievement as a coach is not the many prizes and accolades my students have won, but rather the fact that all of them are excellent teachers and innovators who can chart their own development once they reach a certain level. A large part of why they can do this is the general method of teaching i use and in which they all excel - the dynamic problem/systematic solutions method. Most of you know that I see the primary attribute that determines long term success or failure in jiu jitsu (and in almost everything else in life - thus making jiu jitsu a mirror to all our other activities and giving it a deeper meaning) is PROBLEM SOLVING. Jiu jitsu is more than anything, the act of solving problems under stress faster and more competently in a competitive race towards submission victory than your opponent. My teaching reflects this belief. I break jiu jitsu into skill areas/scenarios and look to see what is the central problem(s) in that area. Note immediately that all the problems of jiu jitsu are DYNAMIC problems. If I ask you what is 316 divided by 23 - this is a static problem - once the problem is stated, it does not change as you figure out the answer. In jiu jitsu, like any competitive game with a sentient resisting opponent, every attempt at a solution to the problems they present will be countered even as we are fighting for a solution. Thus the usual pattern is one of central problems rapidly being followed by subsequent problems as we offer solutions. This immediately gets us into a creative drive to research and find new solutions in an interlocking web that rapidly grows in complexity and size proportional to the skill level of our training environment and our imagination. THIS TEACHING METHOD IS WHAT GIVES RISE TO SYSTEM BUILDING AND PROGRESS. It is the basis of teaching methodology and it creates innovative self starting students who can think for themselves and ultimately go further than their teacher - the very purpose of teaching. Begin by seeing every situation in jiu jitsu AS A PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED - in time you will astounded by the structures you build in response.

Leg Lock Instructional Video - ON SALE NOW: Due to heavy demand BJJ Fanatics has decided to release my leg lock instructional series immediately (it was initially planned for tomorrow at 12pm) - it is fully available as of now in both Digital and DVD formats. It will feature a very comprehensive ten hour viewing deep into the system taught along the same theoretical/conceptual/practical lines I use with my students- the dynamic problem/systematic solutions model - very different from standard instructional format. It is designed to give you a training resource you can constantly refer back to for years of development and build an ability to ask questions, solve problems and become a creative problem solver, rather than simply copy some moves. (For those that prefer a shorter and simpler format, I can definitely do that in the future also) Hope you all enjoy it! I will post a link in my bio if you are interested in buying (please buy from link if possible). Thanks so much to all my teachers, mentors, students and followers who built this interest in new approaches to jiu jitsu! Back system series will be next!

Carrying weight: One of the single most important directives whenever working from bottom position underneath an opponent is this: SEEK ALWAYS TO MINIMIZE THE TIME AND EFFORT SPENT CARRYING YOUR OPPONENT’S WEIGHT. You must make a serious study of the methods and means of reducing your opponent’s ability to impose his weight upon you. This will mostly come down to postural, positional, gripping and tactical factors far to numerous and subtle to list but when they are absent you will immediately be aware as your workload under an opponent will double. Here, Nicky Ryan and Australian grappling superstar, Craig Jones experiment with weight bearing drills after class - note the different demands both athletes have due to their respective roles as top and bottom athlete and how this drastically influences their choices in posture, positioning and grip

Great day of teaching in LA at two of my favorite West Coast schools @5starmartialarts and @dynamixmma showing triangle and leg lock lock systems insights and techniques. We had to cap the dynamixmma seminar at one hundred people - it was wonderful seeing the big class going through some advanced leg lock work and perform it well - our Californian fans are getting the hang of this game!! 🤗🤗 We always love coming out to LA and meeting our friends and followers - always mixed feelings when I return of missing LA and yet happy to see my dedicated students back home in NYC. I shall go and catch the red eye home to be ready to teach the big Monday class at RGA - always a thrill to see the room packed with bodies and dreams - and the will to make them a reality. Thanks again to our gracious hosts and students in LA!!

Learning lessons: Gordon Ryan fought a tough match in his ACB debut against the very talented Vinny Magalhaes and lost a close points decision. Mr Magalhaes got a strong start with a nice guard pass early in the first round. Mr Ryan seemed to prevail in the closely contested action in the next two rounds with several strong leg lock attempts and off balances but could not translate it into points and so lost the decision based on the first round. All credit to Mr Magalhaes for a very good performance. For us - we will have to improve our adjustment to the new rule set and come back stronger next time. The good news is that It’s always an easier thing to fix tactics than technique - so we shall head back to the blue basement and work on that. Wishing you all the best from LA - hope you enjoyed the show! We are in the stands now watching Leandro Lo take on Gabriel Arges - so much talent on this card! Always great to see the super stars of the sport in one room and putting on a show!

Getting ready for the big show: Gordon Ryan and the great Vinny Margalhaes square off at the official ceremony for tomorrow’s ACB event. It will feature a three round match (five minutes per round) scored along IBJJF lines with heel hooks permitted and fitted into 10-9 scoring per round. Mr Magalhaes is a former ADCC champion and one of the most gifted heavyweights in the sport - this will be a tremendous challenge. The card is probably the best I ever saw - I have not seen this much ultra elite jiu jitsu talent in one room since the last ADCC. On this incredible card are jiu jitsu icons, Cyborg Abreau, Marcus Almeida, Leandro Lo, Gabriel Arges, Augusto Mendes, Keenan Cornelius, Yuri Simoes, Romulo Barra, Michael Langhi, Bruno Frazatto, Ari Farias, Edwin Najmi, Luis Panza, Erberth Santos- its like a team of jiu jitsu superheroes! Can’t wait to see what this collection of talent can produce tomorrow!

LA Seminars: I always love teaching on the road. This Sunday I teach two seminars - First is at @5starmartialarts Shawn Williams academy 10am-12pm focusing on Triangle (sankaku) system and its relationship to leg lock system. The second is at Dymanixmma @dynamixmma 2-5pm on cross ashi garami/inside sankaku aspects of leg lock system. Looking forward to showing our approach to the game once again to our LA friends. Note also Gordon Ryan will teach at @pkgla at 12pm That’s a lot of squad methodology for our loyal LA supporters! Hope to see you all and help to get our game to you and perhaps make it yours!

Spoiled brats on the loose in LA: Gordon Ryan and myself head down to train at Shawn Williams @5starmartialarts in a good friend’s McClaren 720 - the only thing scarier than this car’s power output is Gordon Ryan’s driving - here he is about to do another Mario Andretti impersonation 😨😨 Great training at Mr Williams’ academy today - now it’s back to LA home to plot and plan for Saturday and a lighter workout tonight. Wishing you all well from LA!!

LA Bound! At Newark airport getting ready to fly with Gordon Ryan and crew for his debut match on ACB against the Vinny Magalhaes. This weekend I shall teach seminars at Shawn Williams dojo @5starmartialarts and also at @dynamixmma Hoping to see our LA fans and students and show elements of our game 😊😊Gordon Ryan is wearing a Gucci fanny pack that puts mine to shame 😞😞 I am crestfallen. As soon as he falls asleep it’s mine!! See you all in LA!

Very happy to see my sensei, Renzo Gracie, announce that RGA will work with We Defy Foundation - a charitable organization that uses jiu jitsu training to help rehabilitate and improve the lives of injured US combat veterans throughout the nation. I have always believed that jiu jitsu can play a very positive role in our lives outside the dojo, but listening to the stories of returning disabled veterans took that to an entirely different level @wedefyfoundation made me look at the powers of jiu jitsu in a new light and with even greater optimism.

Incorporating systems into your game: I always enjoy coaching experienced athletes with a well established skill set that they have used for years and working with them to take on new skills and add them to their already existing skills as a means of increasing their effectiveness, or even just giving them the joy of new perspectives and skills on top of what they already know. My good friend, Tom DeBlass is a fine example. He has a highly successful game that he developed over many years of Training that saw him win US ADCC trials on many occasions and compete at the world championships on multiple occasions. As he saw the success of the squad (to whom he is very closely linked - he gave Garry Tonon his black belt and is a great mentor to Gordon and Nicky Ryan) he became interested in studying the various systems we employ. Being a skilled athlete with vast experience in jiu jitsu made it very easy for him to pick up the essential concepts and movements and very soon he started having success in the gym. This weekend at Fight2Win Pro Grappling in Philadelphia he went out with the intention of using that knowledge in classic squad style - sit and battle for inside position, then a fight to off balance the opponent (kuzushi) to get an opponent into vulnerable extended positions from where a solid connection via ashi garami can be attained - from there it’s a task of negating resistance, exposing the heel and then proper breaking mechanics. Mr DeBlass did exactly that - and in quick time - just thirty seconds in and victory via outside heel hook was his. It was a fine example off an athlete who had a certain skill set and added to it. If you have been studying jiu jitsu for some time, I am confident and infusion of our systems based approach can do similar things for you. Sometimes people think that my students became proficient because I began teaching them early - in fact I have had many athletes who started very late in their careers with me and had similar success at learning the various systems. Hats off to Mr DeBlass for taking on a new skill set that he did not need, but did so for the sake of knowledge and learning and did a fine job of demonstrating it.

Weekend of victory: Squad juniors, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau had a great weekend at Pilgrim Grappling Championships in Philadelphia over the weekend. They were the main event matches. Mr Rosenthal took on EBI Combat Jiu Jujitsu Champion Chad Georges and had a great victory in overtime using elements of our back system to lock in a winning strangle and continue his impressive win streak. Jason Rau won in regulation time via Kata Gatame strangle in regulation time over Quentin Rosenweig, a very tough EBI competitor. It’s great to see both athletes showing they are at that EBI level and rising fast. Outstanding female blue belt, Katya Leontyeva had a tremendous day, winning advanced category gold in both her weight and absolute divisions - every match by heel hook! Today Mr Rosenthal and Ms Leontyeva showed their impressive work ethic by coming back to the gym next day to help Gordon Ryan train in anticipation of his big match next weekend with the great Vinny Margalhaes in Los Angeles. Wonderful to see such progress and the work ethic that makes it possible.

Neiman Gracie wins again! Outstanding MMA jiu jitsu representative, Neiman Gracie extended his unbeaten record in fine style last night with another very impressive submission victory at Bellator 198 - taking out a very tough opponent with a beautiful kata gatame strangle in the second round. It was a great match to watch as Mr Gracie showed the various influences of his father, Marcio Stambowsky, his sensei, Renzo Gracie and Mentor Royce Gracie along with kickboxing coach Jamie Crowder in a very impressive blend that has produced an incredible winning streak that has taken him very close to title contention now. Well done Neiman Gracie!!

When it comes to fighting, most people think in terms of who is strongest, fastest, most athletic, bravest, toughest etc. These qualities are all very good, but the history of all modes of combat, whether individual or group, shows very clearly that the SMARTEST fighter, the one who employs his resources best and to greatest effect while avoiding harm, is the one who usually prevails. Therefore, make your primary commitment to be THE SMARTEST FIGHTER YOU CAN BE. The one who constantly looks to maximize damage to an opponent whilst minimizing damage to himself. Let THOUGHT be your first reflex when entering confrontation and KNOWLEDGE and SKILL your sword and shield before all other resources.

The essential skills of the leg lock system: You might be puzzled by the first two listed essential skills of the leg lock system - grip and inside position is the first, distance and connection is the second. In both cases TWO skills are listed. True - however, in practice those skills are so closely entwined that I usually teach them together and certainly in practice they are usually performed together- so for the sake of brevity I listed them as one skill (yes, brevity- sounds weird coming from me I know 😂😂) Here, Nicky Ryan goes through his grip and inside position drills with Garry Tonon just prior to his winning performance at Kasai Grappling 2. Note how inside position with the feet and a preliminary grip have been attained at the same time to lessen reaction time for his opponent and set up his ability to go to the next step. Seen in this light, you will see heel hooking as we do - as a PROCESS rather than a MOVE. There is a chain of skills where the preceding skill must be completed before the next can be attempted. All my students are highly adept at at working methodically through this process even against tremendous pressure. In this way even skilled resistance can be overcome and victory attained

Open wedges/closed wedges: an important principle of my leg lock system is the closed wedge principle. Ashi garami is essentially a set of wedges around your opponent’s leg and hips. Like most examples of wedging in jiu jitsu, it is designed to INHIBIT MOVEMENT so that you can more easily break your opponent. As a general rule I have a preference for CLOSED wedges over open wedges when it is time to break someone. In practical terms, this means that ONE OF MY LIMBS MUST REINFORCE THE POSITION OF THE OTHER, LOCKING IT IN PLACE SO THAT AN OPPONENT CANNOT EASILY SEPARATE THE WEDGES AND ESCAPE. There are a vast number of ashi garami variations out there, but if you observe my students in operation you will see immediately that whenever they are in a tough match with a skilled opponent, they will go back to the strength and security of closed wedge variations of ashi garami where their legs lock around their opponent with crossed feet or triangled legs. This adds greatly to the tightness of the control. Our two favorite and strongest finishing positions at the top of the breaking hierarchy both feature closed/reinforced wedges - in the case of straight ashi garami variations we favor outside ashi garami. In the case of cross ashi garami variations we favor versions of inside sankaku. Both lock the attacker very securely to the opponent and thus can generate truly intimidating power. Are closed wedges always necessary? No - you can get a lot of success without them up to a certain level. If your opponent is perhaps inexperienced in avoiding heel hooks, then open versions of ashi garami can work just fine- but when you are in a serious struggle against a skilled opponent - work with the security, safety, strength and power of closed wedges when possible.

The leg lock system instructional: There are many different ways to present my approach to leg locking to students. Initially I thought it best to do so in a simple and brief introduction video - show some important moves and counter moves, in the standard format for jiu jitsu instructionals. The more I thought about, the less happy I was with that idea. That was not how I taught my own students. I got so many requests over the last few years to go and teach in many locations, also many visitors here in NYC asked for instruction - but I am one person with some rather serious physical issues and can’t reach many more people - so I thought about teaching a video that would be quite different from the norm- a video where I went in much greater depth using my preferred style of teaching, the scenario/problem/solutions model that I use with my own students. This is a difficult thing to present on video and puts much greater demands on the viewer than regular videos, where the viewer just passively watches some moves and seeks to copy them. Here, I am looking to present a complete working method for leg locking and give the viewer UNDERSTANDING rather than mimicry. My proudest achievement as a coach is to have produced students who were independent, innovative problems solvers who can teach as well as they compete - I don’t want to produce robots. My goal is to do the same with you. The simplest way to state the structure of my system is as follows. It consists of six essential and sequential skills, manifested in three distinct yet linked sub systems, each of which presents at least one central problem along with subsequent problems as the system unfolds; and is given its character by around ten core principles/axioms. This is the way I taught my students and they rapidly became the best leg lockers in the world. It did not create just one good leg specialist, but a ROOMFUL of them, across all weight divisions and body types. If you can invest time, patience and study into it, I believe it can work for you to. LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM will be released soon by BJJ Fanatics

Moves and movement: Jiu Jitsu is usually taught as MOVES. However, every MOVE presupposes that you are capable of the physical MOVEMENTS that underlie that move. The better your capacity to control and direct the movements of your OWN body, the better will be your ability to perform the moves that will enable you to control and direct the movements of ANOTHER PERSONS body. Therefore, take as much pride and interest in your ability to move yourself around the mat as you do in moving an opponent - your performance of the latter will improve in relation to the former. Whatever your age, physical limitations etc, there is always some way that you can increase or improve your own capacity for movement. Whatever gains you make in this area, no matter how small, will aid you in your quest to perform well the many moves of jiu jitsu and thus move and control another person - the ultimate goal of the sport.

In all combat two things are required for victory - the necessary SKILLS and the CONFIDENCE to use them to their full effect. One without the other is worthless. Confidence without skills is merely delusion. Skill without confidence is like unspent money, it’s value is never actualized. When skill and confidence meet, magic can happen.

Ideal positioning and less than ideal: When we first begin to learn a move it is wise to begin study under ideal conditions - your body well aligned in the preferred position for that particular move. In competition and sparring however, IN THE MAJORITY OF CASES YOU WILL HAVE TO PERFORM YOUR MOVES IN LESS THAN IDEAL POSITIONS AND ORIENTATIONS THAT NATURALLY OCCUR WITH MAXIMUM RESISTANCE. As such, we often practice finishes in a range of different orientations - belly up, belly down, inverted, rolling through etc etc. In this way there are no surprises on match day - you will be prepared for any contingency as you go in to finish your move. Here, Frank Rosenthal easily adapts to a belly down rolling situation when he needed to - finishing a fine inside heel hook at Kasai Grappling Championship in fine style - strong preparation in non ideal scenarios made for a flawless finish against strong resistance.

Back attacks: As most of you know, I put a VERY heavy emphasis on back attacks in my coaching of jiu jitsu. In my opinion, the back represents the safest place to be both in grappling and fighting and offers the most high percentage and effective submission attacks, thus do I favor it above even the mounted position and all other dominant pin positions. When I look at modern jiu jitsu I see many talented athletes who are extremely good at GETTING TO and MAINTAINING the back position. But many people struggle to FINISH from the back, particularly without the gi. Part of the reason is the lack of incentive to train finishes. In truth, there is little incentive to train hard on back finishes for a simple reason. If you have taken your opponent’s back then you have scored four points - the maximum in the sport. In most cases you have probably also scored takedown, passing and other pin points as well - so in most cases you will be far ahead on points by the time you get to the back position and thus very likely to win anyway, so there is no need to finish. That all changed with the rise of submission grappling events, where getting someone’s back meant nothing - NOW YOU HAD TO FINISH FROM THE BACK. Many elite athletes really struggled with this, as the evidence of EBI overtime’s will attest. My approach to the back puts equal emphasis upon GETTING TO, MAINTAINING and FINISHING from back position, rather than focusing mostly upon the first two and assuming the third is just a bonus because the match will be won on points anyway. When it comes to finishing skills, I strongly emphasize two crucial themes. The first is an in-depth hand fighting system arranged in a hierarchy designed to pin an opponent’s defensive arms. The second is auxiliary subsystems designed to allow you to ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY rather than restrict yourself to mostly the neck. These two themes are often exhibited by my students in competition and have led to many of their greatest successes. Here, Gordon Ryan, a young master of back attacks, shows his hand fighting skills as he prepares the way for a strangulation in training.

The separation principle: My leg lock system has around ten core principles that give it its character. One of those principles is the separation principle. This is the idea that if we are to excel in leg locking we must separate the mechanism of CONTROL (Ashi Garami) from the mechanism of BREAKING (the heel hook, toe hold, Achilles lock etc). As a general rule we favor implementing the control mechanism first and the breaking mechanism second - though there are some exceptions to that rule. Once you start to implement the separation principle, interesting things start happening. You can start holding and pinning opponents with the Ashi Garami for long periods of time, switching from one form of Ashi Garami to another - in other words - USING ASHI GARAMI AS A TYPE OF PIN - EXACTLY AS YOU WOULD USE DIFFERENT UPPER BODY PINS IN CONVENTIONAL JIU JITSU. You will see that there is a hierarchy among the various ashi garami variations, just as there is among upper body pins; and that you can hold them at will and establish your control/position prior to attempting the submission- just as you would for upper body pins. Thus the separation principle opens the door for a control/positional approach to leg locking that in some important ways mirror the basic philosophy and methodology of classic BJJ. Here, Nicky Ryan drills ashi garami variations with senpai Garry Tonon shortly before his victory over Geo Martinez. Note how he has established complete control over both legs (double trouble principle) in ways that enable him to dominate movement while not even concerned with breaking - that comes later - at a time and intensity of his choosing, since he is in complete control of his partners movement.

A word of thanks to show promotions: I think of all the jobs in grappling, the toughest and most difficult may be one that no one talks about - producing a big show. To put on a jiu jitsu event requires enormous amounts of planning, time and expense. There are so many things that can go unexpectedly wrong and good plans become a disaster. I see enough of the backstage drama and difficulties to be thankful that my coaching job is so simple in comparison! WITHOUT SHOW PROMOTERS ALL THE DREAMS AND GOALS OF THE ATHLETES AND THE DEDICATION OF THE SUPPORTING FANS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE. I always appreciate the efforts of the promoters - they give a stage upon which dreams can be built. I always laugh when I hear people talk about a squad rivalry with 10th Planet and Eddie Bravo. Nothing could be further from the truth. Without Eddie Bravo’s groundbreaking decision to take the risk of a high production show with large viewership and its own rule set, we would all still be a bunch of no name dorks squeezing each other’s legs in my sensei’s basement. I never forget that and am always grateful for his efforts. No promotion will ever be perfect or satisfy all the viewers tastes - that’s why it’s good to have choices. But all the main shows, ADCC, EBI, IBJJF, ACB, Fight2Win, Polaris, Rizin, Global Grappling League, Sapeteiro and yes, even metamoris - did so much to boost the brands of the athletes and take the sport forward. I am so happy to see a new contender among the big shows, @kasaigrappling In only their second show they have greatly impressed me with their production value and athlete recruitment. Led by Rolles Gracie and Rich Byrne, one a former athlete himself, the other a formidable businessman and both deeply passionate about advancing the sport, they have created a top level show in our hometown NYC that is letting both international and local athletes work towards their dreams. From the squad - thanks so much to all the promoters who gave our athletes a chance to show our approach to the game and create change in jiu jitsu and congratulations to new kid on the block, Kasai Grappling for their outstanding work so far. Thank you all.

Develop one strong threat first and build upon that: A key theme of my teaching is that once an athlete becomes proficient in the fundamentals of jiu jitsu (there is no getting around this - the fundamentals are the heart and soul of the sport and any deficiencies in this regard will quickly be revealed in competition) IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT YOU DEVELOP ONE STRONG MEANS OF ATTACK THAT WILL PUT FEAR AND RESPECT IN YOUR OPPONENTS MIND. If you present no threat to an opponent, he will open up his full game upon you, but if he fears certain things, he will close down areas of his game and restrict himself to stay away from that threat of yours. You will find in time that you have a propensity for certain kinds of attack - what it is is not important- some of you will develop an unstoppable sweep, others a powerful takedown, a devastating arm lock - anything that can win a match and which you perform very well will do. For me, it is leg attacks and back attacks. All my students are very strong in this regard. I like them because they are almost always available and create very strong defensive reactions that lead into many other forms of attack. The results of successful leg and back attacks are usually devastating and have a strong intimidation factor that can be exploited as opponents react defensively. Once you develop that first strong threat, you can build organically from there as there will be natural follow ups - but start with one. Here, Nicky Ryan explodes from bottom into an arm drag that exposes the back of Geo Martinez- forcing a strong defensive reaction and adjustments in posture and positioning that he could exploit later in the match with another of his favorite attack methods - the triangle (sankaku) - a fine example of a strong initial threat creating opportunities for another further down the road.

Getting it right: Talented and industrious squad junior, Frank Rosenthal had a superb performance Saturday night at @kasaigrappling championships winning via inside heel hook. You can see him perform flawlessly many of the central themes of our approach to the leg locking game - a fine ankle lace ashi garami ties his opponent up and immobilizes him to allow transitions to a tight closed wedge (in this case, inside sankaku) around the hip and then perfect head position to generate heel exposure on a now stationary target - result? A completely controlled submission on a tough and skillful opponent from 10th Planet who simply runs out of defensive options as the system unfolds on stage. Great result for Mr Rosenthal in his best performance so far and a great example to the other juniors and classmates and indeed, all of you, in the calm and disciplined execution of well rehearsed skills in a pressure situation.

Nicky Ryan and the power of sankaku (triangle): Many of you will remember that a BIG part of my teaching is concerned with the use of WEDGES as one of the key elements in my approach to jiu jitsu. Wedges are useful for many things, but primarily to RESTRICT MOVEMENT. As much as I like wedges, I have a strong preference for a certain type of wedge. Most wedges used in jiu jitsu are OPEN WEDGES - but whenever possible, I prefer CLOSED (reinforced) WEDGES. This is when your limbs are locked together around an opponent so THAT ONE LIMB REINFORCES THE POSITION OF THE OTHER FOR ADDED TIGHTNESS AND CONTROL. You will notice that most of my favorite finishing positions involve the use of closed (reinforced) wedges. So in my leg lock system the preferred breaking positions involve locking our legs together around an opponent’s leg - inside sankaku and outside ashi garami are two well known examples that you will often see my students using. In the case of upper body submissions, I greatly favor the use of triangle locks as they are fine examples of closed wedges around the head and one arm that present a dual threat of strangle and arm lock. Moreover, it features the strength of both my legs against an opponent’s neck and one arm - an obvious imbalance. In this way you can see it is a particularly good way for smaller and weaker athletes to handle stronger athletes. The primary problem presented by the Geo Martinez match for Nicky Ryan was the obvious strength disparity between a mature athlete with great gymnastics background versus a sixteen year old boy. As such, sankaku training was a huge part of his training. Tactically, strong threats to the legs that created reactions that would lead to sankaku and vice versa were the theme of the camp. All my students excel at sankaku, but the Ryan brothers are particularly adept. Indeed, they have their own sequence from the position we call “the Ryan roll.” What an experience it was to watch this wunderkind hit exactly the tactics and techniques he worked so hard on in camp and show everyone again the remarkable property of sankaku as a means of victory over a stronger opponent - a lesson to us all! Photo Jeff Chu

Victory in NYC! Nicky Ryan won his grappling superfight versus the very tough and distinguished Geo Martinez tonight in NYC. He won a unanimous decision and in the final seconds had a fully locked triangle from the back (an advanced element of the back attack system) and appeared moments from a decisive submission victory. In addition he appeared to have the stronger submission attempts throughout the match, along with more positional reversals. It was a truly remarkable performance from this young man. He went through a tough training camp and tonight on the big stage he did everything he trained for perfectly. He has a maturity and elan that is truly remarkable for a man his age. Eddie Cummings won a hard fought decision over the very talented Renato Canuto as he had the better submission attempts and overall aggression. Frank Rosenthal has his best performance ever with a beautiful heel hook victory over 10th Planet stand out Zach Malany in one of the nights highlight moments. I am so proud of these remarkable athletes here in front of their home crowd. Bless you all from NYC! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Go Eddie! Had a great time at RGA this afternoon teaching the Saturday class usually taught by Eddie Cummings - obviously he is busy with the big show @kasaigrappling tonight, but all his loyal students can in and it was great running them through some leg lock material - here we all after class - wishing Eddie the best for tonight! See you all at the big show!

The purpose of the instructional video: My intention in releasing an instructional video series is to
1 - To provide a very comprehensive guide to the core insights and techniques that was shown to the squad and which they had so much success with in competition. I believe teaching a wider audience can create beneficial change in the sport. The idea was to take someone who perhaps lacked access to instruction in leg locking and “start them on the right track” all the way from initiating contact with an opponent to getting a submission against strong resistance.
2 - To enable anyone who was already experienced in jiu jitsu to quickly add on skills from a niche area (leg locks for example) and add them easily to the game they already have spent years practicing. I was very happy to have Bernardo Faria as part of the project because he already has a tremendous world championship winning game - you will see how he can easily add on leg locking skills to an already well developed game.
3 - to change the game of video instructionals. Usually an athlete shows some favorite moves and you try to learn the ones that suit you. My intention is to show a much more CONCEPTUAL approach whose aim is to make you understand the central PROBLEMS of leg locking and a METHODOLOGY OF FINDING SOLUTIONS. The idea is to make you into an independent problem solver who can understand the problems and has a method to figure out solutions. I will show many of my solutions - but do so in a way that will hopefully allow you to gain the ability to figure out your own as well. I want to make students into PROBLEM SOLVERS rather than COPIERS. This does mean the series is much longer than most and requires more viewer patience/interaction. I wanted to teach at the same level of conceptual detail that I taught the squad - that requires more from the viewer but will allow those with the desire and patience to get to a MUCH higher level than merely copying some moves. For those of you who prefer a simpler, shorter and condensed summary of my leg locking game (and many people do better with that kind of instruction) I would be happy to provide a condensed version in the future.

Teaching a wider audience - launching an instructional video series: For twenty years I have taught in the dojo of my sensei, Renzo Gracie. In that time I have had the honor of teaching packed classes and great athletes, but always I was limited to teaching whoever was in front of me. As a result I had a big influence on a small number of people. The most I could do was occasional touring seminars where I could reach a new audience for a few hours. People have often asked me to come and teach but I am only one person and usually preoccupied with my students next bout. Things got worse when my body started failing and my ability to travel and teach was further diminished. My crippled leg has deteriorated to a point where I have to get a knee replacement on the same side as my hip replacement and there are serious doubts about my ability to demonstrate moves if I do this. I feel that my students have done an incredible job of showing my ideas to the world in the heat of top level competition. Many of you have requested teaching but my limitations as an individual with body issues have made that impossible. My good friend, Bernardo Faria, World jiu jitsu Champion, encouraged me to reach a wider audience than the blue basement in NYC through video. I am happy to announce a soon to be released video production with Mr Faria and Micheal Zenga with BJJ Fanatics featuring my leg lock and back attack systems. If people find the material interesting, we can definitely go on to look at many other aspects of our approach to jiu jitsu, but Most Enquiries I received for instruction were leg locking and back attacks - so I started there. Last weekend we went through a marathon filming session showing the complete ashi garami leg lock system - be warned - this thing is so long and complete it makes my instagram posts look short!! 😂😂 I wanted to show the core concepts, tactics, philosophy and techniques that you have all seen my students apply so brilliantly over the years. I wanted to thank Mr Faria and Mr Zenga for their encouragement and guidance on the project. I hope you will enjoy a look at the squad training methodology - more details soon!

Insight, BJ Penn and my back attack system: As many of you know, I am a huge believer in the idea that someone can have a massive influence upon you even when you met them very briefly, or even without ever meeting them. This is done through the power of INSIGHT. Someone can give you a critical insight, some idea that changes your point of view in some significant way that inspires you to change direction and change how you do things. For example, I met Dean Lister once and he gave me a new perspective with a single sentence that changed my jiu jitsu forever. Another huge influence on my jiu jitsu comes from the oddest source - BJ Penn. Mr Penn was in opinion, one of the absolute most skilled and talented MMA fighters of his generation. On two occasions he fought my student, Georges St-Pierre. Both were epic matches in very different ways. In preparation for those matches I studied Mr Penn’s game to help construct a plan of operations. I was extremely impressed by Mr Penn’s use of his legs to trap the arms of his opponents to facilitate strangling them. Now Mr Penn was a man of extraordinary flexibility. Experimentation quickly showed that his arm trap position was very effective, but that few people had the necessary flexibility to employ it as he did. As it turned out, he was never able to get those positions when he fought Mr St-Pierre, but I did not forget how effective that technique was. I immediately began working on means of controlling and trapping arms from rear mount in ways that did not require flexibility. A sophisticated and intricate system of hand trapping patterns and grip nuances quickly got great results. In time I added four auxiliary back subsystems to the main hand fighting system so that the WHOLE BODY could be attacked, rather than just the neck. When the squad rose to prominence, they all proved highly adept at back attacks and the senior students, in particular Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Eddie Cummings, all added key features and insights. The irony is that the entire project started from observing a rival to one of my students, a man I never actually met, but whose insight and example inspired greatly me.

Hanging out with the old gang: At a friends book signing party in downtown Manhattan tonight and ran into two of my favorite people in grappling - Eddie Cummings and Ottavia Busia - Mr Cummings took a short break from training in preparation for Kasai Grappling this weekend where he and Nicky Ryan have exciting super fight action against very tough opponents. He is in great shape and working hard on new elements of his ever developing game and brand. Also looking significantly more stylish these days too! 😳😳 make sure you tune in for @kasaigrappling this weekend in NYC! Should be a great weekend of action!

Balance: One of the key attributes and skills you must develop as you train is a sense of balance. Your ability to transition smoothly from one move to another is vital to your ability to succeed, as no one move will enable you to defeat skilled opponents, rather, moves applied in smooth SEQUENCES will be the means to victory. YOUR ABILITY TO GO EFFICIENTLY FROM ONE MOVE TO ANOTHER IN STANDING AND TOP POSITION, IS ENTIRELY DEPENDENT UPON YOU BEING IN GOOD BALANCE. Any failure in your balance will require you to first correct your balance before you can move on to the next technique. This will give your game a stuttering and clumsy appearance and make it easy for an opponent to seize the initiative during those times when you are trying to recover balance. Developing the skill of KEEPING YOUR CENTER OF GRAVITY INSIDE YOUR BASE OF SUPPORT AT ALL TIMES is thus crucial to your development. Begin this development while drilling your top game. Pay particular attention to the position of your head position and posture and understand that static balance is not the goal - rather, DYNAMIC BALANCE- the ability to hold balance throughout movement, is the skill you are developing. Here, Oliver Taza displays excellent balance whilst working inside an opponent’s guard - this will enable him to calmly identify his next step in the midst of the action and go immediately to it without delay

The underlying essentials never change: Obviously the sport of mixed martial arts is radically different from grappling. Yet there is a definite sense in which the basic demands of all combat sports are the same - only the means of expressing them are different. I find it helps athletes who are making the crossover to teach them in terms of those shared foundational principles so that the many SHARED elements of the different sports are emphasized rather than the many DIFFERENCES. It does not matter whether we are punching, kicking, clinching, performing takedowns or grappling on the floor - gaining angle on my opponent towards his back will constitute advantage. By constantly emphasizing that concept in grappling training, it becomes easy to teach applications of the same principle to that athlete in the new context of striking. Here, just days before his MMA debut in Thailand, Garry Tonon works to find and exploit advantageous angle to punch, just as he did for years to enter into submissions- different context - same principle

Enjoying the show: Great UFC tonight in Brooklyn NY. Another very impressive showing by Khabib Nurmagomedov and Zabit Magomedsharipov to show the depth of Russian talent in MMA. Also another tremendous performance by Rose Namajunas to retain her belt in a great boxing vs Muay Thai stylistic match up. Here I am relaxing with my friend, World jiu jitsu champion, Bernardo Faria, who enjoyed his first UFC live show - always a great experience! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Controlling movement: A central feature of all good jiu jitsu is that of learning to control an opponent’s ability to move. The best athletes can reduce an opponent’s ability to move to that of a puppet, whose every move is determined by the strings to which he is bound and whose every motion is wholly determined by the puppet master. Note that it is not always possible or even desirable to completely STOP an opponent’s movement - often it is enough, or even better to DIRECT an opponent’s movement - controlling the speed and direction in which he goes. This theme of beginning with stopping, restraining, slowing or directing movement is a central feature of my approach to leg locking. Until you have the ability to restrict or control MOVEMENT, the application of the locks is very difficult against skilled opposition. That is why we strongly separate the mechanism of CONTROL (the ashi garami variations), from the method of BREAKING (usually heel hooks, but there are others). The ashi garami holds an opponent in place long enough for a breaking force to be applied to the leg. What was different about our approach is that multiple ashi garamis were used in a sequence to perform a single lock. At least one of those ashi garami had RESTRAINT OF MOVEMENT as its main task. Probably the most recognized is the ankle lace ashi garami that ties an opponent’s legs together in a way that makes effective movement extremely difficult and sets up some particularly punishing leg attacks. Here, Georges St-Pierre works on binding the ankles together as a prelude to a heel hook variation.

Leg lock mastery and the percentage principle: When I was a beginner in jiu jitsu leg locks had a subversive and mysterious aura to them. There were some people who were considered experts in the field. The criteria by which people were judged as expert was typically THE NUMBER OF LEG LOCKS THEY KNEW. If one person knew ten leg locks and another knew one hundred, the second man was the expert. Consider the work of my students - NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF THE VICTORIES MY STUDENTS HAVE HAD IN COMPETITION AND IN THE GYM - AND NO ONE HAS HAD MORE LEG LOCK VICTORIES OR AT SUCH A HIGH LEVEL - HAVE COME FROM TWO LEG LOCKS - the outside heel hook and the inside heel hook. Probably one of the biggest effects upon leg locking that I have had is to change people’s perceptions about what constitutes leg lock mastery. Rather than see it in terms of the number and variety of leg locks known and performed, I SEE IT IN TERMS OF MASTERING ONLY THE MOST HIGH PERCENTAGE MOVES AND FOCUSING UPON THEM - EMBEDDING THEM IN SOPHISTICATED SYSTEMS OF OPERATIONS THAT TAKE AN ATHLETE FROM THE BEGINNING OF A MATCH TO THE END. Thus mastery is about the DEPTH OF THE SUPPORT SYSTEMS AROUND A FEW HIGH PERCENTAGE LEG LOCKS, RATHER THAN NUMBER AND EXTENT OF THE LEG LOCKS THEMSELVES. I really only teach five ashi garami based leg locks in a serious fashion, along with a few non ashi garami leg locks, and of those five, the overwhelming majority of my time is spent on just two - and from those two came a success rate that changed the direction of jiu jitsu over the last five years. I could teach you a hundred interesting and exotic leg locks - and it would do little or nothing to improve your performance on the mat - or I could teach you two bio-mechanically sound leg locks embedded in systems that could get you to those locks and keep you there against strong resistance - the second option will make you a real master of leg locking - the first will not.

Globetrotting grappler: One of my favorite people in professional grappling is Aussie superstar, Craig Jones. This remarkable young man travels the world for competition, seminars and training. He is a great example of the martial arts ideal of a killer on the mat, but an absolute gentleman off the mat. I had a great time teaching in Australia last time visiting family and had a great experience at Mr Jones’ gym, @absolutemmamelb in Melbourne, so whenever Mr Jones is in town I always like to return the favor. Today he had some great training sessions with young Nicky Ryan. Both Athletes are getting ready for the upcoming @kasaigrappling show in NYC in two weeks- prior to that Mr Jones will fly to Japan to compete and then back to NYC! I don’t know anyone who travels so far so often as this man! Here, Messrs Jones and Ryan relax after working their half guard leg lock entries and sparring rounds.

Close relatives: sometimes there are moves and skills that are so closely related to each other that they simply cannot be taught apart from each other, but instead should be taught as one. An example is juji gatame (the arm bar) and the triangle (sankaku). WHENEVER YOU HAVE ONE, YOU HAVE THE OTHER. Thus I teach them as one unified system. Here, MMA athlete, Asim Zaidi, who often travels to NYC to train submission skills with the squad, shows the results of that approach with a fine interplay between arm bar and triangle attacks as he gets a good win against an EBI veteran in a local grappling match.

Eddie Cummings back to center stage: The Wolverine, Eddie Cummings, one of the most skilled submission hunters I ever had the pleasure of working with, will return to the big show - headlining the @kasaigrappling Kasai Pro 2 event in NYC on April 14. He will take on the extremely impressive Renato Canuto at 160 pounds in a fifteen minute super fight with no points for first ten minutes and then a shift to points in last five minutes. Mr Canuto greatly impressed everyone at the previous Kasai Show, beating out a stacked field with exceptionally dynamic movement both standing and on the ground and showing equal ability in both positional play and submissions. This will be a great clash of very different styles. Mr Canuto is a master of generating movement, but Mr Cummings is, like all my students, trained primarily in disrupting and inhibiting movement,
This should lead to a fascinating match. Mr Cummings has been working hard developing his own brand over the last year independently of the squad, but still very much a flag bearer of the submission grappling/attack the whole body and one of the greatest products of the blue basement. In addition, several of the juniors (kohai) will compete in the card - I will talk about that soon. Looking forward to another great night of grappling in NYC in this very impressive emerging show!

Getting hands taped for the first time: A first MMA fight is never an easy thing. When camp begins, most of the problems are physical - the sheer volume of work is staggering. Much of that work is new, so it has a clumsy, unfamiliar feeling about it. There are myriad small injuries from the punishing training and you don’t have time to let them heal so they accumulate over the camp. As The first fight get closer, hard physical training is reduced and usually avoided altogether in the last week. That’s when the mental problems start. Self doubt, confidence issues, concerns about the opponent’s strength relative to your weaknesses - they all come out. Often they reach a peak in the warm up room. Here, Garry Tonon gets his hands wrapped and certified for the first time just prior to his debut fight last week in Thailand. I remember once at a UFC event, a young fighter in his first event was getting his hands wrapped professionally for the first time and was greatly impressed by the result off having a real professional tape up his fists. When it was done he jumped up and yelled, “my hands feel like they have been dipped into steel!!! When I hit that f**ker he’s going to wake up with a busted face and broken jaw!” The professional hand wrapper looked casually at him and quietly remarked, “I wrapped the other guys hands the same way ten minutes ago...” i usually find that the nervousness peaks at the hand wrapping - why? Because, once the hand wrap is complete - THE ACTIVITY OF WARM UP BEGINS, and PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY is the single best antidote to fear and nervousness that I know of. Shortly after this picture was taken, Mr Tonon went through a solid warm up that brought together all the main themes of the camp helped reduce the natural feelings of nervousness you would expect in a debut MMA performance. Always remember - WHEN YOU FEEL NERVOUS PRIOR TO AN EVENT OF ANY KIND - PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY RELATED TO THE TASK BEFORE YOU WILL HELP YOU MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE.

Why don’t you just call it a honey hole (or 411, or saddle or whatever) like everyone else? Often people ask me why I insist upon a large array of names for moves that most people describe with a single well known name. My reasoning is easy to understand. FOR ANY GIVEN MOVE, THERE WILL BE MANY VARIATIONS WITHIN THAT MOVE - each will have different strengths and weaknesses and areas of application. FAILURE TO UNDERSTAND THOSE DIFFERENCES WILL LEAD TO INAPPROPRIATE APPLICATIONS THAT WILL LOWER MY PERFORMANCE. Let’s look at a simple example. A friend calls me and says he needs me to come over with a screw driver and remove some screws. Being completely naive with regards screwdrivers and handyman work in general, I naively reach into a tool box and grab a screwdriver and head over. Given that there are several different types of screwdrivers/screws used out there - I HAVE PROBABLY CONDEMNED MYSELF TO FAILURE BEFORE I EVEN BEGIN THE TASK. As any task becomes more complex - THIS MUST BE REFLECTED IN THE LANGUAGE USED TO DESCRIBE YOUR ACTIONS AND THOUGHTS AS YOU PERFORM THAT TASK. If I have only a single term to cover a wide array of variations of a move, MY THOUGHTS AND ACTIONS WILL REFLECT MY LINGUISTIC NAIVETY WITH A NAIVE PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE OF THE TASK. If I have only one word to describe a given color, “red” - how good do you think my ability to paint a picture of a scene accurately compared with another person who distinguishes crimson, scarlet, magenta, maroon, garnet, cherry red etc etc will be? The language you use to describe your actions to yourself and others will set the limit on your ability to think about, reason, describe and distinguish the variations within a move that HAVE A GENUINE EFFECT UPON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE MOVE. Here, Georges St-Pierre works one variation of an inside heel hook with an inside sankaku/outside foot leg position that offers some mechanical advantages along with some disadvantages - being able to distinguish this from the many other variations lets me exploit those advantages when i can - a more sophisticated terminology helps us make and describe those distinctions to ourselves and others - greatly speeding learning

Most people teach heel hooks simply as a MOVE. I always teach it as a SEQUENCE. A sequence that begins long before the heel hook is applied and where the majority of time is spent upon INHIBITING MOVEMENT through the use of wedges and biomechanics and where breaking the opponent is usually no more than an afterthought...

Hey gang! We’re heading home! At Bangkok’s international airport waiting for our twenty hour flight home with Nicky Ryan who must now get home to train in preparation for his super bout with the outstanding Geo Martinez in just less than three weeks,
along with his proud Dad. Mr Tonon will stay in Bangkok a few days to enjoy a well deserved rest after a very arduous camp. I am planning on getting back to NYC Monday morning and going straight to RGA to teach the Monday afternoon class and then the Bronx bombers at night. Let’s get the blue basement cracking like electricity and build the heat that forges champions! Barring any airport delays I will be there and need you all to turn that spark into a flame - many competitions coming up and victory goes to those who work hard and smart. See you all in the dungeon ☠️☠️☠️

A word of thanks: Part 2: Thanks to Mr Tonon’s family, especially Mom, who did such an amazing job raising this young man and fully support him through thick and thin, traveling all the way to Thailand to support him. Thanks to my sensei, Renzo Gracie, who gives us a space to train and freedom to develop so the athletes can progress towards their dreams. Thank you to One FC for believing in Mr Tonon’s potential and giving him a chance to showcase his hard work on the international stage. And thanks so much to you, my dear readers, who follow our exploits, tolerate our foibles and share our vision of grappling and martial arts in ways that motivate us and makes us try even harder. Bless you all from Bangkok - sorry for long double post - there are so many to thank!

A word of thanks: Part 1: Being a small part of Garry Tonon’s preparation for his winning MMA debut was a great coaching experience and to see him successfully execute many of the central themes and concepts of an entirely new sport in such a short preparation time was truly impressive. I wanted to thank the many people who played key roles in this young mans incredible development. First, to Mr Tonon himself. He trained three times a day seven days a week, through injuries, physical pain and early frustration and never missed a workout. Due to the fact that I have to teach a high volume of private classes to make a living, the only daily time slot for MMA sparring was immediately after his second grappling class. I did not want him to neglect his main strength, so he had to spar MMA immediately after two hours of grappling - he did it every day without complaint. His work ethic amazes me. Thanks also to Squad seniors Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan, along with all the kohai (juniors) who created the framework of the squad that helped build his brand and a training room that could promote development. Thanks so much to the unsung heroes of the squad - the regulars of RGA in NYC headquarters who come in every day while holding full time jobs and made a room that builds champions - you fellows are the rock upon which this whole enterprise is built. Thanks to Doug Pelinkovic, Mike Jaramillo, Gene Dunne, Brian Glick and Claude Levy, senior students whom I often discuss ideas and concepts of MMA and who provide such a fine sounding board for my developmental ideas. Thanks to Tom DeBlass for being such an outstanding mentor to Mr Tonon all these years. Thanks so much to Ryan Rizco, Jake Shields, Matthew Tesla, Neiman Gracie, Garry St-Leger and Mehrdad for being the sparring partners who took Garry from total novice to confident debutant in just four months. Thanks to Jamie Crowder and Joe Sampieri of RGA Muay Thai for all your insight and help. Thanks so much to Georges St-Pierre and Joe Rogan for extremely valuable input on the subtleties of distance, movement and timing that played a pivotal role in the outcome. Continued...

Victory in Thailand: Garry Tonon won his first ever MMA fight here in Bangkok via TKO in the second round. Prior to the bout, Mr Tonon expressed a desire to use his fledgling striking skills rather than simply rely on grappling. Despite only around four months of MMA training he made remarkable progress and wanted to test his new skills as part of his development. After an understandably nervous start where he took some hits, he settled into his rhythm and started landed his own heavy blows leading to a first round knock down and very nearly finished in the first round. In the second, Mr Tonon took control both in the open and on the fence and ultimately to the floor where he landed many heavy punches and elbows to get a stoppage. It was impressive to see a grappling athlete with no real striking background other than some sporadic pad work until four months ago come out and win via TKO on a specialized striker. Obviously there is still a huge amount to work on, but it was an amazing performance by the rookie. It was also a brave choice to stay with striking when he could have easily gone into submission mode. Previous to tonight, Mr Tonon had never thrown a punch with bad intentions before, but here in his debut he landed well once he got settled in. Any debut into MMA is tough, but doing it in a foreign country, on the main card of one of the biggest organizations in the world, with only four months of experience behind you and big expectations from fans, and still have the presence of mind to work on new developing skills to help long term growth shows remarkable presence of mind. I hope you all enjoyed the bout. Thank you all so much for your interest and support. I know it means a lot to Mr Tonon and it certainly does to me. It was an honor come to Thailand, home of the mighty Thai fighters, a land steeped in martial arts tradition and influence, and make a memorable debut. Now it’s back to NYC to get the squad ready for upcoming grappling bouts!

Working through resistance: Nicky Ryan works on his leg locking skills in sparring tonight. It is never enough to know only the mechanics of the moves you employ - you must be able to apply the moves against knowledgeable resistance - this will be the standard by which you will be judged in competition. Here, Mr Ryan takes his time to control his opponent’s movement through skillful application of an ashi garami variation. Now he will deal with each line of resistance in turn until he can get to the actual application of the lock and secure the finish.

Adapting: Garry Tonon learned some aspects of the professional MMA fighters life today - going to various media obligations, rules meetings, medical checks, preliminary weight and hydration tests etc. In the end, however, the athlete’s greatest responsibility is training, for without that, he or she would never rise to the level where they would have to go through all those chores in the first place - so at the end of a long day - it’s back to the gym for drills. Now we head to a light dinner and back to the hotel. Tomorrow is the official weigh in and then all promotional responsibilities fulfilled.

Fine tuning: Garry Tonon gets some light tag sparring in tonight in Bangkok in preparation for his debut here Saturday night. Obviously intensity levels diminish sharply in the last week but there are always ways to train and improve without maximum power. Watching the young grappling master take on the entirely new world of striking is as fascinating to me as it can be frustrating to him 😜 As always however, his learning speed is very impressive and his work ethic even more so. Now it’s dinner time as we are now joined by @tomdeblass and @jakeshields and Mr Tonon’s mother here for a night in Bangkok. Wishing you all the best and thank you all for your support in this merging of the squad’s submission grappling base with MMA.

Meanwhile...back in the West: While Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan have been preparing for upcoming challenges here in Thailand, Oliver Taza has been competing very successfully in the European Gi jiu jitsu circuit. Mr Taza has, like senior team mate, Gordon Ryan, been training a lot in the gi program in the blue basement and has ambitions in both gi and no gi. This week he entered the ACB European championships and won all four matches by submission to qualify for the ACB world championships later in the year. Here he shows excellent passing pressure to put himself in position to switch between Kimura and back systems to get the submission in the finals.

Two versus one: Putting Nicky Ryan through a tough session tonight in Bangkok. Two opponents versus Mr Ryan over thirty minutes alternating as he stays in the center for the full thirty minutes. Working against two people is never easy - they get a chance to rest while you don’t. Learning to deal with the physical pressure mounting over time as you are fatiguing is a good test of inner resolve and maintaining calm and discipline under tough conditions. Here we reflect on the main lessons learned, the most successful techniques and tactics and the least successful so that tomorrow we can incorporate more of what was working and change or omit what was less successful. Immediately after this, Garry Tonon went into his MMA training - it’s a fascinating experience as a coach to run two two sports back to back and see first hand the commonalities and differences between the two.

First day in Bangkok: The squad went straight into action after marathon flight from the blue basement in NYC to Bangkok Thailand. We stopped by local MMA and jiu jitsu gym generously hosted by @morganbangkok At MMA@Fight Lab - its always a joy to go back to Asia - there is such a strong tradition of martial arts here, especially in Thailand, and the local scene reflects that. Nicky Ryan sparred with locals in preparation for his upcoming bout with Geo Martinez and Garry Tonon went through his MMA drills in preparation for his debut this Saturday. It was good to feel the heat and humidity out here - I always prefer a hot training environment over a cold one. A good workout in Thailand is the best jet lag cure ever invented 😜😜 Now it’s time for dinner and rest -I am quite certain there will be some heavy sleeping tonight! Wishing you all the best from Thailand. What an honor to train in the homeland of the mighty Thai fighters who have provided so much inspiration and technical nuance to the modern game of MMA.

Another squad adventure begins: Killing time at JFK as we wait for the plane to Bangkok, Thailand for Garry Tonon’s MMA debut next weekend in ONE FC. I was actually early for a flight for the first time in my life due to the good influence of my students! Nicky Ryan will come to maintain his training for his upcoming match in Kasai Grappling on April 14. Here he is joined by his Dad. Mr Tonon had his last sparring session today and is excited to start a completely new phase of his competition career. We are all sitting around telling horrible stories about each other. My favorite so far? One time Nicky Ryan was weight cutting for a jiu jitsu tournament and Garry Tonon made him carry a box of freshly baked donuts and hold them for everyone else to eat while Nicky watched and salivated! #evilsensei #thecrueltutelageofgarrytonon. I though I was a heartless and cruel teacher until I heard that one! I have to catch up to that level! 😂😂😂 Twenty four hours from now we will be getting set up in Bangkok and getting ready for training. Wishing you all the best and thank you all for your loyal support.

Nicky Ryan back in action: Nicky Ryan will take on the very formidable Geo Martinez at Kasai Grappling Championships in NYC on April 14 in a super fight put together by the Ryan brothers and and the @kasaigrappling team in what should be a fascinating match. Mr Martinez is a multi time EBI champion and ADCC medalist. He has even defeated a senior member of the squad and gone the distance in a tight loss to another, so clearly his submission defense is of the very highest caliber. This will definitely be the toughest challenge of the sixteen year old Mr Ryan’s career. Ordinarily I am not in favor of teenagers taking on Adult champions, but Mr Ryan showed he could qualify and compete at world championship level, so I will make an exception in cases like this. Obviously there is going to be a significant strength and physical maturity gap here, Eddie Cummings and Jonathan Calestine both told me that Mr Martinez was among the strongest lightweights they ever encountered and could maintain that strength for long periods. Mr Ryan will have to use all his rapidly developing skills to take on such a skilled and tough opponent. This entire Kasai event is fascinating, with several great super fights and a main tournament that should create some fantastic match ups - more on this soon! Hats off to Kasai for creating a great show in the Empire State and giving these two fine athletes a venue to showcase their skills.

There is no learning how to defend a given move until you learn the nuances of attacking with it: Every day I get people asking me how to defend leg locks. “I don’t want to DO leg locks - I just want to be able to DEFEND them.” This is simply setting yourself up for failure. With this approach, Not only will you be unable to perform a leg lock (or any other move you care to name), you will not be able to defend one either. ONLY BY GAINING UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT MAKES A MOVE WORK, WILL YOU BE ABLE TO PREVENT SOMEONE ELSE FROM MAKING IT WORK. You have to KNOW WHAT YOU ARE FIGHTING AGAINST if you are to have any hope of STOPPING a given move - and that means LEARNING THE POSITIVE APPLICATION OF THE MOVE FIRST, AND THE DEFENSE SECOND. You cannot learn jiu jitsu in fragments. The deeper your knowledge of a move, the easier will be the task of frustrating someone else attempting to apply it, FOR BY KNOWING THE CONDITIONS NECESSARY FOR SUCCESS, YOU KNOW WHAT YOU NEED TO DO TO CREATE FAILURE IN AN OPPONENT. Here, Garry Tonon uses his great experience and knowledge of ashi garami scenarios to calmly work his way out of what could be a bad situation - minutes later he would go on to win with a strangle. That calm demeanor in defense comes from endless hours of learning to attack in the same position.

The basis of functional strength is posture: People talk all the time about strength development for sports. There are many proven programs and methods of increasing somebody’s strength over time. When it is time to APPLY that strength in competition however, remember this - EVEN THE GREATEST STRENGTH WILL BE UNDERMINED BY FAILURES IN POSTURE WHEN APPLIED TO A GIVEN TASK. For any given task there is at least one posture that optimizes strength application - deviation from that ideal posture(s) will manifest itself as weakness. Breakdown the most commonly occurring situations and scenarios in your sport and research which postures come close to ideal as far as applying your strength towards your goals. Doing so will maximize the effect of whatever strength you have. Naive strength is one thing, BUT STRENGTH DIRECTED BY POSTURE FEELS LIKE IRON. A weak man with good and efficient posture will outperform a strong man operating from poor posture. Make posture in all the main areas of your sport a serious part of your study. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows perfect posture whilst wrestling on the fence in single leg position - a key part of his sport

Getting ready: Garry Tonon is getting ready for his MMA debut at One FC Iron Will @onechampionship in Bangkok, Thailand on March 24 against his opponent, striking specialist Richard Corminal from the Philippines. Mr Tonon’s introduction to MMA training and techniques began just twelve weeks ago. He was fully committed to his grappling career prior to that and the transition had to be made in very little time. As always he has applied himself with everything he has - but MMA is a deep ocean of moves, tactics and principles and there is still a long, long way to go. The fusion of his submission grappling background with MMA makes for fascinating training sessions and I believe it will be very interesting for spectators as well. Here he works with Welterweight great, Jake Shields on the very new world of standing striking. It is never easy for an athlete who knows what elite performance feels like in one sport, to take on another. They feel very acutely their beginner level mistakes in strong contrast to their usual smooth and efficient motion. Mr Tonon has however, taken on the project with admirable enthusiasm, humor and diligence that points to good progress over time.

Kani Basami: The scissor throw - kani basami - is one of the more controversial moves in jiu jitsu. It is among my favorite moves - all of my students are very good at it and often use it in competition - AND YET I DO NOT PERMIT THEM TO USE IT IN CLASS AND I EVEN WOULD GO SO FAR AS TO SUPPORT A BAN OF THE MOVE IN COMPETITION. Why do I have such an odd point of view towards this move? Kani basami is one of the few moves with a truly unacceptably high accident rate - even when the move is performed well by well trained athletes. A tiny misjudgment of distance and height on a moving opponent can result in a badly broken leg. There are many safer ways to get into your opponent’s legs that work just as well. When I began teaching I saw many incidents involving flying Kani basami injuries and ultimately came to ban in it my classes. Yet this moment proved to be one of the most important of my coaching career. It made me ask a very interesting question. WAS THERE A WAY TO EMPLOY THE EFFICIENT MECHANICAL SCISSORING ACTION OF KANI BASAMI ON THE GROUND? (It would be safe on the ground as you are not jumping your full bodyweight onto a weight bearing leg). Initially I worked with the idea of back stepping from top position and this gave great results that students could use safely in everyday training to enter into inside heel hooks. Things got really interesting however, when kani basami was used from bottom position. The idea was interesting - INSTEAD OF FLYING TO YOUR OPPONENTS LEG IN STANDING POSITION - MAKE HIM FLY ABOVE YOU BY ELEVATING HIM FROM BOTTOM GUARD POSITION AND USE THE POWERFUL SCISSOR ACTION TO ENTER INSIDE HEEL HOOKS FROM UNDERNEATH. This was one hundred percent safe and proved to be extremely effective. How odd that an ancient move, which i do not allow my students to use in training with each other, should become one of the cornerstones of the modern leg lock game used by my students in a new fashion. My decision to ban its use in class more than fifteen years ago created an impetus that created a whole new direction for the move. I have not performed flying Kani basami since my hip replacement - no wonder my poor partner looks nervous! 😂😂

A fun day of training today at RGA when the Hayden brothers, Josh and Jason cane in unexpectedly for a workout with the squad. They have always been among our toughest rivals in EBI competition and other shows. It’s always a pleasure to see athletes in less competitive settings and enjoy a grappling in a way that can’t be done under the pressure of the big stage. Both brothers are highly skilled in submissions and had a fine day’s work with the squad. As much as competition success is a worthy goal, friendship and civility is a more worthy one. Here the Hayden brothers listen to our horrible stories and opinions after a great session of armlocks, leg locks and strangles.

Legend provides inspiration: One of my all time favorite MMA fighters is the great Jose Pele Landi. He was a legend of early MMA back when it was called “Vale Tudo” or NHB. He was a gifted kickboxer with good upper body takedowns who could also mix it up on the ground. He was universally feared and respected for his devastating knee strikes which he could use at any moment in any situation to KO opponents. Imagine my surprise when he began coming in to train with the squad in grappling! Even now at forty four he comes in to train and gives his all. It is amazing to see such a legend trying new moves and working with the youngsters. I am always so impressed when I see people who have the accomplishments to sit back and rest, but who refuse and always seek further growth and new adventures. Sometimes I show the younger athletes film clips of Mr Landi in action and they are always amazed and proud to work out next to such a legend. There is always something special about working out next to a great athlete that lifts the room. What an honor to have one of my early idols work with my students and inspire them the same way he always inspired me.

Concepts versus details: Whenever I teach I try hard to begin with the general concepts that govern the area I am discussing and then flesh it out with details that give students the practical ability to get those general concepts to work. Concepts and details work together in a manner similar to a child’s coloring book. The concepts are like the outlines, the details are like the colors you fill in to make it into a beautiful picture. Jiu Jitsu without concepts to give a general sense of direction will be like a collection of colors scrawled randomly over a page that portrays nothing. Jiu Jitsu without details will be like a rough sketch, colorless and dull. When jiu jitsu has both concepts and details in unison - then you will see a complete and beautiful picture. See your jiu Jitsu along the lines of this metaphor. Start at the conceptual level to give yourself direction. Then over time, add details to add life and color to those outlines. Just as sketch and color together produce art, so too will concepts and details together produce a martial art.

Here is Mr Stuart Cooper’s video on the squad. Thank you so much Mr Cooper for making the time and effort to create such a well produced video illustrating some of our core concepts to our audience. Thank you also to my amazingly passionate and hard working students, especially the pioneers, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. All of you gave an incredible voice to my ideas that I could never have done alone. Thank you all for your efforts - it has been my privilege to be a small part of that. Thank you also to my everyday students - far too many to mention - who provide the testing grounds, the passionate atmosphere and toughness that produced so many champions. Thank you to my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie, who gave me my start in the sport and the best playground to grow I could hope for. Thank you also my dear readers on social media for showing interest in what we do and putting up with my rather clumsy expression of my ideas. I hope you enjoy Mr Coopers video. #Repost @stuartcooperfilms with @get_repost
・・・
@danaherjohn talks about how he broke down the systems based approach to Jiujitsu and then took various niche areas of the game and created systems within systems. This approach saw his students winning matches against much more experienced opponents who had been training far longer.
Full video now available to watch on my YouTube stuartcooperfilms
Audio extracted from The Joe Rogan Experience MMA Show #11 with John Danaher
#stuartcooperfilms #DanaherDeathSquad #Leglocks #jiujitsu #bjj #adcc

The most important part of your workout: Imagine if you had some strange brain disorder that resulted in total amnesia after every jiu jitsu workout so that everything you learned in that lesson was forgotten. Progress would be impossible! Every class you did would be your first class! The basis of all improvement over time is MEMORY - memory allows us to retain information and apply it the next time we work on the same problem so that we do not have to re-learn the same things every time, but can move on to new lessons and accumulate knowledge. IF MEMORY IS THE BASIS OF PROGRESS - SHOULD WE NOT BE DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO ENHANCE OUR ABILITY TO USE MEMORY TO TAKE THE INFORMATION FROM A PREVIOUS LESSON AND APPLY IT TO THE NEXT? One of the most beneficial things you can do as a student is at the end of each lesson to think of the single most important thing you learned in today’s class and ask yourself how you will try to apply that lesson tomorrow. If you can carry just one piece of valuable information from one class to the next, I assure you that you will make fast progress over time and surpass most of your peers. It always amazes me that people who are happy to perform three hours of hard physical training every day will balk at the idea of thirty seconds of easy thinking after that workout that could greatly benefit the next workout and ensure that a year from now they will be far better than they currently are. YOUR WORKOUT DOES NOT FINISH WHEN YOU STEP OF THE MAT - IT FINISHES WHEN YOU USE THE EXPERIENCE GAINED TODAY TO CREATE A PLAN FOR WHAT YOU WILL ATTEMPT TOMORROW.

Spreading a message: I always try to convey our approach to the sport out to the jiu jitsu world in the hope that some people might find it interesting or helpful. The vast majority of the work in getting people interested in our methods has been done by my students, whose outstanding achievements in competition have made many people take notice of our approach. Wherever I can I try to help out through writing or speaking. A small milestone was reached recently when the Joe Rogan podcast went past one million views on YouTube - Mr Rogan generously have great exposure to some of the core concepts of our way of thinking about the game and experimental/Socratic method of learning and teaching that we employ to instill it in the athletes. Thank you all so much for your interest and to all those who helped us get the message out @joerogan @ebiofficial @eddiebravo10p @polaris_professional @flograppling @adccsubmission @ufcfightpass @ufc @globalgrapplingleague @f2wpro Without you all we would just be some weirdos playing twinkle toe footsies in my sensei’s basement! Thank you all and thank you to all my cherished students who gave so much and did so well.

Pushing and pulling: Most of what I teach from bottom position in jiu jitsu follows a simple three step pattern. FIRST, GET AN EFFECTIVE WORKING GRIP. SECOND, GENERATE KUZUSHI (off balancing). THIRD, ATTACK (preferably in complimentary combinations). When it comes time to begin the study of kuzushi, the best place for most people to start is the seemingly simple, yet in practice, very subtle, dynamic of PUSH and PULL. As the Japanese noted so long ago, when someone is pushed, they will push back, when pulled, they will pull back. Learning to read your opponent’s posture and where their body’s exertion is being directed at any given moment is critical to your ability to off balance them through pushing and pulling. If ever I want to PULL someone, I first PUSH them back - knowing ahead of time that they will instinctively push back against my push and thus greatly amplify the effect of what I really wanted all along - a powerful pull. This seems like such a simple concept, but it takes discipline and training to apply it consistently throughout a match and make it the basis of your initial contact with an opponent that ties into all your favorite attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan pulls with the right hand to create a defensive pull back reaction from the great Xande Ribeiro that will create an entry for a strong rearward pushing trip - a good example of the push pull dynamic in operation.

Another day coaching in the blue basement...😂

A fundamental distinction in joint locks - linear and twisting locks: Joint locks can be divided into two broad families. The first are linear or straight locks. Common examples are juji gatame (armbar), ude gatame (straight arm lock) and hiza gatame (knee bar). These locks are probably the clearest and simplest examples of lever and fulcrum in the entire skill set of jiu jitsu. The second family are the twisting or rotational locks. Common examples are Kimura, Americana and heel hook. In general these locks tend to be more complex in nature. Often the relationship between lever and fulcrum is not so obvious and the forces involved are rotational. Athletes can have favorite moves, but I have always believed ALL athletes most excel in several linear and several rotational locks (you can’t only excel in linear or only in rotational). This is because very often the main escapes from a linear lock lead very naturally into a twisting lock and vice versa. Being able to switch mindset from linear to twisting and vice versa in the blink of an eye is thus very important. In addition, linear locks tend to work best on straightened limbs, whilst twisting locks generally work best on bent limbs - when you excel in both, you will be able to attack regardless of the extension, or lack of, in your opponent’s limb. Once students are made aware of the different nature and demands of these two families of joint locks, I find they usually have no difficulty working with both - but they should always be aware of the important mechanical differences between them in order to maximize their use of them. Here, I teach one of my favorite twisting locks - Kimura - to the students of Columbia University and run them through the various factors that enhance performance with this incredibly versatile hold.

A remarkable role model: A sad week at RGA headquarters in New York City - one of the most prominent and successful athletes and teachers Rafael “Sapo” Natal, will return to Brazil for a time to take care of family. Mr Natal’s story is one that should inspire anyone looking to work towards a dream. He learned jiu jitsu from his primary sensei, Draculino and came to NYC when he wanted to transition to MMA so he could work with Renzo Gracie. Working hard in a new country with new language and new culture is never easy, but Mr Natal attacked his goal with everything he had. In a short time he won a dedicated group of students and got into the worlds premier MMA organization, the UFC, where he had a very distinguished career. Mr Natal was beloved by students and workmates alike for his enthusiasm and drive and success. He always radiated an easy going charm while pushing people hard to do their best - his own example was a fantastic demonstration to the students. Last night he gave one of the most emotional and heartfelt goodbyes the academy has ever seen. What an honor to have worked alongside this outstanding young man for so long. He worked so hard and gave so much. He went through a long, complex and painful eye surgery after an injury. I never heard him complain, never saw him waiver from his goals - I only saw him work harder and inspire others to do the same. I am sure fate will bring him back soon to NYC, but I truly admire his decision to put family before self and get that done before he returns. Wherever fate takes him, the entire RGA staff and student body will always remember him as a real mensch - a true jiu jitsu man who represented himself and his team with distinction and honor. Wishing you the best @rafaelsaponatal from NYC

New challenges: The ideal grappler would be one who was equally dominant in both gi and no gi competition, and could even do well in MMA. Obviously such a project is a long term one. Some of the squad members are making first steps in those directions. This weekend, Oliver Taza entered the Canadian Nationals at brown belt and won gold. Here he uses a variation of one of our favorite leg entry set ups, the reverse X guard, to enter into the legs and quickly finish an IBJJF legal knee bar (heel hooks are illegal in this format). It is a nice example of cross over between two different rule sets. Good to see Mr Taza making waves in gi competition while still striving towards his main competition goals

Alma mater: I had the pleasure of going back to my alma mater Columbia University to teach a jiu jitsu seminar yesterday. It was wonderful to see the amazing progress the students have made under the direction of club leaders Andrius Schmid and Jason Yang. Back in the 1990’s the club was started by Christian Barry, Matt Serra and myself. The sport was so different then! Mr Barry advertised the first class as “Brazilian fighting jiu jitsu and Vale Tudo” with a picture of a vicious fight from mounted position. Almost one hundred people showed up for the first class - every angry nut job and lunatic came out of the woodwork of Columbia and showed up in the wrestling room. The entire class immediately descended into a chaotic mass sparring session as dozens of repressed academic types with some kind of obscure martial arts background/fantasy went berserk on each other in a mass rage/ warfare scene that was pure comedy gold! Next class five bruised and scratched people showed up and the Columbia jiu jitsu club was born! 😂😂😂 Time has worked its magic and now it is a very big and well run club - I had a great time showing the gifted students there elements of the squad’s Kimura system and its links to other subsystems we routinely use in competition. It was wonderful strolling around the campus afterwards and reflecting upon the great influence of my dear mentor, Isaac Levi, my Ph.D supervisor, and his insights on research programs that I use every day - albeit in a context very different from what he expected. In the end, learning is learning, no matter what the context. I am so grateful to be able to take the gift of great teaching and mentoring I received and give a small amount back to a new generation of students, despite having completely changed paths in life.

Leg locks in MMA: I am often asked in whether leg locks are effective MMA competition. My answer is always the same - ANY OF THE MAJOR TECHNIQUES OF THE VARIOUS COMBAT SPORTS CAN BE APPLIED SUCCESSFULLY IN MMA IF PERFORMED WELL AND AT THE APPROPRIATE OPPORTUNITY - AND THEY CAN ALL FAIL IF PERFORMED POORLY OR AT AN INAPPROPRIATE TIME. The quality of the APPLICATION is far more important than the choice off technique (within reason). Tonight, Emmanuel Vera, a very talented junior member of the squad, took his leg locking skills into the cage and won his fight in just thirty seconds via Achilles lock. Great to see him training hard and getting the reward of victory. I have always studied and taught jiu jitsu with the notion of application to a real fight in the background. It is great to see some elements of our work getting seen in the context of MMA. Fine work by Mr Vera who continues to impress with his work ethic and results.

Angles for strangles: Nothing beats a strangle from the back to demonstrate clearly the founding principles of jiu jitsu. Positional control that renders even the most dangerous opponents relatively harmless, a submission that can go from fairly gentle all the way to rendering someone unconscious or worse in extreme cases, and one which a smaller person can reasonably expect to apply successfully against a much larger and stronger foe. The first question is always - how do I get there? It all begins with angle. In the most basic cases I MUST BE ABLE TO GET OUTSIDE MY OPPONENTS ELBOW - EITHER BY MOVING HIS ELBOW OR BY MOVING MYSELF AROUND THE ELBOW ( usually both at the same time). This will give me the angle I need to initiate a movement towards my opponents back. A common problem I see here is that students will gain an angle by successfully getting outside an elbow, but then hesitate and lose that momentary opportunity. A phrase that I often use with my students is this - if you can SEE the back, then you can TAKE the back. The most common ways you will be able to see your opponents back in a combat situation is if you get outside his elbow (eg an arm drag) or over his head (eg snap down) or inverted spin around or through his legs (eg berimbolo). As you enter these, or any equivalent move, there will be a moment where you can see the back - even just a small part of the back - and that is where you must move decisively and with purpose. As you spar, LOOK FOR THAT VISUAL CUE that signals opportunity and take it. Of course you will fail sometimes when you first try - that’s normal - but in time the visual cue will be followed by successful action and you will prove to be a dangerous opponent who can literally see opportunity and take it. Remember always that EVERY SUCCESSFUL PHYSICAL ACTION BEGINS WITH THE MENTAL ACT OF RECOGNITION OF OPPORTUNITY, WITHOUT WHICH THE ACTION NEVER WOULD HAVE EVEN OCCURRED. In time you will learn that you can take the back without even seeing the back - but at the start this is the single best way to get students going beyond angle and getting all the way to the best position in the sport. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

The Yerkes - Dodson law: My entire approach to training athletes and preparing them for competition is based around a well known and very simple law described and tested around a century ago by two eminent psychologists, Yerkes and Dodson. Using rats as experimental subjects, they looked at arousal/stress levels imposed upon rats as they tried to learn skills. The results agree well with our basic intuitions in the matter. HUMAN PERFORMANCE AT ANY GIVEN TASK WILL VARY ACCORDING TO THE AROUSAL/STRESS LEVEL, FOLLOWING A PARABOLIC CURVE WHERE LOW AROUSAL WILL RESULT IN LOW PERFORMANCE. PERFORMANCE WILL RISE AS AROUSAL RISES, UNTIL A CRITICAL POINT IS REACHED WHERE AROUSAL/STRESS HAS NEGATIVE EFFECTS RESULTING IN LOWER PERFORMANCE LEVELS. We all have a basic sense of this. When we are apathetic and uninspired, we typically perform tasks poorly. As we become more stimulated by excitement, anticipation, we rise in performance. However, when stress levels reach into fear, shock and extreme nervousness, we fall down the other side of the curve into lowered performance. Subsequent research into the Yerkes-Dodson law revealed that simple tasks are less negatively affected by rising stress/arousal levels. Complex problem solving tasks are heavily affected by rising stress/arousal - as stress rises, performance drops significantly. As a coach, I must be mindful of this as I teach different aspects of the sport. Problem solving is usually done in a relaxed informal fashion after class. Simpler Tasks involving more straightforward physical effort are coached with more stress and arousal. Interestingly, as even complex tasks become more familiar to a student, they are less affected by stress/arousal. Occasional stress tests on a student will show me very clearly how well they have familiarized themselves with a given movement that I want them to excel in. It is well worth your time to familiarize yourself with this basic law of performance and look to see its effects upon your own performance and methods by which you train yourself to improve that performance level.

Divide and conquer: When practicing jiu jiu jitsu, ACTIVELY SEEK TO DIVIDE YOUR OPPONENT’S BODY AND USE YOUR WHOLE BODY TO CONTROL AND ATTACK SEGMENTS OF HIS BODY. This is one of the most fundamental directives of the sport. One of the very best ways to begin investigating this principle is from bottom half guard. A central feature of most variations of half guard is that THEY EFFECTIVELY DIVIDE THE BODY IN HALF AND SEEK TO USE YOUR WHOLE BODY TO CONTROL AND FIGHT HALF OF YOUR OPPONENT’S BODY. Here, I am working aspects of half guard control and positioning with my good friend, Tom DeBlass. You can clearly see that the very nature of the position creates a situation where half of his body is engaged by all of mine. Making this way of thinking central to your game is a key to your future progress - ALL GOOD JIU JITSU IS BASED UPON IT. If you don’t know where to start - BEGIN WITH BOTTOM HALF GUARD, as it is a very clear expression of the principle and has tremendous applicability to everyday training and sparring. Use it to learn the critical notion of selecting a part of your opponent’s body and through grip, movement and connection - owning it.

New directions: Exciting news today - Gordon Ryan signed an exclusive contract with the rapidly rising @acb_jj promotion from Russia. This team has done an amazing job of gathering the elite talent pool of current jiu jitsu and putting on first class tournaments around the world both gi and no gi featuring the best athletes in the sport in tournaments and super fights. Mr Ryan will compete initially no gi and then move to gi matches. This represents a major move for Mr Ryan as he will no longer to be able to compete in a wide array of different organizations as he has done his whole career thus far, but @acb_jj puts on many shows so he is hoping to keep his usual high volume of performances this year. The promotion has an interesting show format featuring ADCC and IBJJF rules, but with the twist of five minute rounds and no guard pulling in first minute. Should be very interesting! Mr Ryan is slated to first take on the very talented ADCC gold medalist Vinny Magalhaes. We always regarded Mr Magalhaes as one of the very best opponents the squad faced in EBI - should be an amazing match between two great world champions!

The return of the newly crowned champion: New featherweight EBI champion Jon Calestine came back today to see his old friends at squad headquarters RGA. He told us all the remarkable story of his victory. The whole adventure began on very short notice as his senpai Eddie Cummings had to pull out at the last minute due to an extremely severe flu. Mr Calestine has only resumed training recently after a severe shoulder injury last year and was quite clearly the smallest and lightest competitor in the field. He spent the week in LA alone and was then told to be ready to compete just two days prior to the event. His friend and mentor Matthew Kaplan had to fly out at the last minute or he would have had to compete without even a cornerman! Despite all the confusion and far from ideal preparation, he stepped up to the plate and delivered a near flawless performance in the true tradition of the squad - gold medal performance with blitzkrieg leg lock attacks to win the matches, the belt, the crowd and the shekels! It was so great seeing him return today and getting an ovation from the more than eighty athletes at the big RGA Monday afternoon class that produced so many squad members and sit next to other squad EBI champions and swap stories of success. Hats off to this talented young athlete who trained so hard, got the opportunity and ran with it! Here, “JC” proudly shows his EBI belt off to the entire class after a tough session. It was an inspiration to everyone in the room to be around that kind underdog success story and of course, wonderful to see a friend and team mate back in the basement telling us the whole tale and laughing about old times and talking technique. For all of you, my dear readers, you could not hope for a better example as you push towards your own goals and dreams, of a young man who trained with purpose and passion until when fate offered a chance - he had the skills and confidence to step up and shine!

Great performance last night by Jonathan Calestine to win EBI 15 in the featherweight division in his debut performance. Mr Calestine replaced his main teacher, Eddie Cummings on short notice after Mr Cummings came down with flu during the week. Mr Calestine was a regular training partner and apprentice in the squad, but left with Eddie Cummings due to concerns about training next to team mates who either did, or could potentially compete against them in the same weight classes. It’s always a tricky thing to deal with this problem. Some athletes, such as Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, are fine with the idea of training with people they will compete against, others, such as Eddie Cummings and Jonathan Calestine feel awkward about it. As a coach I respect and understand that. We still think of them as alumni from the same team and carrying the torch of our approach to the game. Mr Calestine’s strong leg locking pedigree was very much in evidence last night as he quickly heel hooked his first three opponents in regulation and then won the final against 10th planet stand out Geo Martinez in over time to take a great win. Great to see his success as a student and Mr Cummings success as a mentor. There are a bunch of other athletes emerging in the squad who can do similar things in future EBI’s in various weight categories - this should make for great shows as the seniors go in new directions in the future.

Last moments before the action starts: Usually the preparation for a bout is fairly extensive. The vast majority of the work that will determine the outcome has been done already. There is however, the day itself. By far the most important element on that last day is the athletes warm up routine. This is the final preparation for the match itself. After the warm up there is only those last moments of walk out to the stage and the tense moments as the athletes are being introduced to the audience. In These last moments it is critical that the themes and messages to the athlete be very simple - focus on the main themes you think will be important for the bout. Essentially they are short and simple reminders of what you have worked in training for the bout. Keep the athlete in motion, physical motion helps relieve the natural tightness and anxiety that occurs in those moments. Everyone has their own preference on how to act and feel in these moments. Some like the tension and go with serious approach. Others like a more laid back, “just another day in the office” mentality When Garry Tonon went out to take on Ralek Gracie, someone in the audience yelled out in a stentorian voice, “LEG LOCKS DON’T WORK!!” Mr Tonon quipped, “someone’s about to be disappointed.” We all got a smile in before the action 😊 And of course, another smile when he won by leg lock! So in those moments of tension, focus on the simple themes and ideas that you believe will be important to win, keep your body moving fluidly for tension relief and let your own personality determine your pre-contest demeanor. Once the action starts - you will feel right at home!

No matter how much bigger or stronger your opponent may be than you, his one leg will never be stronger than your whole body...although there may be a few times in your life where it’s close! #ashigaramisavedmylife

Double Trouble: One of the founding principles of my leg lock system is that of double trouble. This is the idea that for any given leg lock attack, the overwhelming majority of my opponent’s defensive reaction will come from the OTHER leg. Knowing this, If I can constrain the other leg, MOST OF HIS DEFENSE WILL BE SHUT DOWN FROM THE START AND I CAN DOUBLE THE AMOUNT OF TROUBLE HE FACES IN ATTEMPTS AT ESCAPE. The clearest demonstrations of this principle in operation come from cross ashi garami situations, where the second leg can be bound up to totally negate an opponent’s defensive options and create a quasi pin that rivals even the best conventional pins for control over movement. When my students began using this approach, observers were amazed to see them totally controlling even very talented opponents for long periods of time before finishing. Note that double trouble is a principle - NOT A MOVE - thus it can be applied in many situations and in many different ways. Making it a core element of your leg game will greatly increase your control over struggling opponents and make for more high percentage finishes. Here, Garry Tonon completely ties up the great Shinya Aoki, widely regarded as a master of leg locks himself, in a way that completely negated his ability to defend himself and enabled Mr Tonon to win via heel hook variation soon afterward.

Jiu Jitsu Takedowns: There are many styles of grappling, each has a rule set that encourages certain types of behavior and discourages others. In Judo, primacy is given to takedowns and throws above all else. A well executed throw can end the match at any time. In international styles of wrestling, throws and takedowns are graded by their AMPLITUDE. The bigger the throw, the more points it scores. There is a definite sense then, that in Judo and wrestling, amplitude is the desiderata of throws. Moreover, though it is possible to win Judo and Wrestling mostly on the ground, it is very difficult to envision a great champion in either sport who completely lacked skills in throws or takedowns. Jiu Jitsu on the other hand, looks at takedowns very differently. They score relatively low points and never end a match. Moreover there are many champions who went their entire career with virtually no takedown skills. Even for those who do study takedowns, the spirit in which they are trained and applied is very different from other grappling sports. In jiu jitsu, the key idea behind takedown training is not AMPLITUDE, since all takedowns get the same score regardless of how high or low the amplitude exhibited; rather, in jiu jitsu THE WORTH OF A TAKEDOWN IS ALWAYS ASSESSED BY ITS AFTERMATH. The question is always, WHERE DID YOU END UP AFTER THE TAKEDOWN? Takedowns in jiu jitsu are never seen as and end in themselves, but only as a precursor to ground grappling - so the END RESULT of the takedown is a bigger concern than the takedown itself. It is no good applying a beautiful drop seoi nage throw if it results in your opponent immediately taking your back once you land. Your takedown can score a maximum of two points, while his back control scores four and now your are fighting for survival. As such the spirit of training takedowns in jiu jitsu needs considerable modifications from other grappling arts. Here, former US Judo National champion and double Judo/Jiu Jitsu blackbelt, Garry St-Leger @gstleger shows the Judo ideal of an ippon throw with projection and amplitude in competition. Learning to adapt these skills into a jiu jitsu context is a fascinating study.

Tightness: A crucial concept to understand in jiu jitsu and submission grappling is that of tightness. Once a lock is put in place, it is crucial that there be sufficient tightness that an opponent cannot easily pull out (unless you are deliberately employing a tactic to allow him out to set up another move). The problem is that most people always use MUSCULAR tightness as the means of tightening a lock. Muscular tightness is tiring to maintain and usually inhibits movement. A much better sense of tightness to aspire to is MECHANICAL tightness, where my primary focus is upon a tight fit of my body into that of my opponent. In this way, BODY PLACEMENT AND POSITIONING create tightness around a lock rather than muscular exertion. The only degree of muscular exertion i need is that required to hold my body as a system of WEDGES AROUND THE PART OF MY OPPONENTS BODY THAT I AM TRYING TO IMMOBILIZE AND CONTROL. Here, Garry Tonon shows good mechanical tightness as he enters a juji gatame arm lock from bottom position. By using only enough muscular exertion to maintain his body position, he can maintain the lock for long periods of time without exhaustion and if necessary, move smoothly in response to his opponents defense. Learning to differentiate muscular tightness from mechanical tightness is one of the biggest conceptual steps students can make in their path to excellence.

Jake Shields gets another win: MMA superstar Jake Shields shows once again that he is one of the very few MMA fighters who can hang with elite grapplers in grappling competition today. Last night at Fight2Win he took on Australian grappling icon Kit Dale and took a hard fought decision victory due to use of guillotine and leg lock attacks to win a tight decision. Great to see an athlete take on new skills that he works so hard on with the squad every day getting him great results. People often say to me that they find it difficult to learn new skills on an already established game - I always believed this is a self imposed limitation. If you had the ability to learn one set of skills, why should you find it difficult to learn a new set? The surest way to prevent yourself doing anything is to tell yourself you can’t do it. Mr Shields walked into the gym, saw something he wanted to learn and got down to the business of learning it, never questioning whether he would be able to do so, and last night that can do attitude won him a match.

The return of the Wolverine: The next EBI event in California will feature the return to top level competition of Eddie Cummings - two time EBI champion at featherweight. Mr Cummings is one of my most brilliant and innovative students. He has been working hard the past one and half years developing his own emerging brand of submission grappling with his partner Ottavia Bourdian/Busia. Next weekend you will get a chance to see that hard work in action on stage at one of the most high profile submissions tournaments - EBI - the tournament format that really gave birth to the squad and helped establish them as a force. Watching Mr Cummings today he looked as sharp as a knife - look for some new and exciting elements to his growing game! Of all my students, Mr Cummings always had the game that most closely resembles my own - a game based upon grip and kuzushi (off balancing) from bottom position and then feeding into attacks in combination starting at the legs and then following wherever the action goes - that always makes it a special pleasure for me to watch. Can’t wait to see the Wolverine tear it up again in the format that I believe best suits his style in a weight division that he is made for! Keep your eyes on this @ebiofficial one! Feb 17 in LA at @musclepharm MusclepharmHQ. Once Mr Cummings gets to grips, the action comes on fast!

What will your jiu jitsu look like? One of the most obvious features of jiu jitsu as a sport is the tremendous variation among the many top players as they work for supremacy. It is very clear that there is no one body type, psychology or style that dominates the sport. Rather, we see many very different athletes exercise their unique individuality to get to the top. A natural question to ask is - WHAT WILL MY GAME LOOK LIKE? We all want a sense of identity within the sport. Realize this: your game will be a r reflection of many factors, but three will have the greatest effect. Your BODY TYPE, PERSONALITY and COACHING LINEAGE will be the biggest influences in building who you are as you mature within the sport. We all need to learn the fundamentals and they don’t change much from athlete to athlete, but once you go beyond that into more advanced elements, you will be actively CHOOSING which techniques you will focus upon. Your body type will play a heavy role in those choices. You will also be choosing how you actually apply them (in an aggressive proactive fashion vs a passive reactive fashion for example) and your personality will play a massive role here. The third decisive element is the influence of your various coaches and role models. They have their respective strengths and weaknesses and will teach accordingly, obviously doing a better job with their strengths. This will filter through naturally to the students. These three influences, your body type, personality and teachers, will be responsible for most of the choices you make as you build a game that is an expression of who you are. It would seem that two of the influences, body type and personality, are internal, whilst the third, coaches, are external, but really even the third is internal, since it is an act of choice who we select to stay with as a student. When students ask me what directions they ought to take their game, I always counsel them to relax and let their body type and personality make the decisions for them over time. It will happen organically over time without the need for prompting Photo by @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

The principle of concentration of force: One of the founding principles of all modes of combat, jiu jitsu included, is that of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE. The idea is that I want to take a large percentage of my total strength and apply it upon a a specific target that (A) has a high kinesiological value - if it were damaged the opponent would find if very difficult or even impossible to continue fighting, and (B) represents a small percentage of my opponents total strength. So for example, in the case of a well applied ashi garami, both my legs, my entire posterior and anterior chains of force and both arms are committed against one of my opponents legs. I don’t care how much bigger and stronger my opponent may be than me - it will never be the case that one of his legs is stronger than almost my entire body (if it is, then you should be using large caliber handguns against him, not heel hooks! 😂) The main target of the attack, the knee, obviously has great kinesiological value - once broken it is very difficult indeed to keep fighting effectively - at the very least your combat effectiveness will be severely degraded once it is broken. ANY COMBAT METHOD WHICH MAKES CLAIMS TO EFFICIENCY AND AN ABILITY TO OVERCOME BIGGER AND STRONGER OPPONENTS, MUST MAKE USE OF THE PRINCIPLE OF CONCENTRATION OF FORCE. As a student of jiu jitsu YOU MUST MAKE A LIFELONG COMMITMENT TO THE PRINCIPLE AND A DEEP STUDY OF HOW TO APPLY IT IN PRACTICAL WAYS. The first step on the martial arts journey is recognition of this principle - every subsequent step is simply a further articulation of it. Recognize it and live by it.

Coaching memories - Georges St-Pierre’s first lesson at TUF: The twelfth season of the Ultimate Fighter TV show featured Georges St-Pierre against the very tough and dangerous Josh Koscheck. It would be filmed over six weeks in Las Vegas - the longest time I ever left the Renzo Gracie Academy for. Due to prior commitments, none of Georges other coaching staff of that time could stay for more than a few days, so Mr St-Pierre and I stayed the whole six weeks and split training into standing position and ground where he taught the former and I taught the latter. We had to go against one of the most successful MMA organizations in the world - Team AKA. When the smoke cleared we amassed a victorious record of 8-2 against them and both finalists were from our team. On the very first day of training with our team, Georges St-Pierre stepped up to teach the first class. The team was very excited to learn from arguably the greatest MMA fighter of all time and I was curious to see what he would begin with, as we knew very little about our new students - would he begin with the essentials of stance, motion and jab? Perhaps he might get fancy and show Superman punch set ups and combinations? Maybe strikes into takedowns? Mr St-Pierre surprised everyone, including myself, by starting with a lesson on classroom respect. He taught how to sit, stand, listen and ask questions while instruction was being made. Only then did he get into actual instruction of fighting techniques. We were all rather surprised by this. After class I talked to him about it. He said something I never forgot - only in a room that observes respectful decorum and has protocols for learning behavior is fast progress possible - until that basic necessity is satisfied, nothing else will have much value. I thought it was a beautiful lesson, certainly one that I shall not forget.

How would you do if you had to fight yourself? This is always an interesting hypothetical question - in the case of Georges St-Pierre and Jake Shields it is actually a practical question! I have never seen two athletes so closely matched in skill level, tactics, technique etc in ground grappling. When they spar each other the only difference I see is their appearance and accent - other than that - identical! It’s great to see Mr St-Pierre back in the gym despite his battle with ulcerative colitis. He has had to make considerable changes in his diet to lessen symptoms and still has to avoid certain modes of training, but his grappling looked great as he battled the squad and former rival and now good friend and grappling doppelgänger Jake Shields 😂😂. It impresses me so much to see two great athletes who have a legacy so strong that they could easily stop training altogether and live comfortably as legends, come into the gym everyday and battle the youngsters - giving all of them hell on the mats - an then laugh together after giving each other hell with identical games!

Hands: In every jiu jitsu match you will ever have, whether daily sparring in the gym or the biggest competition of your life - ALMOST ALL INTIAL CONTACT WITH YOUR OPPONENT IS WITH HANDS AND FEET. As such, I put a heavy emphasis on training hands and feet among my athletes. When people hear me say this, they usually assume I am talking about hand and foot STRENGTH, and assume we must do lots of strength work for our grip. I do believe that a strong grip is a good thing in jiu jitsu. Most world champions I have met and trained with had an impressive grip. What I really emphasize however, is hand PLACEMENT AND TACTICS. You can train grip strength for months and make only slight improvements and still run into problems of exhaustion and forearm fatigue - but just a few pointers in hand placement and tactics can make a massive difference in combat effectiveness in minutes. The most common problem I see among aspiring athletes is a tendency to GRIP AND HOLD rather than the much more desirable and effective GRIP AND ENTER. The idea is not hold people per se, but to hold them just long enough to enter into a planned attack. I have a respectable grip strength, but i could not expect to hold a resisting athlete of world championship caliber for more than a few seconds - that’s why developing a mindset of GRIP AND ENTER is so important for your development. Have an idea of what you want to attack with, ascertain what is an appropriate grip to get to that attack, then get the grip and enter. That is the pattern of hand training we usually work with.

Just the act of asking and attempting to answer this question will open your eyes to training methodologies and ideas - perhaps it will change you, perhaps it will make you more confident of what you already believe - but you have to ask and try to answer...

Jumping in: Squad junior Ethan Crelinsten walks around at one hundred and forty pounds. Two days ago he heard a local professional grappling tournament Show The Art Invitational, was having a big tournament at 170 pounds and needed an athlete. He immediately jumped in despite the size difference and today he won the whole event in brilliant fashion - winning all four matches via submission in regulation time (EBI) rules. Here he is relaxing after the show, counting his shekels and plotting his next move 😜 Sometimes a spontaneous test like this can do wonders for an athletes confidence.

Creating a leg lock system: When I first began work on leg locks it became clear that ashi garami Based locks were the most effective. Ashi garami is a generic term that simply means something like “entangled legs.” (An archaic version of it is even part of the old Kodokan Judo syllabus where is refers to one specific leg lock which is illegal in Judo competition) Really it refers to any situation where, at a minimum, TWO OF MY LEGS CONTROL ONE OF MY OPPONENTS LEGS. Because the the legs offer substantial means to control an opponent’s movement, they can be used as the basis of high percentage submissions. There were many different variations of ashi garami, each having its good and bad points. In time I came to believe that one of the most useful ways to help categorize and organize the system was to make a division between three main versions of ashi garami that controlled the legs in ways that were importantly different.
1 Straight ashi garami system
2 Cross ashi garami system
3 Reverse ashi garami Each of these three has a very different methodology of control and submission. As such, a big part of the ashi garami system is to see that really it is three distinct but linked systems embedded within an overall leg attack system. Within each of the three main ashi garami systems there are many different variations of leg entanglement and of course, it is important that one should be able to transfer at any given time between the three. A big part of effective system building comes from discerning the main methods of control and what directions they move towards. Then it is a matter of building infrastructure around those elements until you have effective solutions to the problems opponents create for you. Here, Gordon Ryan works on a variation of reverse ashi garami that leads into very effective attacks on both legs.

A theory of Mixed Martial Arts: For the longest time the sport of MMA has been misdescribed as an ECLECTIC sport. A means of fighting that is a mix of various sport martial arts such as Western boxing, Muay Thai, wrestling, jiu jitsu and others. This is to see MMA a patchwork of various styles sewn together. A much better way to understand it is to see it as four distinct skill sets
1 Shoot fighting: The skill of striking and takedowns in open position
2 Clinch fighting: The skill of striking and takedowns whilst locked in a standing clinch
3 Fence fighting: The skill of striking and takedowns whilst propped on the fence
4 Grapple fighting: The skill of striking, positional exchange and submission whilst on the ground. Each one of these skill sets derives much of its content from various sport martial arts. For example, ground fighting borrows much from jiu jitsu and wrestling, along with striking technique that can be derived from Muay Thai and boxing. It is crucial to understand however, the skill of ground fighting in MMA TRANSCENDS the various martial arts that form its base. Throwing elbows and punches on the ground is a very different action from doing so in standing positions and clinches, so the punches and striking strategy of boxing and Muay Thai must be greatly modified. Submission set ups may be derived from BJJ, but applying them in an MMA context will require extensive modifications. ONCE YOU START ADDING NEW ARTS AND SKILLS, THE OVERALL SKILL SET YOU ARE PRACTICING CHANGES DRAMATICALLY, UNTIL IT BECOMES A NEW, AUTONOMOUS SKILL THAT TRANSCENDS ITS VARIOUS SUBSIDIARY SKILLS AND IS ULTIMATELY QUITE DISTINCT FROM THEM. This is true in all four of the foundational skill areas of MMA. once you grasp this, you see MMA for what it is - AN AUTONOMOUS MARTIAL ART COMPRISED OF FOUR MAIN SKILL SETS, EACH OF WHICH IS HEAVILY INFLUENCED BY, YET DISTINCT FROM, ITS VARIOUS COMPONENT ARTS. Each of the four skill sets transcends and stands alone from the various arts that form its foundation. Getting this vision of MMA through to new fans of the sport will help them in understanding the nuances of the action and appreciate all four domains of the sport.

Senpai and kohai: One of the strongest elements of dojo instruction is the relationship between juniors and senior students. When i was beginning jiu jitsu I had three senpai, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All three were world champions and all three were wizards on the mat whose every training session was downright inspirational to us juniors. It is natural for any beginning student to doubt the effectiveness of the techniques he or she is shown. When you first learn them, they seem difficult and convoluted- impossible to perform on a resisting training partner, let alone an actual fight. More than anything else it is the senpai who create that confidence by providing everyday living proof of the effectiveness of the techniques by using them successfully with skill and elan upon the juniors and beginners. Nothing builds faith in technique better than having them used upon you in a way that makes you feel helpless. This, more than anything else, creates the belief that it works, that you want to possess it and that if someone else can get to that level, then so can you - the three most important beliefs a beginner needs. When i build a room, I invest heavily in instruction of the class senpai. They will always provide much of the backbone of the training rooms ability to create a tide in which all can rise. Here, Nicky Ryan, outstanding kohai, watches his senpai, Garry Tonon, go through his shoot boxing drills - watching, learning, getting inspired in ways that will boost his own performance tomorrow. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

I teach jiu jitsu backwards: Jiu Jitsu always occurs in a SEQUENCE. The most common sequence begins by taking the opponent to the ground, then getting past his dangerous legs, then working through a hierarchy of pins that put increasing pressure on the opponent; and then finally, using that pressure finish with a submission hold. Most teachers of the sport teach in a way that reflects that fundamental sequence. Usually I do too. Most of the early lessons concern getting people to the floor, getting past the legs and working through various pins. Submissions are taught as the end of a long chain of events - the icing on the cake as it were. As such, the majority of training time is spent ON THE PRECURSORS TO SUBMISSION. I think in a standard class this approach makes the most sense for a wide cross section of students. When an athlete comes to me with ambitions to be a champion however, I teach very differently. I BEGIN WITH THE END GAME - SUBMISSIONS. I put an extreme emphasis upon THE DARK ARTS OF BREAKING AND STRANGLING. I look to create a student who has tremendous confidence in their ability to finish an opponent should they be able to get into a finishing position. THIS CREATES A MINDSET IN THE STUDENT TO HUNT RUTHLESSLY AND PERSISTENTLY FOR SUBMISSIONS AT ALL TIMES. If a student does not truly believe they are capable of breaking or strangling an opponent, how hard do you think they will push for the finish in competition? But if they truly believe they can finish anyone given the chance, THEY WILL FIND A WAY TO GET TO A FINISHING POSITION OR DIE TRYING. This creates a very different type of athlete, with a very different mindset and approach to the game. Rather than see submissions as an afterthought to a sequence, try to see them as the very soul of our sport and adjust your training regimen accordingly, even if just for a time - I am certain you will find it a fascinating and rewarding change.

Jiu Jitsu and humor: Anyone who has trained for even a short length of time in jiu jitsu or any other combat sport will tell you that sometimes the grind can be rather taxing. All combat sports have a high attrition rate - jiu jitsu is no exception. I find that humor is probably the single best means of students bonding together and with their teacher. When I teach, I try to use humor as a means of making an important point memorable. We tend to remember something that made us laugh. I also like to see students joking about the game, themselves and each other after class - that’s usually a healthy sign that they are getting along well and building the camaraderie that is essential to a long lasting and unified room. Visitors are quite often shocked at the constant pranks, off color jokes, teasing and taunting that we engage in after class - almost nothing is off limits. Of course this is a serious game where the success is measured in the capacity to break peoples limbs and strangle them in a highly competitive setting - so during training time it has to be all business. Finding the compromise between work and fun takes time and varies from gym to gym. The value of humor to make important information memorable and to build camaraderie cannot be underestimated - but too, the danger of letting a room descend into a clownish atmosphere that can kill progress cannot be underestimated. Ultimately you will have to judge whether you have gotten the balance right by the results of the students and there retention of information and their willingness to stay in the program. When students think of their training as a fascinating, frustrating puzzle to be solved that improves them and their lives in a way that few others can, and brings a smile to their face when friends and acquaintances ask them about why they train - then you have probably found the right balance. Photo @stephaniedrewsphotography

Any given Monday: Teaching the big Monday afternoon class at RGA is always a source of joy and pride to me. It began mostly as a no gi grappling class that had a strong element of MMA ground skills woven in. On any given Monday you could see a large number of MMA athletes mixed with jiu jitsu players working their skills in the floor. One day ace jiu jitsu photographer Luca Atalla was taking pictures at caught this fairly typical scene from years ago - Georges St-Pierre, the great Roger Gracie, Romulo Barral, Gregor Gracie, a VERY young looking Garry Tonon and his mentor Tom DeBlass, along with Shawn Williams and my dear Sensei Renzo Gracie, surrounded by sixty other people in the room. Everyone was getting ready for upcoming matches - some MMA (if I remember correctly this was prior to St-Pierre/Condit) some jiu jitsu - but it is great looking at these old images of the titanic wars that were fought every Monday as the athletes fought towards their goals. It has been my privilege over the years to watch so many of the greatest jiu jitsu and MMA athletes test the ideas and concepts I teach and give the best possible feedback that made it easy for me to see what was working, what was not, what could be improved and what should be abandoned. I could not have had a better group of people over two decades to develop ideas and theories and test them in such a harsh proving ground.

Teaching via heuristics: When I teach I try hard to find a satisfactory compromise between precise details, which are necessary for efficient application of techniques; and HEURISTICS - general “rules of thumb” that give the athlete a broad insight that guides the DIRECTION of their techniques. For example, I could sit in front of you all day and teach a thousand details on variations of ashi garami. Some would be of great value, many would have less value. However, none will have as much immediate value to you as a general heuristic that points you in the right direction in the overwhelming majority of applications and is simple enough to learn once and you will never forget it, you can use it tomorrow and it will never let you down. So if I say, “The athlete whose feet dominate the inside position will always dominate the ashi garami game,” this is a simple heuristic that I push upon all my athletes and which guides so much of their behavior in a simple and memorable way that can guide them for a lifetime. Of course, the heuristic must be backed up by technical details and a training program - but it’s the fundamental insight that can change more than behavior- it can change your way of thinking about the leg game and get you thinking independently about where to go from there. Here, Nicky Ryan shows the benefits of good inside positioning, a skill at which he excels, as he enters a variation of ashi garami in a tough session at RGA.

The four mechanical pillars upon which my approach to jiu jitsu is Based: A huge part of my approach to jiu jitsu is based around what I believe are the four most important mechanical underpinnings of the sport. These are
1 - The principle of LEVER AND FULCRUM
2 - The principle of the WEDGE (inclined plane)
3 - The principle of DIRECTIONALITY OF FORCE
4 - The principle of KUZUSHI (off balancing) Through the lens of these four mechanical principles I see most of the sport of jiu jitsu. Everything I teach, every question I ask, and every answer I offer, will make reference to at least one of these principles. Lever and fulcrum are widely talked about. They are force multipliers that can make the weakest man strong. Wedges are used to immobilize and inhibit or direct movement (among other things) - think of a humble little door stop that can hold any door open even in a hurricane. With regards your own force, a fundamental measure of its efficiency and effect will be the degree to which you apply the force in the appropriate direction. So often we apply large amounts of force in the wrong directions, when a much smaller force in the right direction would have garnered much better results. Kuzushi (off balancing) refers to our capacity to move an objects center of gravity beyond its base of support and destabilize it to create openings for attack. Kano wisely saw the value of this in standing positions. One of my biggest goals is to extend its use into bottom position ground grappling where it can play a tremendous role in advancing our bottom game. I teach jiu jitsu as a primarily mechanical enterprise, backed up by biomechanical and tactical elements. In the future I will talk more about these critical notions. Show me any move in the sport and I will show you how at least three of these four concepts are involved in its operation. Once you learn to observe the sport through these concepts you will see a very different sport indeed. Three of these four mechanical underpinnings have been widely discussed for generations - but the principle of the WEDGE has never been emphasized in jiu jitsu. One of my primary goals as a teacher is to change this.

Techniques and principles: The underlying PRINCIPLES of jiu jitsu (and indeed, all combat sports) are as fixed and unyielding as the night sky, rooted as they are, in the unchanging strengths and weaknesses of the mind and physical body of man. The TECHNIQUES of jiu jitsu, on the other hand, change with the rapidity of the waters of a river, since they are the result of the restless minds of men, who endlessly seek out innovation, change and study in order to gain competitive advantage over each other. Excellence in jiu jitsu must always involve study of both. Once learned, the principles will provide the unmoving bedrock upon which your understanding of the sport will be based. Technique on the other hand, you will have to continually update and adapt as it evolves around you.

Doing time: Whenever you start of a new enterprise there is a period where you have to start off at the bottom and “take your lumps.” A well run and progressive training program can shorten this time, but can never eliminate it. It is up to the athlete to work through it as long as necessary until his or her stint is over. I see this all the time, even in grappling. We all want new skills, but they don’t come overnight. There has to be several attributes in the athlete if he or she is to get through the frustration of the early learning process. First, patience, Second, resilience and third, faith. Patience to let time work it’s magic, resilience to take the early knocks and go the distance required, and faith that a program will create in time the changes needed to take you to your goals. All of us have to do our time. Not just at white belt, but every time we incorporate new techniques and tactics into our game. That ability to endure these times is the key to progress. Here, Garry Tonon does his time just a couple of months into MMA training with the formidable Jake Shields. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Ryan brothers getting recognition: This weekend the Flograppling awards for 2017 were announced. Squad standouts, Gordon and Nicky Ryan were rewarded for an outstanding year. Nicky Ryan won juvenile grappler of the year after double bronze at USA ADCC senior trials and going on to be the youngest entrant in the history of ADCC world championships at just sixteen years of age. Big brother Gordon Ryan won the award for best no gi submission of the year with his superlative guillotine variation upon the great Keenan Cornelius to win ADCC gold as part of the biggest medal haul in a debut performance in the history of the event. We are all so proud of these two brothers and deeply impressed by the dedication and hard work they put in to get these awards. Interestingly, RGA had two nominations for juvenile of the year. Fellow sixteen year old phenom, Rayron Gracie was also nominated. My sensei, Renzo Gracie, and I are very happy indeed to see the future of the academy so strongly represented by these two outstanding youngsters.

Rash guards - Part 2: Now it’s time for a rash guard story that may change the minds of some of the vast numbers of rash guard doubters out there...I am an admirer of the great MMA fighter Jose Aldo - any time he fights, I’m watching. The night he fought Uriah Faber, I wanted to see it. I don’t own a television, so I suggested to a bunch of my students that we go to a sports bar on the upper east side of Manhattan and watch it live and watch the great man at work. As always, I was running a little late and came in wearing my usual attire and began looking around for our table. Now my students and I actively seek out every opportunity to prank/ridicule/make fun of each other, my general weirdness gives them lots of raw material to work with! The entire group of them had dressed in rash guards and Fanny packs! As I sat down there was a noticeable look from pretty much the entire bar as they all simultaneously asked the question, “who the f**k are these dorks and why are they dressed in those gimp outfits?” We all started laughing and started to watch the show. Out of nowhere groups of women started coming up to our table and asking who we were and why were we dressed like that? Were we a sports team? Cyclists? Triathletes? Lunatics? Morons? Suddenly our table was neck deep in curious babes and hotties and the Jose Aldo fight was completely forgotten 😂😂Every single one of my students got multiple phone numbers and action out of that escapade! (I was the only failure 😞😒😂😂) The dudes at the bar were furious and could not understand how a bunch of dorks in wet suits who looked like they had beamed down from the deck of the starship Enterprise had gotten all the female attention 😂😂 So, who knows...maybe you doubters ought to give it a try...my rash guard system worked as well for my students as my leg lock system...perhaps it can work for you too! 😂😂

Rash guards: Part 1: Arguably the question i am asked more than any other has nothing to do with jiu jitsu. “Why do you always wear a rashguard?” First let me dispel a commonly voiced, but incorrect theory. It has nothing to do with fighting or being ready for fights. In my current physical state, an aggressive five year old could easily defeat me with a simple kick to the knee or hip or even a push - a rash guard isn’t going to save me! My reasons are purely practical. First, they are very comfortable, Second, they are easily washed and dried. Third, they are extremely low maintenance/wrinkle free/easily packed for travel etc. Fourth, being a low friction material, they are well adapted for wear under a jacket. Fifth, They enable me to comfortably demonstrate a technique in impromptu social situations to students. Sixth, they are warm in cold weather, yet cooling in hot summers due to wicking effects, and; if caught in rainstorm, they will dry in minutes even while being worn. Seventh, some clothing companies sponsor and support my athletes. I am proud to represent any company that supports my people. Eight, they are free as clothing companies are happy to see me wear their products. Nine, there is considerable variation in rashguard design that can vary from informal daily wear to more formal wear for dates/occasions. When it comes to comfort and utility and low maintenance, I have never seen an attire that can beat track pants, sneakers, rash guard and fanny pack. If i find something more comfortable in the future i will switch to that. It may not be aesthetically pleasing, but I am already rather ugly and odd looking so I don’t even bother with clothing aesthetics as my looks are a lost cause - if I had to rely on looks and charm for anything in my life I would be a homeless beggar already 😂😂.

A night at the boxing show with Mr Freddie Roach and his assistant Marie Spivey: Enjoying some boxing at Barclay center in Brooklyn NY. Always a pleasure to catch up with Mr Roach and listen to the fight wisdom that comes with decades in his craft at the very highest levels. Such a fascinating experience to hear his insight on boxing technique vs the demands of MMA. My privilege to watch great athletes up close through the lens of a truly great coach.

New directions...new skills: Garry Tonon goes through his MMA sparring with @gstleger It’s never an easy transition for a great single discipline athlete to transition mid career to MMA. The sudden influx of new skills can be overwhelming physically and daunting mentally. Elite athletes are well aware of what good athletic performance feels like in their own discipline, so to begin at white belt in three or four new disciplines can be very unsettling - they feel very strongly the contrast between their high skill level in their established domain and their lack of skills in the new areas. Ultimately however, one has to strive to move forward and believe that time and training will work their magic just as it did when they first began. In the end it’s a healthy reminder that we are all white belts in most areas of life and that the general spirit and desire for learning is more important than any knowledge we may have stumbled upon thus far. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Make it memorable - the fundamental problem of teaching in jiu jitsu: The main concern of most teachers in jiujitsu is the information they GIVE to their students - how much, how complex etc. The study of jiu jitsu is never about how much information you TAKE IN - it is about how much you will be able to RECALL and use under severe stress. RETENTION, NOT OUTPUT, IS THE CENTRAL PROBLEM OF JIU JITSU INSTRUCTION. As such, we need effective methods of improving students ability to recall the large amounts of information we churn out. The most important method will always be the most basic - simple repetition. There are others however, that I find very effective. One of my favorites is the QUESTION AND ANSWER method. When students are spoon fed information they are not actively engaged in the learning process and tend to see themselves in a passive role that quickly leads to inattention, boredom and inability to recall what was taught. Whenever I can, I try to make the student part of the lesson through engaging them in question and answer dialogue where they have to WORK towards an answer. This creates independent and innovative problem solvers rather than robotic followers. It also creates a strong memory association with the learning experience that greatly aids retention. The teacher guides the discussion by asking questions that lead the student in a given direction and the student works for the answers. This leads to a cycle of curiosity, frustration, insight and satisfaction that engages the student and creates a learning process and answers that are both memorable and beneficial - one day the student will be able to put HIMSELF through that cycle and think autonomously. Things we are given for free we attach only small value to. Those things we work for, we value and cherish - this applies to knowledge as well. Photo @stephaniedrewsphotography

THE THREE GREAT KEYS TO COMBAT: Of all the activities that humans can partake in, none is more chaotic and unpredictable than fighting. THE WHOLE PURPOSE OF MARTIAL ARTS IS TO USE KNOWLEDGE AND TRAINING TO CONTROL THE OUTCOME OF COMBAT - TO CONTROL CHAOS. The history of combat sports clearly show that there are definite limits in our ability to do this. IN A WORLD OF UNCERTAINTY THE BEST WE CAN DO IS TO STACK THE ODDS IN OUR FAVOR AS BEST WE CAN. When I coach, I constantly stress to my athletes the need to assert themselves in three critical aspects of combat sports that play a huge role in determining the probability of the outcome. The athlete who can control the DIRECTION of the fight, the PACE of a fight and control the SET UPS and precursors to the main moves used by both athletes will win the vast majority of the matches he or she enters. This a huge topic that cannot be addressed in an Instagram post, but I shall give a simplified example. Georges St-Pierre is a quintessential example of an athlete who career was built around the three general keys to combat. Mr St-Pierre almost always was able to immediately dictate the most basic direction of a fight. If he wanted it on the floor he could put it there at will with his double leg. If he wanted it to remain standing, he was notoriously difficult to take down and hold down. With regards pace, he was always capable of slowing a match on the fence and tiring a dangerous puncher there. He could always return to center octagon and increase speed and generate movement that would set up double legs in the open. With regards set ups, in standing position, he had a complete arsenal of feints, misdirections, jabs and linked Superman punches that enabled him to use his king weapon, the double leg. On the floor he had an elaborate collection of protocols and striking from guard that created pressure to set up his Queen weapon, strong striking allied to guard passing that led either to submission,TKO or a dominance that won the round. In the chaos of fighting, we can never fully determine the outcome, but devoting your time to the study of these three key aspects of combat will always give you your best chance

Joe Rogan and I finish up podcast on various jiu jitsu and MMA related themes in LA. Afterwards, Mr Rogan demonstrated some fascinating thoughts on the use of lead leg and turning side kicks for MMA showing very impressive power and speed. I really believe that the influence Mr Rogan is one of the main reasons why ground fighting is still a big part of UFC events. In an age where most fans just want to see two fighters work in standing position, he constantly encourages and educates fans on the value of ground fighting. As such he has done a huge service to the sport and jiu jitsu. It was a pleasure to talk with him today. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Meanwhile, back in New York...The squad kohai (Juniors) went on a rampage this weekend at the Rise Invitational Grappling competition last night. My great friend and Renzo Gracie alumni, Matt Serra has a very talented student, Jason Rau, who he sent to train with us. Mr Rau has worked hard to become one of the best in the room and last night defeated 10th Planet standout, Jon “Thor” Blank via submission (sankaku/ triangle variation). In addition, Frank Rosenthal showcased his rapid improvement by winning gold in the event 8 man tournament that featured EBI standouts JM Holland from 10th Planet and Mike Davila. Mr Rosenthal defeated Mr Davila via strangle in the final to take first place. Stanley Rosa from @bxmartialarts also won in a fine display from these talented young men. Great to see their hard work and drive being converted into shekels, notoriety and medals!

Teaching in LA: I went over some of the core principles of our leg locking system at @dynamixmma in Santa Monica today. They did a great job of hosting, bringing in almost ninety people who bravely put up with my foul language and rough manner and overall horribleness. Here I demonstrate the delicate interplay between upper body and lower body forces that are required for maximum effect. When this is done well a staggering amount of force can be brought to bear upon the knee and ankle, even with one hand as I demonstrate here. Tomorrow it’s on to my great friend and fellow Renzo Gracie Alumni, @5starmartialarts Shawn Williams for more jiu jitsu adventures. Wishing you all the best from sunny California!

Danaher airport curse continues...my amazing ability to somehow screw up anything involving air travel continued today. I taught all day and got ready to go to JFK. As soon as I left RGA and massive rainstorm broke out just as everyone went to leave work - massive traffic jams of New Yorkers fleeing the city for the weekend but bombarded in winter rain storm - perfect 😖😖😖 Trying to run to the departure gate on a crippled leg dragging a bag full of rashguards while soaking wet always makes for a pleasant preflight experience 😂😂 No problem - second last person on the plane! (I beat a giant fat dude who was breathing like Darth Vader) Looking forward to LA weather and teaching out West! 😊😊 See you all soon!

Story time: The Renzo Gracie Academy has been a center of jiu jitsu training for almost twenty five years in NYC. In that time so much has happened, so much has changed and so much more to be done. Luca Atalla of Gracie Magazine took time to interview me with regards the early days of the academy, Mr Gracie’s approach to teaching and why he produced such a list of champions. I also talk about teaching the MMA athletes who came to the academy to work on ground skills, the early days of the squad and other subjects. In time these should be released @gallerrapp and renzogracie.com. Lots of cherished memories and a great cast of characters!

Seminar in LA: This weekend I will be in Los Angeles teaching a seminar at Dynamixmma in Santa Monica at 4pm with friends Antoni Hardonk and Josh Fiore. Always a pleasure to get out West and show our methods. Also I will stop by my great friend, Shawn Williams 5Star martial arts academy on Sunday to teach, then on Monday talk to Mr Joe Rogan and friends on his podcast. Should be a busy but fun weekend!

The essential nature of jiu jitsu is control leading to submission. All the various forms of control have a common theme - to restrict, stop and direct movement. Ultimately your goal is to make an opponent’s own body unable to respond to the commands and wishes of his mind and thus, to make your mind master of his body. Then you have true control.

I am very happy to say that next Monday (15th January) I shall join Joe Rogan on his weekly podcast discussing jiu jitsu and the squad along with other topics. Mr Rogan is a great student of the game and very adept at 10th Planet style jiu jitsu as well as more conventional styles of jiu jitsu. He is a great voice for the sport who has done a tremendous job of trying to educate MMA viewers of the subtleties of all forms of jiu jitsu and grappling (not just 10th Planet, as some claim) in UFC competition. Once I was at a dinner and was asked who I believed was the most influential person in jiu jitsu. I surprised everyone by answering that it was probably Joe Rogan. My reasoning was that he talks to a larger audience than anyone and does so with a passion that has probably brought more people to the sport than any athlete. It will be a pleasure to talk with him and friends about the game.

Facing your challenges and fears: A huge part of the martial arts journey is bound up with the notion of confronting and overcoming tough challenges and deep fears. The very nature of martial arts is that of dealing with confrontation, conflict and violence. Any kind of confrontation is likely to create some level of fear response to it. The question is - how will you deal with it? I have seen myriad ways in which different athletes have overcome anxieties to win, so many in fact, that I don’t believe there is any one right way to do it. It will come down to individual preferences. I have always found however, that one approach always seems to help in those times where fear, doubt and anxiety threatens to inhibit your performance and prevent you getting to your goals. YOU MUST AVOID THE TWO PITFALLS THAT COMPOUND FEAR AND ANXIETY AND WHICH LEAD TO INDECISION AND PARALYSIS IN THOSE CRITICAL TIMES WHEN DECISIVE AND WELL DIRECTED ACTION ARE NECESSARY. These are INACTIVITY and INDECISION. Show me a man feeling fear before a major event who is inactive and lacking any plan of action once the event begins, and I will show you a man WHOSE FEAR LEVELS INCREASE WITH EVERY PASSING MINUTE as the deadline approaches. THE SUREST WAY TO RELIEVE ANXIETY IS TO HAVE A CLEAR PLAN OF OPERATIONS AS TO WHAT YOU WANT TO DO AND BE ACTIVE IN YOUR PREPARATION TO ENACT THAT PLAN. In all my years of coaching, I have seen every kind of psychological counseling, visualization, hypnosis etc. I HAVE NEVER SEEN A BETTER ANTIDOTE TO ANXIETY THAN INTELLIGENTLY DIRECTED ACTIVITY. Let planning and activity be your sword and shield whenever fear and anxiety threaten to overwhelm your ability to perform. When you are alone with your fears, they will be your guardians.

Two forms of grappling aggression: There are two primary forms of aggression/attack in grappling - SUBMISSION and POSITION. Interestingly, THE THREAT OF EACH IS MAXIMIZED ONLY WHEN YOU THREATEN BOTH EQUALLY. The squad is primarily known for our heavy emphasis on submission attacks, but we never overlook the need for constant and strong positional attacks at the same time; FOR ONLY WHEN THERE IS A DUAL THREAT TO PROVOKE STRONG DEFENSIVE REACTIONS WILL THE OPPORTUNITY FOR SUBMISSIONS ARISE. Conversely, ONLY WHEN THERE IS A DANGER OF SUBMISSIONS WILL IT BE EASIER TO WORK YOUR WAY TO BETTER POSITIONS. This constant interplay between position and submission AT ALL TIMES, rather than only positional attacks first, and then submission attacks, is a distinctive feature of our game. Most people use the position/submission duality as a SEQUENCE position first, then submission). We like to do this also, but often use it as a DILEMMA (threaten both at all times to make each easier to attain). Here, Garry Tonon applies strong passing positional pressure to open up a submission opportunity on the legs that would take him to victory in this match.

There are three things in which I have total faith and upon which I have built my career. The laws of physics, the ability of a well constructed and rational training program to improve performance in a given task so that over time people can overcome obstacles and fears and get to their goals; and the ability of a few highly motivated and skilled people to create change across an entire population of people. In a world of doubt and uncertainty I would stake my life upon these.

Relaxation, tension and body geometry: A huge part of your success or failure in grappling will come down to your ability to control your opponent’s movements by FITTING THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF HIS in ways that MAXIMIZE CONTACT AND CONNECTION and thus inhibit movement through CONNECTION RATHER THAN MUSCULAR STRENGTH. The insight you must gain is that THE ONLY WAY TO MOLD YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR OPPONENT’S BODY IS TO RELAX AND SOFTEN YOUR OWN BODY. However, the only way to KEEP yourself locked into that position is to tighten yourself. Thus you must play the same delicate balancing act between relaxation and tension that a python does when it wraps around its prey. YOU MUST BE SOFT WHEN MOVING TO FIT INTO YOUR OPPONENT, THEN TIGHTEN TO SOLIDIFY YOUR POSITION ONCE THERE. Often you will have to work in cycles of tension and relaxation to get the job done. Here, Gordon Ryan shows superb conformity to the shape of his opponent’s body - made possible by relaxation- but also tightness to hold himself once there against a very skilled opponent like Yuri Simoes as he patiently works towards a match winning strangle. Photo @banejitsu

HAPPY NEW YEAR FROM THE SQUAD!! Hope we can put some uplifting moments into your jiu jitsu in 2018! Thank you all so much much for your interest and support for our approach to jiu jitsu! Wishing you all the best for tonight and next year! 🎆🎊🎆😊😜🤗🎆

In a sport where everyone is doing their best to keep moving forward and improve - just maintaining what you have been doing and remaining stationary is effectively moving backwards. Being content with your past successes is a guaranteed way to ensure future failures. Keep working hard as 2018 approaches. The techniques and tactics of our sport are limitless- it’s up to you to take advantage of that. Photo @banejitsu

Creating good habits: Training is designed to INSTILL GOOD/SOUND HABITS IN ATHLETES THAT BECOME SO INGRAINED IN THEIR THOUGHTS AND MOVEMENTS THAT THEY WILL MANIFEST THEMSELVES EVEN UNDER THE GREATEST PRESSURE. The path to building those habits is DAILY DRILLING. Drills are often rushed through, ignored, performed half heartedly or otherwise downplayed by students. Let me tell you this - WHEN YOU ARE TRUELY UNDER PRESSURE IN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP COMPETITION, YOU ARE EXHAUSTED, OUT OF IDEAS, CAN’T HEAR YOUR COACH ABOVE THE CROWD, YOUR OWN MIND SUGGESTING WAYS OUT TO QUIT WITH DIGNITY - THE ONLY FRIEND YOU WILL HAVE ON YOUR SIDE IS THE UNBREAKABLE HABITS BUILT OVER COUNTLESS HOURS OF DRILLING TO ACT CORRECTLY AND IN WAYS THAT TAKE YOU BACK TO THE PATH OF VICTORY. Don’t devalue them. Here, Nicky Ryan and Nick Ronan work on their daily ashi garami drills at Musclepharm HQ in LA in preparation for competition that saw both win in fine style by submission.

Double danger: All of us try constantly to improve our skills in the combat sports. Persistent, intelligently directed training will eventually create results and you will develop some weapons that will earn the respect of your training partners and opponents. However, if you want to further your success - ALWAYS LOOK TO DEVELOP WEAPONS THAT WORK AS COMPLIMENTARY PAIRS. The fundamental feature of real combat is RESISTANCE from your opponent as you fight for advantage and victory. It is critical that you have at least one strong complimentary pair of attacks so that as one attack runs into resistance it opens the door for the second attack. The way in which pairs of attacks can compliment each other is varied. Sometimes they compliment each other in terms of DIRECTION (forward and backwards or left/right for example). Sometimes they do it from one side of opponent’s body to another, or from lower body to upper body, so that as an opponent defends one he offers the other. One of the strongest complimentary pairs of attacks among my students was the jab/takedown pairing of Georges St-Pierre. He would use his jab to harass, frustrate, hurt and move opponents. If they did not fight back against it he would easily win the round, so opponents HAD to fire back in order not to fall behind on the scoreboard. The jab is a long range weapon, so that meant opponents typically had to CLOSE DISTANCE to fire back. However, their attempt to step forward and fire back put them in danger of the second complimentary weapon - the double leg takedown - a weapon that he had developed to an extraordinary degree. Mr St-Pierre also had well developed guard passing and ground striking skills that made time on the floor very hazardous for opponents. So they would have to struggle back up to their feet where the same cycle could be repeated until victory was attained. FINDING AND DEVELOPING A POWERFUL COMPLIMENTARY PAIR OF ATTACKS IS A BIG PART OF YOUR EARLY DEVELOPMENT IN THE SPORT. Only when your attacks come in complimentary pairs that take advantage of defensive reactions will you be able to break through the strong resistance you will encounter as you rise in level.

The first battle in any grappling match is the battle for grips: In any grappling bout, whether it be a friendly match in the gym among white belts or a titanic struggle in black belt world championships competition, is the battle to attain functional grips upon your opponent. The number one theme I also coach in this regard can be stated very simply - ALWAYS FIGHT FOR GRIPS WITH A PURPOSE AND A PLAN. So often I see people nonchalantly working for grips first and then try to figure out on the fly what they will do with those grips once they get them. THE IDEA IS TO KNOW WHAT YOU WANT TO DO FIRST SO THAT YOU KNOW WHAT GRIPS YOU WILL NEED TO BRING ABOUT THAT END. This will immediately give your grip fighting a purposeful and energetic feel that will make you stand out in a training room. Here, Gordon Ryan and Dillon Danis settle into position to begin fighting for grips in a hard fought, tactical match that prominently featured grip fighting and grip denial. Both athletes knew what they needed to win and what the other fellow needed to win and had a plan as to what grips they had to get and which they had to deny in order to get what they wanted. Much of high level competition is determined by the outcome of these grip battles. Photo @banejitsu

Back in NYC! Just touched down at JFK and get to renew my love/hate affair with New York - sub zero temperatures and a giant line for a cab filled with obnoxious New Yorkers (I fit right in)😖😖 Hey gang - training begins tomorrow 12pm gi and no gi down in the basement of despair, hope and learning! No rest for the wicked! Lots of material to work on - lots of goals and dreams to fight towards. See you all tomorrow 😊😊

Hard working problem solvers: People come to me all the time asking what kind of attributes they need to need to develop in order to excel in jiu jitsu. Conversely, they will also claim that they can never beat a certain opponent because they are possessed of a certain attribute that they cannot overcome. Thus do I get endless numbers of inquiries asking how to build certain attributes such as strength, speed,
Flexibility, mental toughness etc. etc. These attributes are all good and desirable and will definitely help your progress - BUT THEY ARE NOT THE ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES I LOOK FOR WHEN APPRAISING THE POTENTIAL OF A STUDENT. What I look for can be said in a single short sentence. I look for HARD WORKING PROBLEM SOLVERS. Nothing more, nothing less. When you look at a list of great world champions you will see tremendous variation in physical and mental attributes. BUT YOU WILL SEE TWO THINGS THEY ALL HAD IN COMMON - they worked harder and proved more adept at solving the problems in front of them in the time available than their opponents. How hard working you are is not some innate quality. I ACTUALLY DON’T BELIEVE ANYONE IS LAZY - JUST UNMOTIVATED. WHAT WE CALL LAZINESS IS SIMPLY A LACK OF PASSION IN THAT DOMAIN. (I shall write more about passion and laziness in future posts as I believe they are very important notions in our quest for improvement). As for problem solving, I think this is something we all find happiness in and we all have different ways of finding solutions. Look at the squad as an example. Eddie Cummings and myself come from a formal academic background and our problem solving methods reflect that, with a wordy, fine grained distinctions look to them. The Ryan brothers do not, and their methods of solving problems have a more practical/workshop look to them. Garry Tonon and Georges St-Pierre are somewhere in between - BUT ALL GOT OUTSTANDING RESULTS AND SOLVE THE PROBLEMS OF JIU JITSU WITH EQUAL EFFICACY- just in somewhat different ways. Work on your attributes- but don’t think they are the key to your success - realize that the keys are your capacity to work over time and solve the problems that arise as you work. Photo @banejitsu

Begin with denial: Most jiu jitsu athletes begin their matches with a clear sense of what their favorite moves are and how they want to employ them against their opponent. This is good, but I recommend you begin with something else first. BEGIN EVERY ENGAGEMENT WITH DENYING YOUR OPPONENT THE TOOLS HE NEEDS TO IMPOSE HIS GAME UPON YOU - ONLY THEN DO YOU WORK TO IMPOSE YOUR GAME UPON HIM. Any time both athletes are simultaneously working to implement their own moves, it immediately becomes a dog fight. Top tier athletes typically focus first on shutting down their opponents avenues of attack and only then switch to the positive act of launching their own attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan shuts down the dangerous open guard game of World champion Romulo Barral with his signature body lock. Once Mr Barral’s guard was sufficiently nullified, he switched to a positive passing game leading to a decisive strangle attack - a near perfect demonstration of the denial/impose sequence that is such a key feature of our approach to the passing positional game. Photo @banejitsu

SHOW ME A MAN OUT OF BALANCE AND I WILL SHOW YOU A MAN WHO IS OPEN TO ANY ATTACK YOU CHOOSE. Make your opponent’s BALANCE your primary focus - then you will have the luxury of CHOOSING which attack to follow with, rather than having to smash through your opponent’s full resistance when his balance is undisturbed.

The bicycle wheel: Students often come to me concerned that due to some circumstances in their life, be it injury, career, family/personal, they have to reduce training. Their concern is that with reductions in training time they will lose the skills they had worked so hard to develop. Don’t be concerned. Skills take tremendous work in order to be CREATED OR IMPROVED, but very little work in order to be MAINTAINED AT (OR CLOSE TO) THEIR CURRENT LEVEL. My friend, Jean Charles Skarbowsky, used a fine metaphor to express this idea. Remember when you were a child playing with a bicycle? You could prop the bicycle upside down and spin the front wheel with your hand. When you first began to spin the wheel, it took a fair amount of effort to get it spinning quickly - you had to overcome the inertia of the stationary wheel through effort. BUT ONCE THE WHEEL WAS SPINNING QUICKLY - YOU COULD EASILY KEEP IT MOVING AT SPEED BY PERIODICALLY BRUSHING THE WHEEL WITH A LIGHT TOUCH OF YOUR HAND. Realize this - YOUR PHYSICAL SKILLS WORK THE SAME WAY. Once they are well developed, even minimal efforts will maintain them close to their current level. Have faith that should life and circumstances take you in directions that mean you have to reduce training time - don’t despair. Just stay in the game to the degree that you keep most of what you worked so hard to gain. THE ONLY TIME I SEE PEOPLE DRASTICALLY LOSE SKILLS IS WHEN THEY COMPLETELY ABANDON THE GAME BOTH MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY. All the time I see athletes keep ninety percent of their skills with just minimal upkeep for extended periods of time. As soon as circumstances change favorably you can get back in the saddle very quickly and then devote the extra time and effort to making improvements and innovations- which require considerably more time and effort. Whenever training time gets compromised let the metaphor of the bicycle wheel be your guide.

Victories at No Gi world championships: The squad’s Canadian contingent had an outstanding performance at the No Gi world championships this weekend. Oliver Taza won the gold medal at lightweight brown belt and Ethan Crelinsten won a silver medal at light featherweight brown belt. Both athletes had a very high submission rate despite not being able to use the weapon we are most associated with - heel hooking. These two young men always impress me with the dedication they show to travel long distances to train with us and keep improving. This was the last big show of the year and to see their progress rewarded in this fashion is very gratifying. Thanks also to Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon for traveling out to the competition with them to corner and coach. This has been an amazing g year for Messrs Taza and Crelinsten- both had very strong performances at ADCC despite relative inexperience and now at the IBJJF world championships as well. Expect even more next year as they continue to train hard and make the technical and tactical progress needed to get to the next level of achievement.

Integrated systems: Earlier in the week I discussed a central theme of my approach to jiu jitsu - that we constantly seek to select isolated, high-value areas of the sport and build complex systems around them so that our athletes can have a significant knowledge advantage in that domain. If the athlete can maintain that domain and dominate the action within it - HE OR SHE WOULD BE SUCCESSFULLY CHANGING THE GAME FROM ONE WHERE PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES, WILL, YEARS OF EXPERIENCE ETC ETC DETERMINE THE OUTCOME; TO A SITUATION WHERE DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE DETERMINES THE OUTCOME. If the system itself is sound and the students application of it is better than his opponent’s ability to interfere with it - success will follow. Unfortunately the tremendous success that my students had with certain systems created the impression that all we did was invent some fancy systems in a few areas - legs and back - and that was the limit of their skills. This lead to many accusations of them being “one trick ponies” incapable of beating top level competitors with well rounded games. This year my students did a fine job of showing what our actual approach is, rather than the public perception. ALWAYS THE INTENT WAS TO CREATE DIFFERENT SYSTEMS THAT COVERED THE WHOLE BODY, NOT JUST SUBMISSIONS BUT POSITIONAL ATTACKS ALSO - AND THAT THESE SYSTEMS SHOULD BE INTEGRATED WITH EACH OTHER SO THAT FAILURE IN THE APPLICATION OF ONE WOULD LEAD TO OPPORTUNITIES TO EMPLOY ANOTHER UNTIL A COMPLETE BREAKTHROUGH WAS ACHIEVED. This use of INTEGRATED SYSTEMS is the real goal of all my students and the direction of my work in jiu jitsu. Here, Gordon Ryan uses the interface between our Kimura system and back attack system to work his attacks against the great Xande Ribeiro in a very tightly contested match in ADCC. Mr Ribeiro is doing a fine job of blocking two dangerous attacks at the same time. This kind of sustained multi directional pressure is what you must try to build towards in your training. Photo by @banejitsu

One of the most interesting moments of my jiu jitsu year was accompanying Gordon Ryan to his bout with Ralek Gracie at the legendary Gracie Academy in Torrance CA. After the bout, Rorion Gracie graciously showed us around the beautiful dojo, which features many historical artifacts and memorabilia and even a museum! It was fascinating to hear his perspective on the development and changes of the sport and his insights on the early history of Jiu Jitsu in America. When I first began jiu jitsu, Rorion was one of the chief figureheads of the sport. All my life I trained exclusively with my sensei, Renzo Gracie and had only very sporadic contact with Messrs Rorion, Royce, Rickson and Royler - Helio’s side of the first family. Most of the early jiu jitsu students in America will agree with me that early UFC’s and “Gracie’s in Action” were the major reasons why we got involved in the sport - Rorion was directly involved in both. It was an honor to see the man who had such a profound effect on the history and development of modern martial arts in his dojo. Of course any person who makes major change in the world will have his advocates and detractors - change will always thrill some, appall others and lead to green pastures for some and burnt bridges for others - but I know that I and many others owe him a great deal of gratitude from afar for his efforts to expand the sport and revolutionize modern martial arts. I sometimes wonder if I and many others would even have ever heard of jiu jitsu without his work. It was an honor to be able to show some of the new directions and talents of jiu jitsu in the home of one of the most important historical traditions of the sport.

Orientation, disorientation and control: A common feature of jiu jitsu sparring and matches is the degree to which athletes are put into very contorted positions whilst upside down, inverted, spinning around an axis etc. Usually these situations occur spontaneously and in a very short time frame. Often they are quite different from the usual moves we practice in the gym. In any extreme, uncontrolled scramble situation of this kind, it is vital that the athlete have a general sense of direction and a few key concepts in mind SO THAT THEY CAN CREATE ORDER OUT OF CHAOS AND STEER EVENTS IN THEIR FAVOR. So often I see students clamoring for endless details on a specific position. This is a good thing, but even better is the student who seeks to place the details in ORDER OF IMPORTANCE and focus primarily upon the most vital ones. In wild scrambles where your orientation is very different what you are used to and time is of essence, a few key concepts will be far more useful to you than a mountain of details. Here, Garry Tonon finds himself in a position, ashi garami, with which he is extremely familiar, but in an unusual manifestation - vertical with the foot uncontrolled. Focusing upon the main features of ashi garami control, he was able to rein in ADCC medalist Vagner Rocha and bring this unpromising situation back under control into a much more standard ashi garami so that just a few seconds after this photo was taken, his opponent was tapping in submission to a finely applied heel hook variation. Photo by @banejitsu

Integrated systems: Most of you know that a distinctive feature of my approach to jiu jitsu is to focus upon specific, easily attainable scenarios and build complex systems around them that enable an athlete to control that position and work towards submission. Because the system is very comprehensive it offers the athlete a tremendous KNOWLEDGE ADVANTAGE over his or her opponent in that specific domain which the opponent will find very problematic to deal with and overcome. Very often you will see my students making use of some of our more well known systems - back, front headlock, Kimura, juji gatame/sankaku, And ashi garami among many others. In truth however, ANY ONE SYSTEM CAN COME UP SHORT UNDER THE PRESSURE OF TOP LEVEL COMPETITION. It is of the first importance then, that athletes work towards the most important goal of my approach to jiu jitsu - THE INTEGRATION OF THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS SO THAT THE ATHLETE CAN APPLY PRESSURE WITH ONE, WITH THE ABILITY TO PASS SEAMLESSLY TO ANOTHER AND RENEW THE ATTACK UNTIL THE SUSTAINED PRESSURE BREAKS THROUGH RESISTANCE AND SUBMISSION IS ATTAINED. This INTEGRATED SYSTEMS APPROACH is what all my athletes strive towards. Here, outstanding apprentice (kohai), Nick Ronan shows superb integration of ashi garami and back systems to create extreme pressure on opponent, Mike Davila to get the breakthrough and submission in fine style at @kasaigrappling championships this weekend.

Aussie in Manhattan: Outstanding Australian Grappling star, Craig Jones came by the blue basement to train with the squad in the morning class today! When I was visiting family in Australia, Mr Jones’ gym in Melbourne was very welcoming when I taught a leg lock seminar - it was a pleasure to return the favor and host Mr Jones here in our town 😊 When squad members achieve notable wins we have a tradition of awarding them a finely made knife as we consider the blade the perfect metaphor for our life in jiu jitsu. In true Crocodile Dundee in NYC fashion, Mr Jones looked at the knife and deadpanned, “That’s not a knife...” 😂😂 A wave to all our Australian friends - Mr Jones is an amazing example to us all, Australian or otherwise, as to what can be achieved by dedicated, self starting individuals far away from the more well known centers of the sport.

Quest for improvement: I love the excitement of watching junior students working hard to catch up to the skills of the inspirational seniors and drive towards their goals and dreams. Jason Rau has been doing exactly that. This weekend he entered sapeteiro Invitational 185 pound division - despite being a 170 pound athlete- and took gold - winning every match by submission in regulation time. Mr Rau has a formidable arsenal of attacks that just keeps growing, but sankaku (triangle) and ashi garami Based attacks are his favorites. He used both to win the gold. In the finals he faced EBI standout Josh Hayden, who has a reputation as a strong leg locker and a very difficult person to leg lock. Mr Rau had no problems breaking through and getting the win via heel hook variation to take a fine victory. This all happened prior to the big Kasai show last night and it was inspiration to his team mate and great friend Nick Ronan, who got the good news and then went out on stage to win via strangle in his superfight with Mike Davila. A great weekend for these two friends and students of our approach. This constant quest for improvement is the heart and soul of jiu jitsu study. We all need a reason to get up and go every morning - without such a reason every step is an effort - but when you have a passion and goal every dawn is a renewed chance to get what you want and your feet feel light indeed.

Victory in New York City: Gordon Ryan capped off an incredible year in NYC tonight, defeating multi world champion and two time ADCC gold medalist Yuri Simoes by submission with just seconds left on the clock after a dominant display of reversals and guard passing pressure. This has been an amazing three weeks for Mr Ryan. In a three spree he defeated Ralek Gracie, won EBI 14 and defeated a two time ADCC champion in a weight division above him. Garry Tonon competed in the tournament and had some memorable moments in his characteristic style but did not want to play the point game that is required to win the format. Young gun Nick Ronan had a fine performance in the preliminaries- putting on a submission clinic on opponent Mike Davila culminating in a fine strangle from the back. It was great to be able to represent our style in our home town in Kasai grappling’s inaugural show. Hope you all enjoyed the event!

Working against resistance: Daily drilling of moves is a good thing, but only live sparring will get you proficient in your ultimate goal of being able to control and submit a fully resisting opponent who is trying their best to defeat you. The first line of resistance on the part of your opponent IS THEIR ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE WHAT YOU ARE ATTEMPTING TO DO TO THEM. Only when they make that recognition can they formulate a defense. A huge part of success in combat then, is TO DISGUISE YOUR REAL INTENT UNTIL THE LAST MOMENT. The best attacks typically begin with feints and misdirection that subvert your opponent’s ability to read and recognize your real intent. Once you have gained proficiency in the fundamental movements and skills of the sport - go further AND MAKE MISDIRECTION AND SUBTERFUGE YOUR PRIMARY SKILL. More than anything else, you will need this to break through knowledgeable resistance and bring about the ends you seek.

Kasai Grappling Championship: This weekend the squad will go out for the last time this year at the First Kasai professional grappling championship. Garry Tonon will enter the 170 pound tournament against some of the most talented Welterweights in the world, most of whom are world champions or ADCC veterans. Gordon Ryan will take on two time ADCC gold medalist and multi time BJJ world champion, Yuri Simoes. This a tremendous line up of talent for an inaugural event. The organizers have done an incredible job of getting the best athletes in a first class venue in a show with great production quality. Rich Byrnes and Rolles Gracie have assembled a tremendous team of experts and I am really looking forward to what may become one of the premier grappling organizations. The rule set is a great compromise between positional skills and submission skills that will reward purposeful action and punish passivity - a first period of submission only and then if no submission, a period with conventional points scoring to decide a winner. It’s wonderful to have in here in NYC - we normally have to travel to get to premier shows. The squad is working their way through the week getting prepared. Check out @kasaigrappling - it’s up to us as jiu jitsu fans and athletes to create the support that can give the athletes a forum to showcase the sport! Hope you all enjoy the show!

The remarkable Jake Shields wins again: With all the excitement of EBI 14 this weekend, we must not overlook the great achievement of Jake Shields in Submission Undergound Grappling. He took on outstanding jiu jitsu world champion Gilbert Burns in an EBI rules format and won a hard fought victory in overtime via riding time. Mr Shields is a fine example of an established athlete working hard to learn new skills at a time when most athletes are happy to just keep doing what they have done before. Every day he is in the gym working hard with the young killers. He is one of the very few MMA fighters in the world who can go with truly elite grapplers and win or at the very least, give them one hell of a test. His work ethic is an inspiration to the younger athletes and his great results a well deserved reward for his great efforts.

Victory in Texas: Gordon Ryan won his fourth EBI title tonight in Austin Texas in a tough tournament - winning three hard fought elimination matches and then a dramatic overtime finish against Australian grappling star Craig Jones. Mr Jones has had a breakout year with an outstanding performance in ADCC and now again in EBI 14. In a very memorable overtime, Mr Ryan had to use all his escape skills to break out of a tight juji gatame armlock. He was able to prevent his extended arm from going into hyperextension and then strangle Mr Jones in the next exchange. Two outstanding victories in two weeks for Mr Ryan - now it’s back to NYC on a 5:45am flight to NYC to resume teaching and training as Mr Ryan and Mr Tonon prepare for the Kasai grappling tournament in NYC next weekend! Thanks to Onnit Gym here in Austin for hosting a great EBI event. Also thanks to Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila for putting on another great EBI and giving all the athletes a great venue to express their skills in a thrilling format. Thanks to all our loyal fans for your support as the squad takes on all comers 😊Wishing you all the best in NYC - to my students in NYC - see you all tomorrow 😊

Training in Texas: The squad arrived in Austin, Texas and straight to workout room. Here we are in The Center for Veterans Of Foreign Wars - Post 8787 - Veterans Jiu Jitsu. It’s great to see a community center dedicated to Veterans of America’s armed forces and an honor to work out there. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan go through their submissions drills before EBI 14 tomorrow night and then afterwards Mr Tonon went through his MMA drills. Texas has its own unique charm. Now it’s back to the hotel to rest and hopefully watch a very exciting looking UFC card tonight. Wishing you all the best from Texas!

Victory in LA - Part 2: Big wins via submission by both Nicky Ryan and Eddie Cummings at Fight2Win Pro in LA tonight! Both wins were via strangulation from the back after reversals from bottom position. Nicky Ryan, just sixteen years old and recent purple belt defeated twenty five year old 10th Planet black belt Ricky Lule and Mr Cummings defeated Jacob Sandoval, a talented blackbelt from Cobrinha. Fight2Win continues to impress with strong shows that mix grass roots support for local talent mixed with big name main events in exciting venues. Thanks also to Musclepharm who provided a great training center all week. Special thanks to Garry Tonon who thanklessly worked hard all week to help Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan and Eddie Cummings prepare for their respective matches in between his own MMA training. Now the squad heads to Texas tonight to support Gordon Ryan as he seeks to defend his EBI Open weight title in Austen. Thanks as always for your support and interest in our work and progress. Wishing you all the best from LA 😊😊

History: It was an honor to go to the legendary Gracie jiu jitsu head quarters in Torrance for Gordon Ryan’s match with Ralek Gracie. Inside the dojo was a beautiful mini museum of Helio’s side of the family - a side I am not very familiar with as I trained exclusively under Renzo Gracie and the Gracie Barra lineage. It was a wonderful experience to be a small part of the match and then walk around and observe the famous dojo with its memorabilia and images from the past, all the way back to Helio through the early days of MMA/UFC in the United States. There were so many iconic images from the beginning of the UFC, events that I had long forgotten but which were important in my early development and inspiration. Our sport changes and adapts so quickly that it is very easy to lose historical perspective and get entirely wrapped up in current developments and emerging trends. In truth however, whatever achievements we make today are only possible because of the work and achievements of our forebears in the art. In addition, these earlier authorities often came at problems we still deal with today from a very different perspective, which can often provide insight to a thoughtful person today. Sometimes an old idea, combined with contemporary context, can be a path to something new.

Going old school - California style: When Gordon Ryan defeated Ralek Gracie at the legendary Torrance Gracie Jiu Jitsu academy on Sunday, I got a chance to talk to jiu jitsu icon Rorian Gracie and some of his students about the early history of Gracie Jiu Jitsu in The United States. Gracie Jiu Jitsu was first taught out of a small garage here in California! There were no schools - it took a long time for the first Gracie’s to build a following and work their way up to becoming one of the foremost martial arts in the world. Well, here I am in California, teaching private classes out of...a garage! Ha ha! Looks like things have come full circle!! New school Jiu Jitsu - leg locking 101 - taught old school style out of the garage 😊😊 Here my friends Josh and Chris from @dynamixmma go to work on ashi garami and other skills. Cars replaced by mats and we are ready to go! Now it’s on to team training as the squad pairs with Keenan Cornelius to get Gordon Ryan ready for EBI 14, Nicky Ryan ready for Fight2Win and Garry Tonon ready for MMA debut some time next year. I always love to take inspiration from the past and love to give credit where ever I can to those who came before us and made our work possible. It’s a pleasure to get a small sense of what it must have been like for those Jiu Jitsu pioneers who gave birth to Gracie Jiu-Jitsu here in California and helped make it possible for people like myself to find happiness in the sport.

Back in training: After the excitement of Gordon Ryan’s victory in Torrance yesterday The squad was back in the gym today, joined by Keenan Cornelius. Here, Mr Ryan battles Mr Cornelius while Nicky Ryan goes toe to toe with Garry Tonon in the training cage at Musclepharm HQ in LA. Mr Ryan is preparing for a very tough field in Texas this weekend at EBI 14 Open weight tournament while his younger brother will take on outstanding 10th Planet Black belt Ricky Lule here in LA Friday night. This evening it will be more grappling training and then MMA work for Mr Tonon. In jiu jitsu as in life, the higher your goals and aspirations, the more you must demand of yourself. The more you want - the more you must give - in sweat and effort. When people TALK to me about their goals and aspirations, I don’t even listen. I WATCH WHAT THEY ACTUALLY DO TO BRING ABOUT THOSE GOALS AND ASPIRATIONS AND SEE HOW MUCH THEY ARE WILLING TO GIVE IN THE ATTEMPT. Only then will you really see how serious they are.

Victory in LA: Gordon Ryan defeated Ralek Gracie at the Metamoris event held at Gracie Academy Headquarters in Torrance today. On a bet placed shortly before the match he limited himself to sankaku (triangle) and juji gatame (armbar) attacks - the bet was that it had to be performed between ten and twelve minutes - a closer time frame than the ten to eighteen minutes he declared earlier in the week. At ten and half minutes he secured the submission win via sankaku variation. It was an honor to be at the famous Torrance academy and see so much history and meet people who were heavily involved in the early history of jiu jitsu in the United States. It created a fascinating atmosphere for the match, which had the no time limit rule structure of early matches in the history of the sport. Now it’s back to the gym to get Nicky Ryan ready for Fight2Win Friday night, Gordon Ryan ready for Sunday night, Nick Ronan ready for Kasai grappling event in two weeks and Garry Tonon ready for MMA!

It ain’t easy keeping up with the squad: At the house of our gracious host Mo Jassim, his faithful English Bulldogs have been keeping us company as we work hard on submission skills in preparation for upcoming events. Looks like the last ashi garami session took a toll on this poor fellow! Having fun out here on the West Coast. Looking forward to early seminar at Shawn Williams academy tomorrow before the metamoris event and then back into training! I think by Sunday night I will be sleeping right next to this bulldog! 😂😂

Polishing the edge: When sharpening a dull knife, the initial work is heavy grinding of the edge on very abrasive surfaces that remove metal in ways that gradually change and thin the edge geometry to Bring back the sharpness. As the sharpening process continues, progressively finer abrasives are used that remove less and less metal. At the end of the process the edge of the blade is polished by the finest abrasives. At that point there is no more metal removal, just light polishing that leaves a mirror smooth edge that gleams and cuts like a razor. So too in jiu jitsu contest preparation. During the normal training cycle, the work is heavy and designed to change the athletes skill set. As the contest approaches, the training changes to light work designed to polish already existing skills. Here, Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan, Garry Tonon and Nick Ronan polish their skills for upcoming events at Musclepharm HQ in LA. Following this approach creates an athlete who arrives on match day with skills as sharp as the finest blade

Next stop California: The squad heads to LA - big Gordon Ryan discovers he is no longer capable of fitting in regulation seat of Airbus 300 and must go in cargo. Preparation in NYC has been good. Now training in LA with old friend Shawn Williams. We shall stay in LA for next week to prepare for EBI 14 Open weight. Three tough matches/Tournaments in three different parts of the country in three weeks 😳 Gordon Ryan knows how to prepare for holiday season! 😜😜 Can’t wait to see Eddie Cummings and Nicky when they arrive for their matches in LA along with Garry Tonon riding shotgun - it’s all West coast for the squad this week! I wanted to wish you all a happy Thanksgiving from the squad. Hope you all got a chance to recharge batteries and get ready for training again! 🇺🇸😊

The return of the Wolverine: Eddie Cummings, founding member of the grappling squad, will be returning to the stage at Fight2Win Pro 56 against Jacob Sandoval, an outstanding black belt from the great Cobrinha, in LA. He will be headlining the event alongside Nicky Ryan. Mr Cummings has been working hard in the shadows - always seeking improvement and refinement of his game. Everyone knows his prowess in leg attacks - he was the first to show our leg lock Ashi Garami system to the world. Less well known - mostly due to the overwhelming success of his leg game - is his great proficiency in upper body attacks and his positional game. It will be great seeing him back in action 😊😊 Interestingly, of all my students, Mr Cummings has a grappling game which is the most similar to my own, based upon off balancing (kuzushi) from bottom position into Ashi Garami, sankaku (triangle) and back attacks. Keep your eyes on this one to see some modifications and improvements on an already devastating game!

Ryan brothers back in action: Gordon Ryan is preparing for a tumultuous end to the year with three major engagements back to back. First he takes on Ralek Gracie in a submission only match in LA, then a very tough field in EBI 14 in Texas where he defends his open weight title, then Straight back to NYC to take on double ADCC gold medalist Yuri Simoes - a truly great champion in a weight division above his in the new Kasai event. Sixteen year old purple belt Nicky Ryan will take on 10th Planet adult black belt standout Ricky Lule, who in addition to being a fine jiu jitsu player, is also an excellent wrestler in what will be an exceptionally tough test for the gifted youngster. The match will take place in LA at Fight to Win pro (Eddie Cummings will be there to compete on the same night - more on that soon!) The squad will head to California on Thanksgiving Day in preparation for these big events and stay for a week. We are hoping to connect again with our Californian fans and show some interesting new directions in our training program. This was always my favorite photo of the Ryan brothers. It conveys well their focus and shared vision and experiences - attributes that have brought them both astounding progress in very little time. The only odd thing about the photo is a sinister Michael Myers impersonator lurking ominously in the background...

Sankaku/Triangle: Jiu Jitsu is about using a large percentage of our strength against a small percentage of our opponent’s strength at a vulnerable point of his body. No move exemplifies this sentiment better than sankaku - the triangle. In all its many variations it uses the strongest part of our body - the legs and hips - to isolate a weak part of an opponent - the neck and a single arm - in order to strangle or armlock him. As such it a big part of our approach to the sport. As a coach I use sankaku as a crucial measurement of a beginner students progress - the day I see a student consistently and persistently entering into and looking to finish with triangles, I know he or she is on the right path and making good progress. It shows me clearly that they are using their legs as the forefront of their attacks and are developing the leg dexterity and movement skills that will enhance their game overall. Rookie grapplers do the majority of their work with their arms - experts do the majority of their work with legs and hips. Here, Garry Tonon shows superb leg and hip work to lock on a devastating sankaku attack on his way to a record fifth EBI title in LA

When the body’s work is done, the mind’s work begins: At the end of each workout, it is crucial to spend time evaluating the sparring and assessing which skills were employed successfully and which were not. This kind of analysis is the key to making ONE WORKOUT BUILD UPON ANOTHER SO THAT OVER TIME FORWARD PROGRESS IS MADE. Improvement is only possible if the lessons of one session are applied in the next. This requires a clear articulation of what was working/failing and why it was working/failing and a plan of how to build upon success and overcome failure in the next session. Without that, one workout follows another with little sense of progression. Photo by @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Fighting to the top: The entire pattern of human existence is based upon competition. Combat sports are an excellent means of preparing our minds and character for that reality. In jiu jitsu, as in life, nothing comes for free. In order to get people to take notice of you, you must achieve something. As time passes and your achievements grow, you will gain recognition from your peers. This simple vision is the basis of our progress within the sport. I always love to see the apprentice students (kohai) working hard to make their mark. Young Nick Ronan, who splits time between the squad at RGA and my team mate Matt Serra’s school in Long Island has been making waves on the local grappling scene. Today he won a local eight man tournament in which he had to take on EBI veterans. He won every match by submission, using some advanced elements of our leg and back attack systems. Just a few weeks ago he won another tournament, again every match by submission and again against black belt EBI veterans ( he was a purple belt at the time and just received a brown belt) Amazing to see a young student who has not been training long at all show very clearly he is already at EBI level performance. I find daily inspiration in the hard work of my students as they grapple with much more than just jiu jitsu, but with the eternal human struggle to make their way in a competitive world where hard, intelligently directed work combined with self belief are required to make us stand out from the crowd. Work your goals one step at a time - start small and grow over time. Every hurdle jumped takes you closer to your final goal. In truth we are all apprentices, so their struggle to advance is close to our own heart.

The fundamental principles of combat are universal: One of the more fascinating aspects of working as part of an MMA camp is the interplay between the various specialist coaches and listening to their perspectives on fighting within their domain and in MMA. I have had the honor of working alongside many great coaches. One who greatly impressed me was Freddie Roach. His vast experience at the highest levels of boxing makes him a fascinating and captivating repository of knowledge in both the history and theory of the sport. Each of the various arts that comprise MMA has its own approach to victory in unarmed one on one combat. The broadest division is that between the grappling arts, which typical focus upon maximizing control as a prelude to strangles and joint locks as the path to victory, versus the striking arts, which use mastery of distance, positioning, timing etc to create situations where sufficient kinetic energy can be imparted upon a vulnerable part of the opponent’s body to end the fight. Then within each of these two approaches there are many different variations, each of which goes in different directions or emphasizes different aspects from the others. Underneath all the differences however, the basic pillars of a rational approach to personal combat remain the same. “ALWAYS SEEK SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE INITIATING AN ATTACK,” “SEEK POSITIONS FROM WHERE YOU CAN ATTACK YOUR OPPONENT MORE READILY AND WITH GREATER EFFECT THAN HE CAN ATTACK YOU.” Fundamental Maxims like these hold true across the board. Only when we get down to specifics on how to actualize the maxims do we get differences. Once you see this clearly, all the various arts can become a source of learning for you and the cross over from a single art to MMA becomes easier. Here I discuss boxing footwork patterns with Mr Roach and their application to MMA on the morning of Georges St-Pierre’s return to the UFC. Interestingly there was much common ground in his insights with footwork patterns in boxing for standing grappling in Judo and Jiu Jitsu. Movement is movement, advantage is advantage, whatever form in which they are made manifest.

Regardless of your martial art, be it grappling or striking - VARY THE LOCATION OF YOUR ATTACKS AND TARGET THE WHOLE BODY. When my three senior grappling students, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan first exploded on to the national and international grappling circuit, people were shocked at their efficiency in attacking the lower body - a target that had been systematically undervalued throughout the history of jiu jitsu. Their tremendous success in this regard had a downside. People thought we were advocating leg attacks above others. This was NOT the case. All of my senior students are just as proficient in upper body attacks. When they train with each other, the attacks are evenly distributed. When they train with outsiders they tend to score much more on the legs since their opponents are not familiar with our system and usually struggle to resist in that area. WHEN YOUR THREATS CAN BE TARGETED OVER THE WHOLE BODY, OPENINGS WILL APPEAR WITH FAR GREATER REGULARITY THAN IF YOU TARGET ONLY A LIMITED AREA. This is true in all martial arts, not just grappling. As your opponent moves to resist a threat in one direction he will become vulnerable not another. Here, Georges St-Pierre digs hard to the body of rival Michael Bisping. The power of the blow is apparent and Mr Bisping HAS to address it with defensive measures. You can clearly see how those defensive measures have made him vulnerable to a second blow with either hand upstairs to the head or with the right leg to the lower body. Such is the way of all martial arts. In grappling you must have at least one very strong means of attacking legs, arms and neck so that you can distribute your attacks across the whole body. VARIATION OF DIRECTION OF ATTACK AND THE RESULTANT UNPREDICTABILITY IS A CORNERSTONE OF AN ATTACKING GAME.

Structure and movement: A good coach can look at a student whom they have never met or seen before and within a few seconds of observing them train, know very accurately their skill level. What are the cues they look for to make that assessment? An answer to this question will tell you a lot about what is truly important in your daily training and what is merely frivolous. The two most fundamental aspects the coach will first observe are structure/posture and movement/transition skills from one position to another. Excellence is these two foundational aspects of the sport immediately suggests not only competence in the sport, but also an ability to easily learn new skills upon those already attained. Deficiencies in structure and movement suggests the opposite. YOU CAN HIDE MANY DEFICIENCIES IN JIU JITSU- BUT THOSE TWO YOU CANNOT HIDE, FOR THEY WILL PERVADE EVERY ASPECT OF YOUR GAME IN A DETRIMENTAL WAY. A good therapy to this common problem is to look regularly at the best athletes in the sport in competition or sparring (randori). Don’t do what most people do, which is look only at the move being performed in order to copy it. Rather, spend time looking at the structure/stance/posture of the athletes and their movement patterns. Preoccupy yourself as much with studying MOVEMENT as much as MOVES and you will gain something much greater from your observation than a single move - you will gain insight into the foundations of ALL moves rather than one. Here Georges St-Pierre shows flawless body structure and dynamic movement as he transitions from a single leg to a head inside double leg as part of his preparation for his bout with Michael Bisping. Even a novice could look at this photo and see the apparent efficiency of the performance that comes from strong physical structure allied to efficient movement from one structure to the next.

Last moments before the action begins - keep it short: I am known as one of the most long winded people on the internet 😉😜 a reputation that you, My long suffering readers, know is well deserved 😉😉 but when a match is just about to start, I am a man of few words indeed. I actively look to take the main themes of the training camp and crystallize them into short pithy phrases that remind the athlete in a simplified form what he or she worked so hard upon and what we believe are the keys to winning this match. This is not the time for discussion or articulation - but for action. A quick collection of bullet points convey the main ideas and often serve as a valuable means of focusing upon the essential themes required for victory. I also find they can calm nerves as they convey a plan of action that the athlete can focus upon in those last adrenaline charged moments. Here, Gordon Ryan and myself run through some brief advice to a very relaxed looking Garry Tonon, who would use it perfectly to take another submission victory around ten minutes later.

Know how you intend to win and practice relentlessly: Here is a photo of Georges St-Pierre practicing the very elbow strike to strangulation sequence on the ground against his opponents guard position on Saturday afternoon November 4 at 3pm in Madison Square Garden that would lead to victory that same night. This was part of his grappleboxing program design to create enough pressure to force an experienced and mentally tough opponent like Michael Bisping to turn and expose his back to a stranglehold. Here we work the sequence from elbows to strangle in front of empty seats and curious construction workers as they prepare the arena for the big show. Around eight hours later, Mr St-Pierre would perform exactly this sequence in front of a packed audience under the lights and cameras. It is critical the athlete have a strong plan of attack and the means to enact it. Improvisation is a wonderful thing to observe, but so is a well conceived plan backed by a training program that builds the skills and tactics required to make it work when everything is on the line. Clarity of purpose is crucial in professional fighting. This marriage of ground striking with submission was the focus of ground training in this camp and this was the last training session before the event, held in the actual cage where it would all transpire in front of the world.

Gordon Ryan vs Ralek Gracie: The squad returns its focus to submission grappling as Gordon Ryan takes on Ralek Gracie in his hometown of Torrence, California on the 26 November. The squad has faced Mr Gracie before, Garry Tonon overcame a big size difference to win via leg lock. This time the match is a no time time limit submission only match. Mr Ryan will be the same weight and height as Mr Gracie. He has boldly declared that he will limit himself to only two forms of submission - the juji garami armlock variations and sankaku (triangle) variations. Just one week after this match, Mr Ryan will take on the field at EBI 14 open weight and then the next week take on the formidable double gold world champion Yuri Simoes in a mixed submission/points event, going from California to Texas to NYC in three weeks against some of the world’s best! That is certainly a tough way to end the year. Training and preparation is under way after going in very different directions assisting Georges St-Pierre prepare for his great bout with Michael Bisping. Back in the basement of despair and knowledge again and researching.

Experiment with mixed results: The victory by Welterweight Georges St-Pierre at middleweight to gain a new world title was a bold experiment with a truly great result, but was not without its problems. The fundamental problem was always going to be size. Mr St-Pierre always walked into the octagon around 189 pounds on fight night throughout his career. This made him a very averaged sized Welterweight. In order to move up to middle weight, Mr St-Pierre took on a nutritional program designed to facilitate weight gain and hold weight during the rigors of a full fight camp. The result was a disaster. Two weeks into camp he developed severe stomach pains and vomiting. Initially it was suspected that he had an illness, but all tests came back negative. The situation deteriorated to the point that for two weeks of a six week camp there was no training at all. At a critical point we gave him a two day window to either get back in the gym or call off the fight. The first grappling workout he had he vomited heavily prior to workout and then went to work. The next day he had the worst standing sparring session I have ever seen him have. Finally the stomach issue issue resolved itself to a degree where he could train satisfactorily and the workouts improved dramatically- though the vomiting continued all the way up to the day of the fight. He was eating so much more than usual in an attempt to keep weight on and stay close to 200 pounds. When he went through the final weight cut the big question was, would he return to his bigger size? The answer was a resounding no. On fight night he weighed in at 190.5 - almost identical to his usual fight weight as a Welterweight. The great effort to increase size just didn’t work out and Mr St-Pierre went in to win the title as a mid sized Welterweight. It seems his body just finds a comfort zone around 190 pounds for fighting after a weight cut and no amount of work to change that has any effect. It’s one thing to gain weight, it’s another to do so through a fight camp culminating in a weight cut and then regain the weight. It seems his body has an optimal weight for athletic performance which cannot be drastically changed

Coaches and athletes - The case of Georges St-Pierre: An interesting part of the story behind any great athlete is the influence of various teachers and coaches upon his and her development. A feature of Mr St-Pierre is that he had a long time affiliation with highly specialized coaches. He had specialist boxing coaches, culminating in Freddie Roach, specialist Muay Thai/kick boxing coaches, of whom Firas Zahabi was foremost, specialist wrestling coaches, mostly from the Montreal Wrestling club (the importance of Montreal Wrestling club, particularly Victor Zilberman and Gia Sissaouri, in Mr St-Pierre’s development has never been sufficiently acknowledged in the MMA press - they were a tremendous resource throughout his career). I was the ground/jiu jitsu specialist. However, THE REAL KEY TO MR ST-PIERRE’S SUCCESS IN MMA WAS NOT IN ANY ONE ASPECT OF THE SPORT, BUT RATHER IN THE INTERFACES BETWEEN EACH SKILL AREA SO THAT HE WAS MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE, THE KING OF UNIFYING DISPARATE SKILLS INTO A SEAMLESS WHOLE. No one coach taught him this - his coaches were specialists - but he was the quintessential all rounder. The only logical conclusion is that Mr St-Pierre is personally responsible for the majority of his development in the area that bought him his success. He was not a passive learner - BUT AN INNOVATIVE SELF RELIANT INTEGRATOR. Whatever assistance myself and others may have offered, the primary credit must go to Mr St-Pierre himself. Watching his adaption of our specialized knowledge into his own integrated art has been a privilege

Tension into triumph: The day of a big headline fight is always one of prolonged tension and anxiety. When Georges St-Pierre goes to fight he rarely sleeps the night before and the team spends the whole day together periodically reminding ourselves of the main themes of the camp, then distracting small talk, crass humor, anything to pass time. Being the headline fight means the bout will not begin until around midnight - that’s a long day of anticipation. When there is a great result it is a tremendous feeling of release and happiness - one so strong it is difficult to convey in words. A camp is a grueling six to eight weeks of obsession culminating in the longest and most anxious day. Most of our lives are built upon this pattern, only in less extreme form - of working hard to get to a goal, the joy of getting there or the pain of failure, and then on to new goals and repeating the cycle of desire, striving, success/failure and then a new adventure - but nowhere is it more clearly seen than in the path from fight camp to fight day to aftermath. In times of victory you will never see greater joy, in defeat, never will you see greater heartbreak. It is the pattern of all our lives, made more extreme by being compressed in time and amplified.

Calculated risk: Probably the single toughest thing for a professional athlete to do is comeback from a long period of inactivity either to to injury or retirement and come back into the competitive arena. Inactivity is death to an athlete. Combat sports in particular are very unforgiving of those who step away and then try to return into the maelstrom. History reveals a mixed bag of success and failure. Muhammad Ali came back after a three year hiatus and even with the benefit of warm up fights, lost his first title fight back in action. Sugar Ray Leonard took three years off and came back to edge Marvin Haggler in a controversial decision, then had other comebacks with mixed results. Floyd Mayweather had some brief retirements of around two years and came back successfully. Dominick Cruz had two years off for knee surgery and came back to win again. Study of great comeback success and failure convinced us of several things. If the athlete had maintained a rigorous training schedule throughout the time off and worked to develop new weapons then success was certainly possible, despite the obvious disadvantage of ring rust. Mr St-Pierre attacked the skills required for FINISHING ability - harder striking and submissions. The time off meant that he was not under constant demand to ready himself for a next opponent, but could develop new skills. He developed very strong leg submissions from bottom position and excellent back finishes from top position working with the squad. Working with his striking coaches he blended boxing, Muay Thai and karate with increased emphasis on punching power and accuracy. The question was HOW to return. As a Welterweight? That would do little to enhance what he had already achieved. It would just be more of the same. I pushed for a match at middle weight as this would represent something genuinely new in his career and add to his legacy in a significant way. This was however, a big risk. Four years is a LONG time, plus a new weight, with no warm up. In the end, you can juggle risk and reward as much as you want - the final step is always into the unknown- and in that realm courage and self belief are your ultimate guide and refuge.

Victory in New York! Georges St-Pierre came back after four years of inactivity to win the UFC middleweight title against the great Michael Bisping at Madison Square Garden tonight. It was perhaps the most dramatic fight of his incredible career. Despite his incredible past successes there have always been three constant criticisms of his work, the first, that he did not finish fights, the second, that he never fought above his weight, and the third, that he fought in a tactical fashion that made some of his fights convincing, but unexciting. Mr St-Pierre took time off to train and reconfigure himself in a way that would enable him to prove people wrong. He worked with Freddie Roach on his punching power and with the squad on submission skills and tied everything together with Firas Zahabi. Tonight he stormed back into the octagon and finished a great opponent in a heavier weight class above his own in a very dramatic and action packed fight. This fight had it all - striking, takedowns, submissions- all encased in back and forth action. When Mr St-Pierre first mentioned to us his desire to come back, it was me who suggested taking on Mr Bisping. My reasoning was that all his career, He had beaten tough welterweights. If he came back as a welterweight it would add nothing to his legacy. Only a significant change in octagon demeanor and weight made sense, so we began planning. All credit to Mr St-Pierre and his worthy opponent Mr Bisping. We are all so proud!

Last workout: Here is the crew after a final light sweat in midtown Manhattan as Mr St-Pierre ran through his final drills in preparation for tomorrow night. It’s been a pleasure to watch him working with Firas Zahabi, Freddie Roach and Jorge Blanco in standing position. Looking very sharp from feet to floor. Back to Hotel now for hijinks, stories, laughter. Wishing you all the best wherever you are 😊😊

There’s nothing like the big show: Georges St-Pierre returns to the UFC. Feels like the old days - the crowd energy, the buzz and the anticipation. This one hell of a card - three tremendous title fights and a mix of new talent and returning stars. Fascinating to watch how different fighters connect with the fans in different ways - now it’s just waiting time...

The lonely vigil: Georges St-Pierre goes through light sauna in what was the easiest weight cut of his life. At the end of his welterweight career he was among the smaller men of his division, so making weight a division above was very simple indeed - just a few minutes in the oven and his official weigh in is complete now at 184.8 pounds. We are off to breakfast and recharging the batteries. Good to see so many familiar faces at the UFC staff and fighters and coaches 😊😊 Big hello to my great friend and one of my inspirations @1carlosmachado1 who is here with old friend @wonderboymma

Counting down - the inversion of discipline: Georges St-Pierre and the team, Firas Zahabi, Freddie Roach, Jorges Blanco, Gordon Ryan, Phil Nurse, Erik Owings and myself get final preparation done in midtown Manhattan. Normally the challenge for athletes is to possess the discipline to get to the gym and train hard. In fight week there is a total inversion of discipline - now the discipline is required not to work out hard - BUT TO STOP YOURSELF FROM WORKING OUT HARD SO THAT YOU FOCUS ON LEAVING EVERYTHING YOU HAVE FOR THE CAGE RATHER THAN EXPENDING YOURSELF IN THE GYM. Just a light sweat, reinforcing the themes of the camp - the athlete has to be stopped from going too hard now. Now it’s light dinner time and then sleep and weight loss tomorrow - wishing you all the best from NYC and looking forward to the show at Madison Square Garden - America’s traditional home to combat sports.

Final phase: The last elements of preparation for Georges St-Pierre’s comeback bout on Saturday night began last night here in NYC at RGA. It was great watching him do pad drills with Freddy Roach, Firas Zahabi and Jorge, then grappling drills with Gordon Ryan. During the day, Garry Tonon and Mr Ryan are beginning their first steps in MMA training. It’s never easy to go from excellence in one sport to absolute beginner in another, but both men are enthusiastic and willing to put the time and study in - that alone gives me confidence they will make quick progress in this new skill set. Back to work teaching now. Mr St-Pierre has a public workout this afternoon and then a main workout tonight. The blade has already been sharpened - now it’s just final polishing to send him into the cage with an edge like a razor Saturday night.

Why submissions? Most people who follow the adventures of the squad in Jiu Jitsu competition know that we put a huge emphasis on submissions both in training and competition. A natural question to ask is - why is this the case? Why not just take the safer route of points/advantage victory? A big part of it is our philosophy of jiu jitsu. We define it as control leading to submission. We see control merely as a means to an end - submission - but the end is everything . Most jiu jitsu practitioners see jiu jitsu as “position before submission.” As such, the majority of their training time is spent on positional control with submissions seen as a “icing on the cake” - something desirable but not essential. This is a good and sensible approach, since the point structure makes positional dominance the most likely way to win a match, and in addition, in a real fight, good position allows for strikes on the ground that can open an opponent up and even end a fight. One of the main reasons for our unusually heavy emphasis on submissions is that we see them as the GRAPPLING EQUIVALENT OF A KNOCKOUT PUNCH. Just as there is something frightening about an opponent throwing very hard punches with skill and bad intentions at you, so too, it is intimidating to come across a grappler who is not just looking to get a position on you - but to BREAK you. It is the submissions of Jiu Jitsu that more than anything else, make it a MARTIAL art. Without them it would just be another form of grappling among many. These are some of the reasons we strive so hard to increase our submission skills in addition to the other skills of the sport and why we have a strong interest in sport formats that encourage athletes to exhibit their submission skills. There are many skills within Jiu Jitsu, all are necessary for success, but none catches our attention like a finely applied submission hold!

Rules of engagement: Any time there is a sport competition it is absolutely crucial that everyone involved have a crystal clear understanding of what the rules of the competition will be. It always surprises me how often, even at elite level, athletes and coaches are unclear about the rules of the event they are participating in. A sound practice before big events is a rules meeting where any underlying confusion can be rectified. Here, Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila, head referees of EBI tournaments, go over rules with the athletes prior to the big show. Here we discuss the exact interpretation of back escapes in overtime scenarios. At this event, we did not need any overtimes as Garry Tonon won all his matches in regulation time, however, in the past, knowledge of the rules combined with technique has been an important factor in the success or failure of athletes in these match winning/losing tie breakers. Remember, all forms of losing are a bitter pill to swallow for a hard working and passionate athlete,
But none is so bitter as having everything you needed to win, and losing nonetheless because of a simple failure to research properly the rules of the event. How strange that there are so many athletes who are fully prepared to put hundreds of hours of exhausting work into physical preparation for a tournament, but who are not willing to put fifteen minutes of easy work into understanding the rules that will play a huge role in who wins and who loses.

Outstanding talent - Rayron Gracie: One of the most talented youngsters at RGA in NYC is fifteen year old, Rayron Gracie, son of the late Ryan Gracie. This young athlete is very big and powerful for such a young man, but more importantly, he is a very keen student of technique. He came to NYC to train with my dear sensei, his uncle, Renzo Gracie. In his time here we have seen an incredible rise in his effectiveness that shows tremendous promise for the future. This past weekend the young world champion got another chance to show the world his progress at the Kasai grappling event in NYC - he won gold in both his weight division and absolute - IN THE ADULT DIVISION!! This was no surprise to us here in the gym - we see him doing extremely well against black belt adults every day, but it was certainly a shock to those watching who do not know this young man. Mr Gracie is doubtless one of the top prospects to carry the torch into the future for the first family of grappling. It’s a pleasure to see his progress under my sensei and his cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor Gracie and also our great mutual friend, Bernardo Faria. Look for more great performances from this young man - this is just the beginning! 🇺🇸🇧🇷

Exciting news: Just released today is the news that a new grappling organization @kasaigrappling will be running a premium event in Brooklyn NYC December 9th with the headline event being Gordon Ryan against the great Yuri Simoes. Both Men won gold in their weight divisions in the ADCC world championships this year. Mr Simoes also won gold in the previous world championships and now has the great distinction of being a double gold medalist in two different weight categories. He is one ADCC weight class heavier than Mr Ryan. The two have met before, at EBI 6 Openweight, with Mr Ryan winning via strangle in overtime. However, Mr Simoes was not familiar with the rule set and had fought an exhausting battle with Garry Tonon in the previous match. This time he is working in a much more familiar rule set - ten minutes submission only, then if no result, six minutes overtime with all submissions legal, but IBJJF type points scored (though no advantages- there must be a positive score). It’s a tremendous match up between two great athletes in their top form. Mr Ryan will be juggling training in Gi, EBI open weight training, MMA training and this event as well! Should be an interesting holiday season! 😳😜 Very happy to hear about the emergence of a new high level grappling show in NYC- it is run by Rolles Gracie - a man who truly understands the game and the athletes- this first show sounds like a firecracker! There will also be a superstar eight man tournament on the same night that I will talk about soon!

It’s a family affair: Proud moment for Garry Tonon as he wins EBI 13 in perfect fashion - every match via submission in regulation time to take the maximum prize money - and for the first time in front of his family as Mom and sister came all the way to California to watch his thrilling performance. Here we are backstage after the big show as a very youthful looking Mr Tonon (shaving the beard and dropping a little weight makes him look like a junior high schooler 😂😂) tells his family about his adventures and his sister reminds him he still sucks and mom tells him to wash the dishes after dinner. It was a joy to see the pride on his family’s faces after such a stellar performance and the happiness that that gave Mr Tonon. Back in NYC now - heading to RGA and then on to the Bronx to see how the bombers are doing with their submission grappling training.

Flawless victory: Garry Tonon won an unprecedented fifth EBI title here in LA tonight - every match by submission - three heel hooks and a sankaku (triangle) variation to win the maximum possible prize - Twenty thousand shekels. It was one of the most impressive performances in the history of the event. Mr Tonon defeated the man he narrowly lost to via points at ADCC - Wagner Rocha - but tonight he turned it around with a brutal heel hook variation to win a decisive victory. The tightness and power of his locks was matched only by the relaxed fluidity of his positional movements into attack positions. We are all so proud of his tremendous achievement. Congratulations also to some other incredible performances tonight. 10th planet athletes, PJ Barch and Nathan Orchard went through some absolute wars to make their way up the tournament brackets. Old rival Wagner Rocha had some incredibly tough matches and prevailed all the way through to the final. It made for a very exciting event overall that was a pleasure@to be a small part of. Hope you all enjoyed the show. Now it’s back to NYC to prepare for Georges St-Pierre back in the UFC and then Garry Tonon in a combat jiu jitsu event back here in LA! Thanks again to Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila for putting on another amazing show and helping take this great sport to a new level.

Garry Tonon makes weight for EBI 13 and answers UFC fightpass/Television commentary questions in his own...unique...style...

Teaching in California: The squad had a great day of teaching in LA today. I had the pleasure of teaching at the dojo of my great friend Shawn Williams @5starmartialarts It was great to see the Californians are really improving in the leg lock game! Mr Williams students along with some talented visitors went through some of our counter attack game and did a very fine job assimilating difficult material and made it work well. There is no doubt in my mind that the overall level of submission grappling is improving around the nation as I observe it in my teaching and traveling. Mr Williams and I talked at length afterwards about emerging trends in contemporary jiu jitsu, he has some fascinating views on this topic which I am sure he will talk about when he commentates for big jiu jitsu events in the future. Afterwards Mr Tonon went through his final workout for EBI 13 tomorrow night at the Orpheum in Downtown LA. He is looking very sharp and lean for this 155 pound event. Now it’s back to the hotel room to map out the remainder of Georges St-Pierre’s grappling training for the UFC show on November 4. Wishing you all the best from LA!

Danaher airport curse continues: My propensity to run full speed into disaster at airports continues. Despite being early for the first time in my life to JFK, a major slowdown of the security boarding system combined with massive Friday night crowd created the longest lines I have seen in my twenty fives years in NYC. Then a long walk, a bus ride to a separate gate area followed by another long walk to furtherest extremity of terminal, a last sprint on crippled leg to gate and I was last person boarding with barely a minute to spare! 😂😂😂 Somewhere in a past life I must have DEEPLY offended the gods of flight. A strange thing about the worlds greatest city - it is serviced by the worst three airports I have ever encountered. Perhaps they could go all the way and add burning hoops and scorpion trapdoors to make getting to ones plane an even greater challenge. #whydontothercitieshavethisproblem. Now it’s on to LA to meet up with Messrs Tonon and Ryan to get ready for another big challenge in EBI 13 at our old home of the Orpheum theater. I shall teach a seminar tomorrow at my good friend and team mate, Shawn Williams at @5starmartialarts It will be a pleasure to see our West Coast friends and fans again 😊 See you all soon!

Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Young guns running amok: Squad apprentices (kohai) @jasonraubjj89 @nick.ronan and @frankrosenthal11 dominated the action last weekend while we were away training Mr St-Pierre and Mr Tonon. The Rise grappling event featured east coast talent - at the center of the action was Matt Serra BJJ and RGA. Two of Mr Serra’s students train regularly with us in the basement. Jason Rau won his superfight via heel hook submission, Nick Ronan had an outstanding performance using our back and front headlock systems to strangle four opponents back to back and take gold in the main tournament and Frank Rosenthal won a superfight via submission in short order. Great to see these talented young athletes going out and developing their resume and their brands - and doing it in the best way possible - convincing victory out on the local stage with an eye for bigger wins ahead - a fine example to all those among you looking to build your name in the sport. A big hello to our brothers out on the island at serrabjj - same lineage - working together. Mr Serra was always an inspiration to me and it’s a pleasure to help the progression of his students in any way. Back in NYC now! Heading to the basement to see how everyone is doing and get our training back on - then off to LA and return to Montreal to get Mr Tonon and Mr St-Pierre ready for action!

Nothing beats a good day of training in preparation for a big show: Georges St-Pierre wraps up a strong day of training - he will need more like this to take on an adversary as tough as Michael Bisping. Working with grappling standouts Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon is tough enough - to do it after a full kickboxing sparring workout shows the kind of drive and skill this remarkable athlete possesses. Tomorrow morning we fly back to the basement in NYC to train the rest of the squad and then it’s off to LA to watch Mr Tonon compete in EBI 13. A hectic week, but the squad wouldn’t have it any other way 😊😊 Wishing you all the best

It all starts with a plan: Getting the direction of today’s training through to the troops at breakfast - then it’s on the gym to make it happen. Georges St-Pierre and Garry Tonon prepare for their respective events over the next few weeks. Going over the specifics of ground work for two very different sports is always a fascinating enterprise. Watching the best do it right in front of you is an honor and a privilege. We have an outstanding cast of characters here at Tristar gym for the training session - one down - now on to the next!

At the airport with Gordon Ryan and the ghost of Hugh Hefner: Heading North to Montreal to resume grappling training with Georges St-Pierre this week. Waiting on a plane - Newark airport. The squad will prepare one athlete for MMA and another - Garry Tonon - for submission only grappling as the four time champion returns to his roots at EBI 13 in LA this Sunday. I love the test of different rule sets and sports - it always brings out the best in the squad. Looking forward to seeing the team up in Montreal including my black belt student and very talented MMA coach, Firas Zahabi. Wishing you all the best!

Great day at Renzo Gracie Academy charity seminar: The squad came out to support one of our academy’s great characters, Shy Aces. Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and myself taught a seminar featuring some key elements of our approach to the game. The students did a fine job of absorbing a lot of information and some difficult moves and by the end looked like a worthy gang of leg locking fiends! Thanks so much to everyone who attended - hope you enjoyed the lessons - keep experimenting with what you learned and growth and expertise will inevitably come.

One step at a time: When competing at world championship level - the finishes don’t come easy. At the recent ADCC world championships, Gordon Ryan shocked the world by exhibiting a submission rate of around seventy percent across two weight divisions despite the fact that half his opponents were former champions and/or medalists. A big part of his success in this regard is our approach to working through resistance one step at a time. This requires that we first identify where we want to be/what we want to accomplish, then what problems the opponent is creating for us that are currently preventing us from getting there. Then we must establish what ORDER these problems need to be addressed if we are to work systematically through each problem towards our desired end. This requires a certain calmness on our part. It’s difficult to solve problems in a state of agitation or excitement. It also requires a clear goal on our part and the ability to identify the obstacles in front of it being created by our opponent. Lastly, we need the ability to put the problems in a list from first to last and the knowledge of how to solve each in turn. Working along these lines every day in the gym creates the results you saw Mr Ryan achieve. It was surprising to many to see such a young athlete working so calmly and methodically against very dangerous opponents to get breakthroughs. This calm step by step approach is the one I reinforce every day in the gym with my athletes. The physical speed that different athletes pursue it varies, but the mental process underlying it never does.

Jiu jitsu and friendship: Though the purpose of jiu jitsu is ostensibly that of controlling an opponent in ways that lead to his submission, there are other elements involved in the study of the art that run deeper than this. Perhaps the most important is friendship. Jiu jitsu is fought alone against a single opponent, but it is practiced in a community. That community, due to its strong sense of shared goals, frustrations, hopes, dreams, fears, failures and successes, becomes extremely tight. When one of our number falls, we all feel the jolt. One of RGA’s most beloved students, the inestimable and highly unorthodox black belt Shy Aces, has a dear friend who has fallen upon hard times and needs help. Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan and myself will teach a seminar in our home gym - The Renzo Gracie Academy in Manhattan- to help raise funds for Shy Aces friend. It will be this Saturday at RGA at 11am until 1pm. We will be showing our approach to jiu jitsu to anyone interested in coming by. You can call RGA or contact Shy Aces on Facebook (yep, there’s only one 😜😜). Shy tells me it’s nearly sold out now but we will do our best to get you in. Gordon Ryan will teach tasteful tattoo selection, social media decorum and manners, modesty training for young adults and how to avoid overdosing on protein powder. Garry Tonon will teach hair coloring technique, how not to drive an automobile if you wish to live a long life, and prioritizing chicks over cash and championships. Shy Aces will teach an introduction to car jacking and high speed chase strategies. I will teach some jiu jitsu. Hope you can make it if you are in the city! 😊😊

Nothing beats a strangle: I have always given a special priority to strangles in my approach to jiu jitsu. At the higher levels of the sport there is tremendous resistance to any form of submission hold. Occasionally you will run into an opponent who simply chooses not to submit to a well applied joint lock and is prepared to keep fighting even after taking extensive damage. The truth is that the decision to stop fighting after being put in a tight joint lock is exactly that - a decision. In the case of a strangle, once it is well applied, THE DECISION TO KEEP FIGHTING IS NO LONGER YOURS. Whether you choose to keep fighting or not is no longer up to you, since if you choose not to tap you will simply pass out - the outcome of the match will not be altered by your decision. Thus in any highly competitive situation, if you are presented with a choice between a stranglehold and a joint lock, all other things being equal - I ALMOST ALWAYS FAVOR THE STRANGLEHOLD (of course there will be some exceptions to this general rule). Here, Garry Tonon does a good job of first attaining the positional control that makes strangulation possible, now comes the battle to apply the strangle itself, never easy on a skilled opponent.

Side by side in Montreal: Interesting coach experience in Montreal coaching Georges St-Pierre for his upcoming MMA bout against the great Michael Bisping and Garry Tonon for his upcoming EBI 13 event in LA. Obviously there are big differences between the skills and tactics of the two sports and it was fascinating to watch the athletes interact in both domains. Here, my black belt student Firas Zahabi, head of Tristar MMA gym and I discuss the day’s training and plan for the next few weeks in the light of our observations. Heading home to NYC now for a full day of teaching tomorrow back in the blue basement at RGA. Another day, another airport lounge and a set of problems in need of solutions 😊😊 To all my dear students back in NYC - see you tomorrow- let’s get the room ready to sharpen the squad!

Tough training in Montreal: Great grappling workout here in Montreal, Canada with MMA icon, Georges St-Pierre asssisted by UFC veteran Frances Carmont and squad members Garry Tonon and Jake Shields. Creating a sound training structure for the grappling component of the camp over the final three weeks is the priority- got a strong start today and more for the future. Running over some interesting thoughts for running Mr Tonon’s EBI camp alongside Mr St-Pierre’s camp - would require some logistics and planning- will run it by sensei and see what we can do in these three weeks. Big hello to all my faithful and long suffering students back in the basement - and wishing all the squad/RGA fans well from Montreal.

Traveling band: Garry Tonon and myself at LaGuardia airport getting ready to board plane to Montreal. Going back to where it all started - MMA with Mr St-Pierre. Another huge upcoming challenge for the Montreal native and the squad is happy to be a small part of it. Thankfully traveling with Mr Tonon ensured that I would actually be on time for the first time in my life 😊😊 You know it’s a sad day when Mr Tonon is the most responsible person in the group!! 😖😆 Looking forward to another challenge whilst also getting Mr Tonon ready for EBI 13 in two weeks! To all my students in NYC - don’t forget our beloved sensei Renzo Gracie is teaching the big afternoon class tomorrow (Monday) afternoon - he carries a mountain of knowledge within him and really knows how to communicate it 🤗🤗 Take advantage! Can’t wait to hear all about it when I get back! See you all Wednesday! 🇨🇦🇺🇸

Renzo Gracie Academy does it right: One of the great features of The Renzo Gracie Academy is the depth of teachers that enables our team to take on multiple projects simultaneously and get it done. Tonight Jake Shields, Garry Tonon and myself fly to Montreal to train Georges St-Pierre in preparation for his upcoming bout with the great Micheal Bisping on November 4th in Madison Square Garden here in NYC. That means I won’t be in town to teach the infamous Monday afternoon class at RGA. However - great news - my dear Sensei, Renzo Gracie himself is taking over! Tomorrow the noon class will be filmed for Brazilian television as Mr Gracie runs the show. Let me tell you now - this is not something you want to miss. I always try to tell people what it was like to learn from Mr Gracie in my early days and always struggle to do it justice. Now is your chance to see it for yourself - you will love it! 🤗🤗 Can’t wait to work with Mr St-Pierre and can’t wait to hear the stories of my sensei teaching in his unique and unrivaled style! Great week ahead for RGA in NYC!

Back to our roots: The squad initially made its name in the submission only grappling scene. That was a deliberate policy on our part. My three main students, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan were adherents of my belief that jiu jitsu must be understood as control that leads to submission. Submission only tournaments were the best way to express our approach to jiu jitsu and bring attention to it. Our favorite venue was EBI as it offered an exciting rule set, well run organization and great visibility. Since then, the squad has moved into other rule sets and venues with great success, but we never forgot where we started and what we stand for. Coming up soon we go back to our roots for EBI 13 The lightweights. Garry Tonon returns to the Orpheum theater against a stacked field including outstanding ADCC world championships medalists, Wagner Rocha and AJ Agazarm, two 10th planets standouts, former EBI champion, Nathan Orchard along with the extremely talented PJ Barch Also there will be Bill Cooper - former EBI finalist - and as with every EBI, new talented athletes fighting to make their way into the upper echelons. Mr Tonon is beginning his journey into MMA now, but is anxious to train hard and put in another strong showing in the event that did so much to spur his development. Keep your eyes on this one! It’s going to be a great show!

Squad senpai officially loses his mind - goes on tattoo rampage in midtown Manhattan: Gordon Ryan fresh off the most successful debut performance in ADCC world championships history decided a good first move upon return would be a bucketful of new tattoos 😳💥😳. Mr Ryan’s earlier tattoos are a constant source of banter and ridicule from team mates here in the blue basement. This time he appears to have put more thought into the project and had the Indian goddess Kali, some of whose followers formed a sect based around strangulation- hmmmm....perhaps he is taking that back attack system thing too seriously! 😂😂 Along with, how surprising, some King motifs 😜😜 Whatever one thinks of the tattoos, I have to admire his dedication to the project - a marathon nine hour session to get it done quickly so he can return to training in the least time. I hope this does not set a precedent where every time he wins something he gets another giant tattoo - there’s not much room left at this point!

Australian jiu jitsu gets a hero: One of the features of this years ADCC world champions was the growing internationalization of jiu jitsu/Grappling. Russia had a strong team and though they did not win medals this time, they impressed with their skills. The local Finnish team had much to cheer about with a standout performance by 10th Planet representative, Elvira Karppinen. USA had a great showing via Gordon Ryan, JT Torres and Orlando Sanchez among others. One of the really unexpected breakthrough performances however, came from the Australian team. This was a shock to many, but not to me. Most of my family has moved to Australia and after my hip replacement surgery I went down to see them. I taught seminars there and was impressed by the enthusiasm and skill of the locals. At one gym in Melbourne my demonstration partner for a three hour seminar on leg locks was Lachlan Giles, who had distinguished himself in EBI events here in the US. After the seminar he talked to me about the local team and a talented fellow called Craig Jones. I got to see him up close at EBI 11 - he did not win, but I thought his game looked very impressive and he and Lachlan were doing a great job developing their game, even having some success with some of the material we worked at the seminar. On the first day of ADCC, Mr Jones was absolutely one of the most impressive performers, with two fine submission victories over heavily favored Leandro Lo and Maurilo Santana - both extremely well established world champions. This is increasing internationalization of the sport and greater diversity on the medal podium is a very healthy thing for the growth of the sport. It is also a welcome reminder that anyone in any location from any gym can beat the best if they create a sound training program and have the discipline to stick to it. Well done Mr Jones and hats off to the Australian jiu jitsu culture that created such great competitors in relative isolation from the more well known centers of the sport. 🇦🇺🇦🇺

Hiding an ace up your sleeve: An odd thing about many great jiu jitsu players is that very often they are known primarily through their favorite moves (tokui-waza). People expect to see them in competition and they become that athletes signature move. Many great athletes however, are also extremely good at other moves and often use them in the gym with great success but for some reason the opportunity to use them under the lights on the big stage just never seems to arise and that move just never gets used publicly. This is often a good thing for an athlete, for it means they have a highly refined and developed weapon that no one knows about and which thus has great surprise value. A good example occurred in the recent ADCC world championships in Finland. Gordon Ryan has one of the most devastating guillotine strangles I have ever seen. Every day in the gym I see him use it to great effect - yet in competition his leg locks and back strangles are so successful he does not get many opportunities to use it. In fact he never used his guillotine in a high profile event previously. In the finals of the 88kg division Gordon came up against the great Keenan Cornelius. The two had met before in a very different rules format and Mr Ryan had won via concentrated leg attacks leading to a final breakthrough. This time it would be very different. Mr Ryan focused upon controlling the head and shoulders rather than the legs and hips and sank his guillotine from a standing start and controlled it to the ground for the win. His teammates always knew he had a world class guillotine- but few others did. The excellence of his execution combined with the surprise of its use got the breakthrough when Mr Ryan needed it most - giving him the rare honor of winning gold in a debut performance. We all have our favorite moves - just because you have a reputation for some moves does not limit you to those. Keep developing more and who knows - when you really need them they will be there for you to get the breakthrough that your usual big guns may not be able to secure. Photo @banejitsu

Aggression: A key feature of good jiu jitsu is a spirit of active aggression throughout a match. When I say aggression, I don’t mean it as we do in normal daily discourse, where it typically has a negative connotation and usually implies antisocial behavior. In a sport context it simply means the desire to actively pursue victory, in particular, the most complete victory possible, in the case of jiu jitsu - submission victory. It is a desire to go out and actively pursue the ideal of the sport - control leading to submission. One of the biggest problems in previous ADCC events has been slow paced tactical play where athletes sought to win by doing the least work possible, by taking the least risk. This is a very successful strategy for many, but it runs contrary to the spirit of the sport and makes for disastrous viewing. The most popular competitors have always been those who took risks and had the skills to make those risks profitable. I was very happy to see the officials at this years world championships actively calling out stalling penalties on a regular basis to keep the action moving. The result was a much faster paced event, fewer overtime periods, and a very high rate of submission for such an elite field of athletes. Some of the biggest names in the sport got caught in submissions this year and it made for very compelling viewing. In general I prefer the athletes to do the work of winning and losing themselves, with as little referee intervention as possible, but this ADCC showed how good work by impartial officials can significantly improve an event and help keep it in line with the ideals of the sport. Coaches must take the bulk of the responsibility for making athletes compete with an aggressive spirit, but some help from competent and fair officials is a welcome helping hand. I came away form the event thinking it was one of the most exciting in years and hope that this trend can be extended into future events. Photo by @banejitsu

Reducing intensity - increasing effectiveness: When preparing for a major competition, the intensity of the training sessions must be correlated with the time remaining before the event. Our camp for ADCC 2017 put a heavy emphasis on standing grappling/takedowns (tachi- waza) which is typically more physically demanding than ne waza (ground grappling ). In the final week in Finland prior to the event, I eliminated live standing grappling from the workout and focused entirely upon drilling and limited ne waza sparring. This was to give the athletes a chance to physically recover from a grueling two and half month camp that had severely tested their bodies and to reduce the likelihood of last minute injuries. In the final days it is very unlikely that any additional training will improve performance - there simply is not enough time to adopt new techniques. Instead the focus is upon coming in healthy and rested. Here, Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza go through ashi garami drills three days before they got to use them so effectively on the big stage at the world championships. Learning to vary the intensity of workouts is a big part getting athletes to peak at the right time. For those who are not actively competing, it is still a crucial concept. Varying workout intensity is a fine way increasing longevity in the sport by decreasing physical demands on days when your body is not ready for high output. Not every day needs to be maximal effort. I would rather see an athlete consistently workout seven days a week with big variations in intensity than say, twice a week at maximum intensity over the course of a year. Just as we don’t try to live every day of our lives at maximum intensity but rather follow a pattern of easy days with intense days interspersed among them, so too, we ought to act similarly with our workouts.

Counter offense: One of the key themes of our approach to jiu jitsu is a heavy emphasis upon counter offense. Whenever your opponent goes to attack, he must to some degree open himself up in order to initiate that attack. If the initial attack can be contained or nullified, he will, for a short period of time, be left in a vulnerable state of extension and open to your own attacks. Some of the most frustrating experiences we can have in jiu jitsu involve attacking an overly defensive opponent who will not open up at all. Counter offense gets around this problem by allowing him the initial attack so that his defensive posture is broken. Most people are happy enough merely to defend any given attack - BUT THE BEST DO NOT SEE AN OPPONENT’S ATTACK AS SOMETHING TO DEFEND, BUT RATHER AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO LAUNCH THEIR OWN ATTACK. This requires more than technique. It requires a mindset that is not satisfied with stopping an opponent from doing what he wants to do, but only with using that as an opportunity to do what WE want to do. Here, Gordon Ryan stops the single leg takedown attempt of the great Keenan Cornelius and is already thinking about how he can use his opponents over extended position to his advantage - in this case via a combination of Kimura grip and sumi gaeshi throw. Always remember that there are two main families of attacks in jiu jitsu - direct attacks and counter attacks. If you do not fully exploit the latter you are losing half of your attacking opportunities.

Reflections on ADCC 2017 - The lesson of Xande Ribeiro: One of the stand out performers at this years ADCC world championships was doubtless the great Xande Ribeiro. He had some truly memorable matches including an epic showdown with the man generally believed to be the best currently active jiu jitsu player in the world, Marcus Almeida Buchecha. In addition, Gordon Ryan’s toughest victory was over Mr Ribeiro in a match so close it could easily have been ruled a draw in any other setting. An interesting feature of Mr Ribeiro’s game this year was that he chose a very traditional style - he pulled closed guard on many of his opponents, especially those he believed were better than him in standing position. In an age of leg locking and innovative open guards, this is rarely seen in contemporary no gi tournaments. It was a brilliant decision however, as Mr Ribeiro was able to apply three of the best arm bar attacks from bottom position closed guard in ADCC history - on very tough opponents. The Technical precision and composure of his attacks was impressive not only to the crowd, but also the other athletes watching from the sidelines. Mr Ribeiro’s brilliant ADCC performance paints a very clear lesson to all athletes in the sport - WHICH TECHNIQUES YOU SELECT IN PURSUIT OF VICTORY IS NEVER AS IMPORTANT AS THE DEGREE OF TECHNICAL PRECISION WITH WHICH YOU APPLY THEM. Don’t obsess over which techniques are best, the truth is, almost all the major techniques of the sport can be used to attain victory - worry more about how good you are at applying whatever techniques you choose for your arsenal. Trends come and go - but technical excellence and precision in the execution of your chosen moves never goes out of style. Mr Ribeiro’s fine performance was all the proof you need.

Memories ADCC 2017: The recent world championships in Finland were doubtless a source of great pride for me due to the accomplishments of my students - first for qualifying an unprecedented number of entrants and secondly for fine performances in the event itself. One of my favorite memories however, and one that I shall treasure for all my life, was my time cornering my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie in his Masters rematch with the former ADCC champion, Sanae Kikuta. They had fought an epic MMA match years ago, with sensei winning via his legendary guillotine stranglehold. Once again they had a closely contest match - with Mr Gracie winning a very close bout due to higher work rate/passivity penalty. It was a great honor to watch sensei prepare for and contest his match - I have watched him spar ten thousand times over two decades in the gym - seen changes and adaptations in his game as he gained in age and experience- to watch it all up close and be a small part of it was a memory I shall always cherish. Photo @banejitsu

It’s a long way to the top: One of the more remarkable aspects of our younger team members at the ADCC world championships is how little training time they have had in total. Gordon Ryan’s total training time in the sport is substantially less than the time most of his opponents have been black belts. Nicky Ryan has trained less than three years. Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza around four. Part of the reason for this is the heavy emphasis I put in truly progressive, directionally fixed training programs. Another part of it however, is the dedication my students had to enter competitions whenever possible - traveling long distances and enduring tough camps for each one. My students all had an excellent sense of progressive competition. People know that ADCC and EBI are currently the major no gi events. No one however, gets straight to the big shows. The pattern all athletes must follow is to begin small and build incrementally over time until you have sufficient experience to make waves among the best in the sport. I can think of no better example than Gordon Ryan. For years he tested himself in small shows against unknown opponents. Building upon each minor success until by the time he got to his first ADCC show, he was more than ready to get to the first place position on the podium and gain a higher medal account than any athlete in ADCC history in a debut performance. Here, from some time ago, Mr Ryan battles the impressive grappling and MMA star, Antonio “Shoe-face” Carlos Junior as part of his quest to get to the highest level. That day he prevailed via triangle (sankaku) submission - another rung in the ladder leading to his deepest goals. This idea of incremental progress is just as important to those of you who choose not to compete or have limited competition aspirations. The only difference will be that you use different yard sticks appropriate to your different goals.

Reflections on ADCC 2017: The rise of submission only grappling. The last few years have seen a significant growth of a new facet of grappling - the submission only movement. It was spearheaded by Mr Eddie Bravo’s EBI shows, which quickly gave rise to others based on a similar format. Unfortunately the movement ran into a lot of entrenched resistance when it first emerged - as most new ideas do. For years I heard numerous complaints that these shows attracted only mediocre talent and exhibited only limited skill sets. I just smiled and said nothing. I knew the criticism was based on the erroneous idea that a new movement would emerge fully mature. That is not the way the world works. ANY NEW MOVEMENT TAKES TIME TO DEVELOP. Submission grappling is no different. ADCC is almost twenty years in existence. If you look at early ADCC competition it often looks amateurish compared with contemporary events. EBI type competition has only been around a few years. It was a pleasure to see athletes who have figured prominently in submission only formats do so well at this years ADCC. Gordon Ryan, Wagner Rocha, Craig Jones and Elvira Karppinen were either Medalists or were able to take on and defeat prominent champions in ways that would have to impress even the harshest critics of submission only events. Our squad had its beginning in sub only events, in particular EBI,
We don’t forget that and will always be grateful for Mr Bravo giving us a great format to make our start in. I am happy that the world got to see that sub only grapplers can play a strong role in other forms of grappling. Rather than see ADCC and submission only as opposed formats, I hope the effect will be to break artificial and unreasonable divides between them. Given more time I expect submission only athletes will mature and develop in much the same way ADCC athletes have and lead to many dual champions in both styles - each has so much to offer with regards skill development of the athletes involved.

Golden boy: Gordon Ryan had the weekend of his life at ADCC world championships- the grappling Olympics. In the most successful debut performance in the history of the sport he won gold in his weight category and silver in the open weight category. There were too many notable features in his performance to list them all in one post, but I will say this is one of the most memorable performances in my entire coaching career - it was a privilege to play a small role in his preparation and then observe up close this incredible debut. Mr Ryan is not even close to his full potential and is determined to improve for future world championships. This is only the second time an American has won two medals at one ADCC (Mark Kerr won double gold in the early days of ADCC). Our whole team is so proud of his great accomplishment, as are his Mom and Dad, who traveled all the way from New Jersey to watch their Uber talented progeny. So much great work from the whole squad - I will say more in the near future. I hope you all enjoyed the big show. Happy that the approach we bring to jiu jitsu and try hard to communicate to you all through words and deeds had such a strong showing. I am so proud that my dear sensei Renzo Gracie was there (he had a fine win today which I shall talk about very soon) and that I could make him happy with the teams performance. Wishing you all the best from Finland. I will head home to NYC soon to begin the training of Georges St-Pierre for his comeback fight November 4. Thank you to ADCC for another great show - thank you to all the athletes who participated- so many legends among them -
Your presence and achievements fill me with pride for our sport.

Great first day for the squad: Very proud of all our team members who put on such a strong performance today. Our two Canadian boys Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza both had great matches - attacking relentlessly and impressing the crowd with their submissions arsenal. Young Nicky Ryan at sixteen was by far the tournaments youngest competitor@-
He had a fine match against a black belt no gi world champion lost narrowly on points, but impressed everyone with his attacking style in such an elite event. Tom DeBlass had two titanic matches at heavyweight, winning the first and losing the second on a tight referees decision against last adcc world champion. Jake Shields looked great in his match but as he seemed to be controlling his way to win he got caught on a sweep and then additional points as he tried to recover - impressive as he was fighting two weight categories above his own to avoid clashes with team mates in his actual weight category (170 pounds). The two standout performances came from squad seniors, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. Mr Tonon won tough matches against the Brazilian trials winner and also the very talented world champion Marcelo Manfra. Mr Ryan had a tough match against his very talented and tactically sound rival Dillon Danis- taking a narrow decision win due to getting a full leg locking position just as time expired and then getting close to a back position in overtime. He saved his best performance for his second match against multiple world and former ADCC champion, Romulo Barral. In a classic display of positional play, Mr Ryan was able to take home down, pass his guard twice, then take his back and finish with a tightly applied stranglehold. Day 1 is over - now it’s time to prepare for tomorrow, recharge batteries, plot and plan and head into day 2 😊😊 So proud of our young athletes performance in the Olympics of grappling - they will be back even stronger next time! Excited for the continuation tomorrow- hope you are all well and enjoying the show! 😊😊 Quick salute to our Australian friends - Australia had an amazing day through the incredible work of Craig Jones who had a breakout performance, Submitting two jiu jitsu legends today

Nicky Ryan chows down on sushi and teriyaki chicken and then finishes off with green tea ice cream before the official weigh-ins at ADCC while his jealous team mates sit empty handed around him 😂😂😂 #reapthebenefitsofbeingthesmallguynickyryan He then proceeded to weigh in fully clothed and with his back pack on! 😂😂

Squad gets last light workout in: When the squad travels, we always like to get a light workout in the day before competition. Today we worked out in a place like no other before! This jiu jitsu gym in Finland is a former nuclear bomb shelter! It is deep underground encased in reinforced concrete! It looks like something from a James Bond movie - a jiu jitsu lair! 😂😂 We work out every day on the blue basement back in NYC, but this is a whole new level of dungeon! The squad was joined by beloved sensei Renzo Gracie and superstars Lovato Jr and Xandre Ribeiro among others. It was great watching everyone roll together and listening/watching a great interchange of jiu jitsu ideas and concepts used by so many great champions. Experiences like these are always among my favorite coaching memories. 😊😊 Now it’s off to rules meeting and official weigh in 😊😊

So proud of Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj who has just been announced as a starting athlete at the 2017 ADCC world championships under 66kg division after another athlete failed to make weight. Mr Ryan won bronze medals at both North American adcc trials and has now won the distinction of being the youngest ever competitor in the history of the event, having recently turned sixteen years old (he won bronze medals at trials at age fifteen). At a bodyweight of only 134 pounds he will not only be the youngest competitor but also by far the smallest. Here Mr Ryan orders a big dinner to try to beef up for the weekend 😂😂A jealous Garry Tonon let's him know how he feels about the youngster eating like a king while he can eat no more than salad 😂😂 Hats off to young Mr Ryan who has come such a long way in such a short time - representing his country after just two and half years of training and setting a record before he even steps on the mat 😊😊

Unknown talents of the squad: most people know the squad has some very respectable submission skills - tonight I learned they have a whole other side to them that I never knew. After evening the workout it was time for dinner - fearless leader Garry Tonon immediately went to the kitchen with his able assistants Matthew Tesla and Ethan Crelinsten where he immediately went to work cooking a splendid feast for the entire squad!! Here he is doing his best Gordon Ramsey impression as Gordon Ryan calls out instructions from his Anthony Bourdain book in the background. Amazingly no one has died of food poisoning yet. Nicky Ryan appeared to eat more weight of food than his actual body weight while Tom DeBlass drank from a massive bottle of Pepsi in between salmon and asparagus- truly the diet of champions! 😂😂 They say from chaos comes order - there was a hell of a lot of chaos in the kitchen but a very orderly dinner was served, so I guess it's true!! Now it's bed time and on the road to the competition tomorrow 😊😊

Teaching and training: A very nice seminar here today in Finland at JKL Fight Club @jkl_fightclub where I went over our approach to leg locking and ashi garami. Afterwards we switched gears to contest (shiai) preparation with the squad doing final preparation work. Tomorrow we head back towards Helsinki and the arena in Espoo, close by. Thanks so much to our hosts here in Finland who made us so welcome and made for a great seminar today.

Sharpening the edge: The squad went through drills and sparring in Finland today and tonight. Everyone looking sharp as the days count down. Finland is a deeply impressive country - it reminds me a lot of the Southern parts of my old homeland, New Zealand. The people are extremely sensible, practical and extraordinarily well educated. All those I have met are multi lingual and well versed in world history and politics. Tomorrow we will go through another two sessions, joined just now by big Tom DeBlass who came of the plane plus a three hour train ride and straight on to the mats to put in great work - always an inspiration to the younger students 😊In between I will teach a seminar on leg locking to our Finnish hosts and fans at JKL Fight Club where we love to train. Now it's back home to plot and plan over some good local food 😊😊Wishing you all well from Nordic Europe!

Damn! That was close! Once again my astounding skills to be late for everything - especially airline travel - come to the fore. Barely made flight to Finland despite catastrophic traffic, apparently due to presence of our President in NYC between Renzo Gracie Academy and the airport. God bless the ladies at check in desk and security who felt sorry for me and rushed me through! 😇😇Looking forward to seeing the squad and our Finnish friends and of course, the elite of our sport at ADCC. Can't wait to meet up with my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie when he arrives. Mind racing with multiple projects - ADCC, Georges St-Pierre returning to UFC, upcoming EBI's including a slap grappling edition featuring Garry Tonon - should be an interesting time! Wishing you all the best! 😊😊

Bigger opponents: Probably the single biggest problem that beginning students will face - and one which will continue to be problematic through their entire jiu jitsu career - is that of dealing with bigger opponents. The game is hard enough already, but becomes significantly more difficult when your opponent enjoys a size advantage. There are a great number of methods that can be employed to lessen the effects of size difference in grappling, but the two I put the most emphasis upon are back positions and ashi garami. These are the two positions where a bigger opponent will find it more difficult to employ his weight advantage over you. In the case of ashi garami, your opponent's weight goes into the floor rather than directly down on to you. Success or failure in the ashi garami position is almost entirely a question of who knows more about the subtleties of leg and foot positioning. Due to the fact that bodyweight cannot be used by either player in this position to pin the other, knowledge of limb positioning becomes the rubric of success rather than size. Bear in mind however, that this good feature comes at a price. By it's very nature, ashi garami prevents you (as well as your opponent) from using bodyweight to pin him, so it tends to have a very different form of control from that typically used in jiu jitsu. This takes a lot of getting used to. Moreover, it entails a much greater degree of exposure to counters than the more standard attacking positions of the sport and thus requires a very deep knowledge of safe and unsafe positioning if it is to be used successfully at higher levels. Once students learn to get around these issues they quickly learn that the various variations of ashi garami, along with back positions, represent two of the very best means of reducing the effects of bodyweight disadvantage in grappling.

All rational approaches to combat are founded upon the idea of creating an asymmetry between your ability to attack your opponent successfully and his ability to attack you successfully. The greater the asymmetry, the greater will be the chance of your success. There are many fine attacking positions in the sport of jiu jitsu, ashi garami, the mounted position, knee on stomach variations etc. However, none can match the power of the rear mount/back position when it comes to creating this asymmetry in your favor. The very nature of the human body is well adapted to dealing with threats from the front, but poorly set up to deal with threats from the rear. Much of your training then, most be devoted to getting to, maintaining and finishing from this position. Here, young Nicky Ryan works hard on his skills utilizing our back attack system, an area that he excels in.

Jousting for advantage: The core principle of combat is this - ALWAYS SEEK TO GAIN SOME FORM OF PRELIMINARY ADVANTAGE BEFORE ATTACKING. Only then will you able to secure victory by DESIGN rather than by good fortune. This requires first, that athletes be able to understand exactly what constitutes advantage, second, practical methods of getting there and third recognizing the opportunity once it has been attained and acting upon it. The first is a question of knowledge, the second, a question of skill, the third a question of confidence - how interesting that two of the three are mental elements and only one physical...

Mixing things up: Great training in the Monday afternoon class in the blue dungeon today as two different directions of grappling training took place alongside each other. The squad got ready for ADCC grappling world championships while Georges St-Pierre got ready for his MMA fight on November 4 in the UFC. It's always a fun and challenging coaching experience to look for the common ground between them and also emphasize the important differences in ways that help prepare the athletes for very different challenges. Somewhere in between the takedowns, the positional advantages and the submissions are the answers for both. Great to see old rivals Georges St-Pierre @georgesstpierre and Jake Shields @jakeshields getting each other strong for upcoming challenges. The Ryan Brothers @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyryanbjj continue to amaze me with their progress. Garry Tonon @garrytonon has been electrifying the training room lately with his skills. Wonderful to see my great friend Shawn Williams @shawnwilliamsbjj back on his hometown mats at RGA 😊along with the very talented wrestler Kyle Cerminara. What a room! Always great to see the fine balance of competition and cooperation between athletes, friends and training partners that is the core of fighting to the top in sports and in life.

Forethought gives us direction - remembrance gives us strength. New York is more than the worlds greatest city - it is the world compressed into five small boroughs- where American values let the whole world reach for the sky, then, now, always....we don't forget. 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Reflections on my Sensei: One of the most valuable attributes a jiu jitsu player can have in order to make sustained progress over long periods of time is a SENSE OF CURIOSITY. Quite often I talk to senior instructors who complain of getting burnt out through constant teaching. Burn out is a real problem for hard working students, competitors and teachers alike. The root cause of the problem is a sense that one is doing the same thing every day without progress. This feeling can be soul destroying and in some cases, even push people out of the sport. The best antidote to this problem is to nurture a sense of curiosity. When you are fascinated by the nature of your field of study and constantly asking how you can know more about it, investigating new ways of looking at and understanding it, and experimenting with new ways to perform within it, burnout will rarely be a problem. My sensei, Renzo Gracie and I are almost exactly the same age. I did not start jiu jitsu until the very late age of twenty seven (I had done other martial arts, but in jiu jitsu I was a very late starter as very few outside Brazil had really heard of BJJ prior to 1992). When I started jiu jitsu as a white belt, MY SENSEI HAD ALREADY BEEN LEARNING IT FOR TWENTY TWO YEARS! Yet at no time have I ever seen him tired or jaded of teaching or learning techniques. Today we talked about guard passing and he was very excited to show some new concepts of guard passing he has been working on lately - showing the very same enthusiasm and drive I would see daily when I was a white belt more than two decades ago - it was fascinating stuff. It was a great reminder of how that sense of endless curiosity is the root of enthusiasm and success in both teaching and learning - the moment a man loses that, it is only a matter a time until his study and teaching suffers. I believe the key is to always keep one question in mind at all times - IS THERE A BETTER WAY OF DOING THINGS THAN YOU AND YOUR PEERS ARE CURRENTLY USING? As long as you push this question to the forefront of your consciousness the game will always be exciting and continue to make you grow - just as it does for my sensei.

Escape, evasion and following through: When learning submission holds, one typically begins with the skill of GETTING TO THE LOCK. That is difficult enough on good opponents, however, as you go against good opponents you will soon find a whole new challenge awaits you - THE SKILL OF FIGHTING THROUGH AND OVERCOMING SKILLED (and sometimes wild/unorthodox) RESISTANCE TO THE LOCK AND GETTING TO THE FINISH. You must be able to anticipate and counter common defensive measures to your attacks, mapping out strategies ahead of time as to what you will do when the usual escapes are attempted. Sometimes when unorthodox escapes are attempted, you must be able to improvise on the spot. Remember - NO ONE WILL REMEMBER HOW MANY SUBMISSIONS YOU ATTEMPT, ONLY HOW MANY YOU FINISH. Constantly work on your ability to follow through your submissions against resistance. Live sparring is the most important form of training for this. Here, Nicky Ryan follows the unorthodox rolling movement of his opponent in the midst of a triangle (sankaku) attack, following the motion through to a mounted triangle to get the finish.

Two different pairs of eyes will look at the same event and see two entirely different narratives: Whenever we look at some event unfold, there is an interpretive element where we fit the event into a story mold that allows us to make sense of it. This is an essential part of our human nature. Nonetheless, it can have a limiting effect where it makes us see certain things and completely ignore others. Sometimes those things we ignore are the very things we ought to be focusing upon. As such, it's always a healthy thing to consult other well informed and knowledgeable people's opinions or thoughts on a given subject/event that you are working on. At the very least they will often make you question your own view more thoroughly and in ways that help your project. In some cases they can save you from making potentially disastrous oversights - either way it's a usually a good thing. Very often I consult the views of my senior students and teachers and almost always find some profit in it. There is no need to do everything yourself at all times, and often there are dangers of oversight associated with such an approach. THE SKILL YOU WANT IS NOT SO MUCH SELF SUFFICIENCY, BUT THE ABILITY TO DISCERN VALUABLE INPUT FROM ALL RELEVANT SOURCES AND MESH THESE WITH YOUR OWN TO CREATE IMPROVEMENTS.

Counting down to the world championships: There is nothing like the ADCC world grappling championships to bring together the best no gi grappling talent on the planet. Our primary direction in training and style is towards submission only style, but no submission grappler would deny that ADCC currently brings the greatest talent pool in one place every two years. It's an amazing event to be a part of - it has a an international flavor that makes it stand out from other events. Last time it was in the homeland of the sport - Brazil - this time it is in the Nordic nation of Finland. I am extremely proud that our small team succeeded in qualifying more people for the event than any other. Half of our competition team are youngsters in their first adcc, but I am confident they will qualify and compete for many more. Training has been a joy to watch and the change in competition rules from our usual events created new directions in training are exciting for me as a coach and for the athletes created a great deal of growth in a short time. Everyone is looking forward to meeting up with the world's best and growing as a result. I feel all the athletes on our team who are going have already made big strides forward just in the preparation phase from who they were only two months ago, and that sense of improvement made necessary by meeting the best in competition will only get stronger as the event itself unfolds. In the end, that's the greatest benefit of all competition- personal growth out of the stimulus of intense opposition.

Brothers in arms: There is no question that in jiu jitsu, the single most important factor in your progress will be the manner in which you train. HOW you train is far more important in determining your rate and extent of progress than WHO you train with. Nonetheless, having good people around you can definitely play a positive role in your development and make progress easier. When I was a student, my big brothers (Senpai) on the mat were Matt Serra @mattserrabjj , Ricardo Almeida @ricardoalmeidabjj and Rodrigo Gracie @rodrigogracie . They were always a huge inspiration to me and the other beginners. Sensei Renzo Gracie @renzograciebjj gave us the directions and the senpai gave us the physical interaction that created progress. This tightly woven sense of mat brotherhood, based upon relative experience and skill level creates a symbiotic relationship between juniors and seniors that helps both. Juniors learn fundamental skills whilst seniors get to practice advanced attacking skills on less skilled opponents as a prelude and stepping stone to applying them in championship situations. This healthy sense of mutual benefit is one of the keys to a healthy and progressive training environment where the skills needed to attain dreams can grow to the required level. Sometimes that mat brotherhood goes beyond the metaphorical level and has a genetic basis - real life brothers Gordon @gordonlovesjiujitsu and Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj work hard in preparation for the 2017 world championships. A very big part of the astounding progress of Nicky Ryan is the day to day work of grappling his outstanding brother - after learning to cope with that level of pressure, other assignments can seem easy!

The tale of the army of darkness: one time after an EBI show, if I remember it correctly it was an EBI that Eddie Cummings won, the squad was relaxing after a good nights work backstage at the Orpheum theater in Los Angeles where the event was held. Mr Cummings, Tonon and Ryan were doing interviews joined by Ottavia Bourdain, I went outside to reflect on the nights work and ponder over where improvements could be made. As I stood outside a rather strange looking Californian fellow who looked like a genetic splicing of Nicholas Cage and the bad guy from the 80's classic Stallone movie "Cobra" approached me. He stood silently in front of me, staring with an intense gaze. Finally he addressed me in a gravelly voice. "DANAHER...I watched the show...leg locks...everywhere...leg locks...no escape...I see what you've done." Rather taken aback by his dramatic opening, I answered, "Thank you, sir...ah...what actually have I done?" The stranger stared at me awhile and then answered, "your students...Cummings, Tonon, Ryan...very impressive...I see what you've done..." Again I replied, "ah...what do you think I've done." The rather ominous nature of the conversation continued. "I see the way you walk...the way you move...your hip...your knee...you're in PAIN...I see what you've done..." Rather intrigued by this strange dialogue I said back, "I'm sorry sir, I don't really follow you, I'm not really sure what you think I've done." He immediately replied, "You've raised an ARMY OF DARKNESS. They travel around breaking everybody's legs - so that everyone else feels the same pain you feel - THAT'S WHAT YOU'VE DONE!!" And with that dramatic statement the stranger wheeled around and shuffled off into the shadows of central Los Angeles.

Catching heels, counting shekels: squad apprentice Jason Rau stepped up to take on four opponents on route to gold at Global Grappling Leagues 170 pound tournament yesterday - defeating all opponents by submission to take the prize money. Mr Rau has been training very hard - he suffered a severe rib injury and showed great fortitude in training through it and then competing despite limitations in mobility. The hard gym work paid off as he was able to get to his favorite moves, three heel hooks and an arm lock for the winners place on the podium. Here he relaxes with team mates Frank Rosenthal, who took bronze and Damien Anderson. Great to see the kohai (apprentice) students going out and winning local while dreaming international - that is the mindset we must all take on if we are to maximize our potential in the sport.

Observing, analyzing and adapting: As a coach, the single most important part of my work is the process of observing the gym training and competition matches of my students and their peers, analyzing their successes and failures and finding the causes of these; and then adapting the training program to be able to replicate those successes and avoid the failures into the future. YOU AS A STUDENT MUST ENDEAVOR TO DO THE SAME WITH YOURSELF. Of course your coach will be able to help, but recognize that he has many others to help also, and so only a certain amount of time and attention can be paid to you. The bulk of this work must be done by you. This might seem ludicrous advice to someone who is a beginner in the sport, since they may not feel qualified to make such observation and analysis, let alone adapting your own training program. Don't worry, you will learn in time. Just as you learn the physical skills of the sport over time, despite beginning from a state of ignorance, so too will you learn over time the greatest skill of them all - the ability to assess your own success and failure and make rational modifications to your behavior to bring more success and avoid previous failures. The problem for most people is that they approach jiu jitsu as a PHYSICAL quest - that's natural, since a huge part of the sport is physical. The whole "observation, analysis and adaption" aspect is largely mental. It requires you to put as much work into your THINKING about the sport as you do your workouts. As Ford said, hard thinking is the hardest work of all - that's why most people do everything they can to avoid it. Yes, you need your coaches, especially in the early days, yes, they will give you great insights and guidelines - but don't get lazy with your own self reflection - ULTIMATELY THE LEVEL OF JIU JITSU YOU ATTAIN WILL BE THE LEVEL YOU DESERVE. it is crucial that you take a proactive role in the observation, analysis, adaptation cycle - especially as you climb the ranks and gain experience. In the end you will not only experience much greater sports performance, but also a deeper sense of satisfaction that comes with self expression in your art.

Comeback: Anyone who plans a long term investment in jiu jitsu will have to go through at least one big comeback before their time in the sport is over. Life has a way of taking us out of our plans and sometimes our training gets derailed. The ability to come back, get back to where you were, and then move past into a new level of development is critical if jiu jitsu is to be a lifetime activity for you. Georges St-Pierre @georgesstpierre is beginning his comeback now as a professional MMA athlete, but the very same trials he is currently going through - doubts about his ability to regain past form, to be able to present new skills beyond the old ones, the ability to keep with an ever changing sport - these are all things YOU will have to go through whenever circumstances take you out of the sport for a time. It's important to scale back the early workouts - there will always be time to go harder in the future. Gradual progress over time always trumps unsustainable surges in the long run. Here, Mr St-Pierre works on elements of our back attack system with one of the true masters of it, Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu Afterwards they went through some hard sparring in standing position, a skill in which Mr St-Pierre excels. It was a great example of two outstanding athletes using their domain of excellence to benefit the other, so that MUTUAL benefit - the finest and most sustainable form of benefit - can occur.

Composure: There are many important attributes that athletes must possess if they are to rise to the top echelons of competition. One attribute that I attach great importance to, but which does not get much attention in most people's minds, is COMPOSURE. The reason I value it so highly is because I see jiu jitsu first and foremost as PROBLEM SOLVING ACTIVITY. It is awfully difficult to solve complex problems in a state of mental exhaustion or chaos. Having a clear mind is the prerequisite to identifying a problem and searching for ways to overcome it. Many people identify combat as a battle of WILLS. The person who wants victory more will take it. Whilst I agree that there definitely is a contest of wills, the MEANS by which that contest is decided is typically through one persons superior ability to create problems for their opponent while solving those problems the opponent creates at a faster rate than the opponent can. This is best done by maintaining a level of composure that facilitates thinking, whether it be conscious thought, or semi conscious reflexes honed by training. It is thus of the first importance that in your gym training, you train this attribute of composure just like you train other attributes such as strength, speed, flexibility, tactical aggression or passivity etc etc. I often find students really struggle with developing composure. We all have natural instincts in stressful situations. In combat, these often push us in the direction of maximum effort/aggression in ways that preclude thinking/problem solving. The result is a short period of thrashing about followed by exhaustion leading to greatly diminishing performance as time passes. We all put great value on developing our physical attributes -
But you may be pleasantly surprised how much more successfully you can use those physical attributes when you work equally as hard to develop your mental attributes alongside them.
Begin with composure - for only then will your physical actions be governed by a mind that is calm enough to actively seek to solve problems rather than fight instinctively. Here, 15 year old Nicky Ryan shows great composure while hunting for another submission

Guard passing and submission only tournaments: Quite often I am asked if the skill of passing guard - the skill of getting past your opponent's legs and into upper body pins - is a worthwhile skill for someone interested in submission only tournaments. The idea here is that in a tournament without points scoring, it is not worth the effort of passing guard because one does not receive points for doing so. Accordingly, it might seem a better idea just to go straight to leg locks where there is some chance of outright victory via submission. My answer to this is very clear. It is definitely worth your while to work hard on your guard passing skills and apply them EVEN IN SUBMISSION ONLY MATCHES WHERE GUARD PASSING SCORES NO POINTS. The reason is simple - only when an athlete has well developed guard passing skills can he or she distribute their submission attacks OVER THE WHOLE BODY. The moment you limit your attacks to one part of the body (legs) you have become predictable and thus less likely to break through a skilled opponents defense. As a general rule, I prefer to see my athletes attacks legs predominantly from bottom position. When on top, I like to see them initiate with hard passing work - even in submission only tournaments - so that the whole body becomes a target, rather than half of it. This ensures that an opponent will find it difficult to put anticipatory defenses in place. An unfortunate consequence of the success of my students with leg locks in competition has been a misunderstanding guard passing skills are not necessary for submission only tournaments - this is, in my opinion, a major error. Here, Gordon Ryan works hard to pass the guard of one of his most formidable opponents, powerful world champion Yuri Simoes, in a submission only EBI tournament Photo by Blanca Marisa Garcia

Confidence may be a mental attribute, but it's birth is physical - the hours, months and years of training that create superior technique which leads to victory. The first victories will be small, unheralded gym victories, seen by no one other than yourself. As those small victories accumulate they will be replaced by ever bigger victories until an unshakable faith in your ability walks within you and people call it confidence. Yes - in its mature form it is a mental attribute, but never forget that its infancy was physical.

Coming back: One of the toughest things for a professional athlete to deal with is coming back to his or her sport after an extended lay off/retirement. During that time off two things happen. First, there is an inevitable decline in the athletes performance without the incentive for growth spurred by upcoming competition. Second, the sport itself progresses forward in the athletes absence as new athletes uncover new avenues to victory. The combination of these two makes a successful comeback a very difficult thing - the longer the lay off, the tougher the task. An interesting feature of this weekends match between the great Floyd Mayweather and Conor McGregor was that Mr Mayweather was coming back after a two year absence. There were several moments where that lay off seemed to be evident as his overall movement quality was not as high as it normally is. History shows many examples of both success and failure in coming back. One of the great successes was that of the great Sugar Ray Leonard coming back after three years to take on the formidable Marvin Haggler. He took a controversial victory and showed it could be done even against the very best opponents. On November 4th at Madison Square Garden, George's St-Pierre will take on Michael Bisping after a massive four year lay off. Not only is the time off a problem, he will fight at a heavier weight class. This will surely be the most difficult comeback project I have ever been involved in. The success or failure of comebacks is often related to the amount of training the athlete has engaged during the time off, their motivation levels coming back in and the physical state of their health. Mr St-Pierre never got out of shape in retirement and has trained well throughout. He is very motivated to try the challenge of the bigger weight class. The two biggest problems will be his health (two major knee operations and recent eye issues leading to surgery) and the degree to which the game itself has evolved in his absence. Due to the relative youth of MMA as a sport, it changes and evolves with great rapidity. This will be a fascinating camp, played out among the warnings and inspirations of past comebacks.

Reflections on the big show: As is usually the case, most people are focused upon the RESULT of the Mayweather/McGregor bout last night. The truth is, to anyone familiar with both sports, the RESULT was never in serious doubt - all rounders generally don't step into the domain of a refined specialist and beat them in that domain. The result was never the interesting feature of this bout. What IS interesting is the ramifications of the MMA vs boxing debate. As I have seen so many times in similar match ups in the gym, the MMA athlete did quite well early in the match and can create a competitive first few rounds. However, there is a dramatic difference in energy expenditure on the part of the MMA athlete versus the more efficient boxer. As such, there is an inevitable change over as the match progresses. Mr Mayweather was doubtless aware that this would occur and waited patiently for the mid/later rounds to switch from a passive game to one of forward aggression. What has become clear however, is this - ELITE MMA ATHLETES ARE CONSIDERABLY BETTER EQUIPT TO HANDLE A BOXERS GAME THAN BOXERS ARE TO HANDLE AN MMA FIGHTERS GAME. There is almost no chance an elite boxer could get to a tenth round with an elite MMA athlete. Even if the bout permitted kicks and elbows/knees in the clinch, the outcome would almost certainly be different. If takedowns and ground work were allowed it would be over in seconds - any one of the innumerable clinches in the fight would be an immediate takedown from which a boxer is extremely unlikely to recover. Mr McGregor may have (predictably) lost the bout, but he won something much bigger. He showed that the endless criticism of MMA in standing striking over the years is grossly exaggerated. At elite levels they are highly competent and can provide a good match for a time with even the best boxers in the boxers domain. The daring Irishman may have lost a bout, but he won the cultural war between boxing and MMA and showed clearly that he can do far better in their domain than they can in his. For the courage, self belief and skill it took for him to do that, he can always count me as a fan

Tonight is the biggest fight show of the year - a fight that has been dismissed by many knowledgeable pundits as farcical but which has nonetheless garnered more viewer interest than any boxing event in a very long time. On the face of it, this is a huge mismatch. Mr Mayweather is unquestionably the finest boxer of his generation and arguably of all time. He is both a master technician and a master tactician in the ring who has made the best boxers of his time look ordinary when matched with him. Mr McGregor is an an outstanding MMA fighter with an amazing penchant for proving doubters wrong. In truth however, this project would be the equivalent of having Mr McGregor compete in an IBJJF jiu jitsu tournament in a gi against say, Rafa Mendes - do you really think he would prevail against Mr Mendes under these conditions? My experience of watching very good MMA athletes spar against elite boxers in the gym is always the same - they are quite competitive for the first 3-4 rounds and do surprisingly well. Then around the 5th round the elite boxer begins to figure out the unorthodox or awkward movement and begins to employ ring craft tactics to tire the MMA athlete by making him work harder than he is, making him miss punches etc etc. around the 8th round a very noticeable shift occurs where the elite boxer takes over. I expect a similar pattern tonight- though probably taking less time, given the incredible skill level of Mr Mayweather. Mr McGregors only advantages are youth and size, but heavier punches are not much use if they are thrown at a target that can't be hit, and Mr Mayweather is as always, in fine shape and has never tired in a fight. I would consider it a fine victory for Mr McGregor if he survived 12 rounds and had some competitive rounds among them. Like most people, I love to see an underdog take on impossible odds and win, so my heart is with Mr McGregor, but my mind knows this is exceedingly unlikely. In a world of uncertainty I will offer you one certainty that I truly believe - however well Mr Mcgregor does in tonight's boxing match, I ASSURE YOU IT WILL BE MUCH BETTER THAN MR MAYWEATHER WOULD DO IN A REAL FIGHT AGAINST MR MCGREGOR.

Pioneer: Probably the most challenging assignment for a jiu jitsu coach is to go into an area that has no jiu jitsu background and start a program from the ground up to produce good athletes and a jiu jitsu culture. The fruit of that culture can expand the sport and over time, convert naive students into knowledgeable teachers who can in turn create new students and a sustainable expansion of the art in what was once a place devoid of jiu jitsu. My sensei, Renzo Gracie was a true pioneer. He came to the United States when there was almost no knowledge of jiu jitsu. I still remember him having to tell us in beginners class that being bottom mount and bottom guard position were not the same and that one was desirable and the other was not! Yet from those unpromising beginnings he forged a very large body of students that now sustain themselves and contributors the sport in ways that would have seemed impossible twenty five years ago. One of my favorite jiu jitsu pioneers is Mauricio Gomes, one of only a handful of men promoted to black belt by Rolls Gracie and father to the greatest jiu jitsu exponent of all time, Roger Gracie. He is in many respects, one of the fathers of BJJ in England. He and his son, Roger have produced a great number of talented athletes in a country that got a relatively late start in the sport of Brazilian jiu jitsu. Our recent trip to England was more than just a chance to catch up with Mr Gomes- it was also a chance to see just how far jiu jitsu has progressed on English soil. There are many more schools and students than even just a few years ago, and the level of skill is rapidly rising. Here I talk to Mr Gomes about his incredible achievements in Great Britain and his plans for the future. I have always said of British jiu jitsu, they may have started later than others and with fewer instructors, but the black belts they got, spearheaded by Mauricio Gomes, Roger Gracie and Braulio Estima, were the very best they could have hoped for. With these outstanding men at the helm and the rapid growth of the sport, I have a feeling English and European jiu jitsu will be a power house in a short time!

Strength begets strength: ADCC world championships camp. The squad is working hard on new skills. The slog of training is always at its toughest about half way through. Days just seem to blend into each other and the aches and pains mount rapidly. Much of what gets the athletes through is the camaraderie among them. Shared suffering is easier to bear than lonely suffering - but most important of all is a sense of purpose. Purposeless suffering will break in a man in a matter of hours- but if a man has a purpose that he holds dear, he can endure any conditions indefinitely. Keeping the athletes eyes open to their end goal is critical in these hard weeks where the body and mind are put to trial. Here, Gordon Ryan goes through another tough workout with teenage sensation and world champion, Rayron Gracie, son of Ryan Gracie. Both have a tremendous future the extent of which, like all of us, will be determined by their ability to cope with the pressures of training and preparation by remaining focused as much on where they want to be in the future as where they are now.

Roger and me: Last weekend the squad went to London to compete in Polaris grappling, winning all three matches. London is the base of one of my greatest friends in the sport, Roger Gracie, who, along with his great father, Mauricio Gomes, teaches jiu jitsu in England's greatest city. At Polaris, the squad met up with Mr Gracie and Mr Gomes in the warm up room as we got ready. I asked Mr Gomes if he would like to assist in cornering the squad - I have always found his insights very illuminating and instructive and he has a good calming presence about him in the hectic atmosphere before a match starts. Suddenly Mr Gracie excused himself and said he had to go. The staff of the show advised us that it was time for Oliver Taza to go out and begin his bout. Mr Taza was scheduled to fight the outstanding British black belt Ross Nicholls, who is widely considered the best British black belt and has won many British and European titles. Oliver is a brown belt (he should actually still be a purple Belt according to IBJJF Regulations) but trains very hard and has made great progress in a short time. Last time they met, Mr Taza won via heel hook. When we went down to the stage I was shocked to see Mr Gracie in Mr Nicholls corner - and Mr Gracie was equally shocked to see me in Mr Taza's corner!! Neither of us had any idea that the opponent was one of our students! 😂😂We just laughed and wished each other luck. It was an unexpected honor to corner against the greatest jiu jitsu player of all time - the best part is that Mr Gracie's father was in our corner! 😂😂It was a great match between two very impressive youngsters, arguably the best of the night. Mr Taza prevailed that night with positional play - he could not get a submission breakthrough against a much improved Mr Nicholls - but it gave me a wonderful coaching memory of cornering against one of my best friends with the help of his dad! 😂😂😂 Here we are laughing about the confusion afterwards and enjoying the rest of the show. In the near future I want to talk about Roger Gracie's online teaching platform - I sincerely believe it offers an unprecedented opportunity for students to learn the highest level jiu jitsu

Sometimes when you win...you lose: Garry Tonon came back to the gym immediately for training after his victory in Polaris Grappling over the weekend - an admirable action to be sure. He had tired of his blonde frosted haircut meant to parody his rival Dillon Danis and tried to dye his hair black - unfortunately his hair dying skills do not match his grappling skills and today he showed up with blue hair!! Nice work champ 😂😂😂 #youmayhavewonthebattlebutdillonwonthewar

EBI champs line up: Today saw the return of inaugural female EBI champion, Erin Blanchfield to training with the squad. Here she joins fellow EBI champions, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, along with future EBI champion, Nicky Ryan and her primary coach, Karel Pravec after a great Monday afternoon training session. This tough and dedicated young lady makes the long journey from hometown to NYC daily to train with squad regulars and keep pushing her technical depth and expand her repertoire. Great to be back in NYC and seeing everyone (even a very jet lagged Garry Tonon god bless him 😜😜) back on the mat and getting ready for upcoming challenges.

Meanwhile...back in New York City: The squad had a big weekend in London, winning all three bouts at Polaris 5, but back in NYC Gordon Ryan stayed home to compete in The Grappling Industries absolute no gi event as part of his ADCC preparation. He won first place, taking every match by submission and showing great progress in positional control and linking that with submission skills. Grappling Industries put on a very fine event for local athletes and it was great to Mr Ryan step in and get back on center stage. The advantage of local shows is that they can provide excellent stage experience with no significant interruption to ones training schedule - ideal when the world championships are right around the corner. Moreover, because they are local, they tend to involve matches with known local rivals and thus provide a great measure of progress when you can assess previous matches versus current matches. As such they are a great resource for athletes to both prepare for big events and gauge their development over time. Here Mr Ryan relaxes on the podium and it seems, looks to gauge his progress in the skills of flexing and posing 😆😜 in addition to his ever growing jiu jitsu skills.

Success in London: The squad won three out of three at Polaris 5 grappling championships here in England. All three matches were tough, hard fought affairs where positional domination on the floor, takedowns on the feet and a higher work rate of submission attempts got the wins. The squad always looks to win via submission, tonight we got close, with some training, next time we will work even harder for the breakthrough! Thanks to Polaris for putting on a great event in a great location. Thanks to our opponents who showed great skill and always provide us the tough resistance that creates improvements in ourselves. I fly home very early tomorrow to get back to teaching the other squad members in preparation for ADCC. By midweek everyone will be back in the Apple working towards new goals 😊😊 Hope you all enjoyed the show!

All weighed in: All athletes weighed in today for Polaris 5 in London. Garry Tonon faces the very talented Dillon Danis. Originally the bout was set for 170 pounds, then modified to 180 pounds as Mr Danis is competing in a higher weight category in the upcoming ADCC world championships. Today he weighed in at 184 so he will have a good size advantage. Mr Danis has greatly improved his wrestling and leg locks since the two last met - both factors that will make this a very tough rematch. Jake Shields goes up against British strong man and jiu jitsu stand out Daniel Strauss, who must be among the strongest men in the game. Apprentice Oliver Taza will battle against local stand out Ross Nicholls. Last night of training tonight - nothing too intense - as the athletes go into final phases of preparation for the big show in O2 arena here in London. This marks the first time that Polaris will be available on UFC fightpass - the same move that helped propel EBI into the spotlight of grappling world. Here's hoping the exposure can take our sport to a new level of viewer participation. Happy to see rising stars like Mr Tonon and Mr Danis and established stars like Mr Shields along with Shaolin and Cael Uno creating a buzz and interest level that in time will pave the way for expansion of the sport overall.

Grass roots jiu jitsu: The squad went out into East End London to train tonight at the new gym of UFC fighter Claudio Silva #claudiohannibalsilva who has opened a new school and does a fine job teaching jiu jitsu. The squad spends most of our time in a basement in NYC so it's always a pleasure to get outside and train in new places around new people. It often reminds me of my early early days in jiu jitsu when my dear sensei Renzo Gracie would teach in small clubs and Dojos to tiny groups. It is like going back to the grass roots of the sport - small groups of dedicated enthusiasts learning our craft far from the big centers of the sport. I always feel like it's good for ones soul to do this - to go back to where you started from and get that same feeling of wonder you had as a white belt - it's a rejuvenation we all need periodically. Here Garry Tonon, Jake Shields and Oliver Taza work their submission skills as I run them through a workout at Claudio's little London gym #claudiohannibalsilva Preparation is going well - at this stage it's polishing skills rather than developing skills - more of the same tomorrow as show time gets close!

New guys in town: Squad standouts Garry Tonon and Oliver Taza get a great workout in at a local school here in London #10thplanetlondon. It was fun making the switch back to pure submission grappling training rather than the more positional work we have been doing lately in preparation for adcc world championships. It's always nice to workout in a new room and work under a different vibe and atmosphere. Now time to get back to hotel shower and get dinner - more of the same tomorrow! Two days of fine tuning and then the big show at O2 Arena London!

On the road again: Back at JFK airport, headed to London for Polaris grappling featuring Oliver Taza, Jake Shields and Garry Tonon taking on tough opponents on the other side of the Atlantic. Note to all - NEVER allow Garry Tonon to book your airline tickets - EVER - I have been booked into a four hour wait at exciting Manchester airport before connecting to London 😒😖😣#ihopedillonbreaksyourlegandstranglesyougarrytonon. It's been a while since we were in Old Blighty (England) - looking forward to seeing everyone. The squad has been training hard and looking to show our brand of grappling to our English fans. Ironically as I leave NYC we have some classic grey London weather! Hopefully it's sunny NYC summer weather in London 😊😊getting ready to take off now - see you in England!

Reflections on my sensei - real respect vs superficial respect: my sensei, Renzo Gracie is widely acknowledged as one of the best jiu jitsu coaches of the modern era. For his students, most of our lessons were technical in nature - but some of the most memorable had nothing to do with technique, but instead with other aspects of the sport. One day I was away with the squad, traveling for a match. Mr Gracie stepped in to teach the afternoon class that I usually teach, so I was not there to witness the lesson, but heard it second hand from those who were there, but it's importance was apparent as soon as I heard it. A visiting athlete who has considerable exposure on the grappling circuit and who often visited to train was present for the class. As Mr Gracie began teaching, the visitor sat on the sidelines and played around with his phone. The rest of the class went to work as Mr Gracie went through technique and drills. Eventually it came time for live sparring (randori). The visitor suddenly put down his phone and decided it was now time to enter the class. He approached Mr Gracie and bowed solemnly and asked to join in the sparring. Mr Gracie did not even look at him, he said, "next class begins at 6pm." The visitor was surprised. "I can't train now?" Mr Gracie replied, "we've been training for forty five minutes while you played with your phone - now you feel like training? My sensei has the most transparent face I ever saw. When he is happy, everyone can see it - and when he is pissed off - everyone can see that too! 😜😜 The visitor wisely stepped off the mat. Superficial symbols of respect don't count for much compared with actions that convey REAL respect - training with commitment and giving your all. No one cares how solemnly you bow or how many times you say "osu" or any other mere symbol of respect if your actions convey the opposite. Don't get caught up in the symbols - worry about the substance. My sensei never asked us to bow, call him "professor" or say "osu" to everything he said. The only thing he asked was that we gave our best effort - that was the only form of respect he taught and, for us as students, the most important we could learn.

Heading out: You can have as many coaches and training partners as you want around you; all your friends and family, thousands of cheering fans, in some cases a whole nation - but in the end ONLY ONE THING COMES WITH YOU INTO THE CAGE OR ON TO THE MAT - YOUR PREPARATION. In those lonely few moments before your name is called and the arena roars there is no lying to yourself. If your preparation was thorough it will lift your spirits and buoy your confidence; if not, whatever fears and doubts you have will be amplified tenfold. In training, whenever your spirit is diffuse and motivation lacking - picture yourself heading out to the arena. Understand that every forward step in training, no matter how tiresome, repetitive, boring, will be part of a shield against the fears and doubts your future self will feel when your name is called.

Illusion: When athletes go out to compete in high level shows there is always much fanfare and bombast as they enter - lights, music, cheers and boos. All this is to create an illusion - the illusion that what is about to transpire is something bigger and greater than they have ever done before. The simple reality is that IT IS EXACTLY THE SAME THING YOU DO EVERY DAY, it just so happens to be performed in front of a group of strangers in a noisy and colorfully lit arena instead of your gym. The only reality is you and your skills set/preparation vs him and his skill set/preparation adjudicated by a referee under an agreed upon rule set - ALL ELSE IS ILLUSION, NO MATTER HOW STRONG THE FEELINGS AND THOUGHTS YOU HAVE WITHIN YOU TELLING YOU IT IS REAL. Acknowledge this and go forward with confidence, deny it and go forward in fear and anxiety.

Memories: Jiu jitsu is best seen as a lifetime activity, so along the way there will be a vast store of memories for all of us. Keeping track of them is often a great way to help stay motivated and reflect on progress and make future goals. I was very lucky as a student to study under my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie, quite possibly the most charismatic man in the sport - a master technician and proponent of open experimentation in development that made him a creator of a student body with greatly disparate styles and viewpoints. Under him were his senior students, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie, who did so much to motivate and inspire us every day in training. Every time I cast my mind back to those early days, I find reasons to remember old techniques and insights I never should have forgotten, goals I lost track of and should never have stopped pursuing, and most important, reasons to laugh and smile. Don't lose track of these memories - they are yours and yours alone. No one can take them from you, few can understand the value they hold in your heart. Whenever you feel you are losing your way - they are the best means to get you back on track. Cherish them as you would your best techniques and accomplishments. Here, my fellow students, Shawn Williams and Paul Creighton and myself finish up another session with our dear sensei - this must be around the late 1990's - early 2000's - the only rashguards you could buy then were made for surfing 😜 Never lose sight of cherishing your time in the sport, the characters, the hopes and dreams, the temporary failures and the laughter. Remembrance of the past makes for a stronger future.

Ink to paper: A big day for Georges St-Pierre today as he inked the contract for his return to the octagon on November 4 in the world headquarters of the fight world - Madison Square Garden, New York City, against current middle weight champion, Michael Bisping. This is a huge test for Mr St-Pierre. First, it will be four years since his last fight. Second, it is in a weight class above his own. By the end of his career, Mr St-Pierre was a very averaged size welterweight, now he is taking on a big middleweight. In addition, Mr St-Pierre has been through two acl surgeries - this will be a very stern test indeed - no warm up fights - right back into the fray after a very long lay off against the bigger champion. However, in my coaching experience there has never been an athlete so well suited to taking on the most difficult of tasks and finding a way to break through to success. Mr St-Pierre is much more than a great athlete. He is a strategist of the highest order,
Both in preparation and in the cage. The professionalism of his approach is unparalleled in my experience and I am certain that on November 4th he will be ready for action and these two legends of the octagon will put on a show worthy of the incredible fight history of Madison Square Garden. Grappling training will run concurrently with the squad's preparation for adcc world championships and will make for some incredible training experiences I am sure. Looking forward to seeing the troops gather for another battle and a Season of plotting, scheming, training, experimenting and learning.

When the action's done: when most people think of a training session, they only focus upon the physical work aspect. Every bit as important as the physical work is the feedback that the successes and failures of the session offer as guidance for future workouts - what needs to be improved, which aspects are showing potential, errors to be avoided etc etc. Of course there are days where we are all tired and just want to talk about anything other than jiu jitsu after a session (usually sex and violence or jiu jitsu scandal 😂) but most of the time we always conclude with a brief assessment of what was good, what was bad and what needs to be changed for next time. Only in this way can training be PROGRESSIVE rather than just an endless slogging of one athlete against another. All of my best athletes are extremely adept in this post session feedback analysis. We usually gather as a small group after class and discuss the three main lessons learned and hold a brief congress on what we can do to improve next time and then switch conversations back to mocking/ridiculing each other, any absent friends, anyone else we can think of and then steer the conversation back to sex and violence 😂😂Here I go over post workout reflections with one of the most astute (and obsessive 😜) workout debriefers I ever knew, Eddie Cummings. A big part of his rapid skill acquisition was his relentless self analysis of success and failure in training which we could trouble shoot after class to help prepare for the next session.

Sensei in the training room! My sensei Renzo Gracie has always been my most important guide and influence over the years in jiu jitsu, so it's always a pleasure when he comes in to observe and train with us. Currently the squad is preparing for the tough test of ADCC world championships competition. The specialized tactics make for a harsh training session. Mr Gracie brings so much experience of ADCC style competition and his insights as he watched the young guns prepare was fascinating. Here, the RGA Monday afternoon class relaxes after class with sensei 😊

Order of importance: Very often students come to me with a desire to learn the many precise details of a given move. This is a healthy and good attitude, as precision is very important for the successful application of moves in jiu jitsu. However, it is critical that BOTH THE INSTRUCTOR AND THE STUDENT BE ABLE TO RANK THE DETAILS IN ORDER OF IMPORTANCE, SO THAT MORE ATTENTION IS PLACED UPON THE CRUCIAL DETAILS RATHER THAN THE AUXILIARY DETAILS. In truth, when you go to apply the moves in a match situation you will be under severe stress, and in any stressful situation, our cognitive abilities are greatly diminished. In a scenario where you can only recall a few details, ranking those details from most important to least important is the single best way to increase your effectiveness. Focus upon one crucial detail will do more for your performance of a given move in a tough match than ten trifling details. So when learning details, focus as much on the RANKING of the details as you do upon the ACCUMULATION of them. Making this a habit will enable you to make the most important adjustments quickly and under pressure - a skill you will need in a tight contest. Here I point out the most crucial elements of an ashi garami variation at a recent seminar so that beginners can make quicker progress towards development in this aspect of the game.

Big Tom DeBlass getting ready for action with the squad: This Saturday night in Bayville New Jersey at Fight2Win 43, my good friend and comrade Tom DeBlass will take on the great Joao Assis of Brazil - former ADCC world gold and silver medalist. These two titans have battled previously to a draw and both are looking to show how improvements in their game will make a difference on Saturday. Mr DeBlass is a student of one of my most important mentors, my senpai, Ricardo Almeida and a very well known and respected member of the BJJ community. In preparation for this bout he came in weekly to train squad style and impressed everyone with his drive and commitment. Hats off to Fight2Win for continuing to put on great shows with impressive matchups. They do a great job of building grass roots support through local athletes, along with big name main events. They are continuing to grow and develop whilst offering developing athletes a great venue to showcase their skills. This will be a ten minute submission only match, but if it should go the distance, a judgment will be made on the basis of submission aggression and positional control - skills that both athletes excel in. Looking forward to a fire cracker when these two meet - big men, big skill sets, big following, all going down at the big show!

Details vs direction: When instruction is offered in jiu jitsu, the two general types are first, those that offer a general sense of purpose or direction. This is essential for giving the student the big picture of what he or she is trying to achieve. Second, there is instruction in the small technical details that make it possible for the athlete to perform the actions that enable us to fulfill that sense of direction. Deficiencies in either of these two areas will create problems. A sense of direction is worthless if you can't perform the tasks that get you moving in that direction; and endless details can create a myopic student who can pontificate at length on a given area of skill, but who can't place it in a context that lets him improvise and quickly identify the key features of the scenarios s/he finds himself in. Somewhere in the middle is a satisfactory compromise between the two. It is usually different for different people and problem areas. One of the trickiest times to work this problem is in seminars when I visit schools. Often there is a considerable skill and knowledge discrepancy between the various attendees. I usually find I can make on the spot adjustments based upon how people manage the drills they over as to whether I can get more complex, or stay longer on foundational aspects of the game. The success of my students in certain aspects of jiu jitsu has created a widespread interest in our game and something of a cottage industry in study and emulation of our tactics and skills. As a result, I can often get more advanced in seminars nowadays than I could have several years ago. Here I am teaching a seminar in Pittsburgh @stoutpgh where the students did a fine job of moving through some complex material on ashi garami based leg locking. It is becoming quite clear that the overall knowledge and understanding of lower body submissions around the nation has increased quite dramatically from five years ago 😊😊I am happy that my students @garrytonon @eddie_wolverine @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyryanbjj and myself can help this trend. Already I am seeing some excellent leg locking students as I travel and teach. 😊

Taking on bigger opponents: Jiu jitsu is a difficult enough activity even when matched against someone our own size, but things get very interesting when we have to take in a skilled opponent in a weight category well above our own! This weekend squad apprentice, Ethan Crelinsten, took on 10th planet standout, Nathan Orchard in the Submission Series in Nova Scotia in an open weight event. Mr Orchard is a fine competitor who has an outstanding record in EBI competition and in other high profile events. Despite a sizable difference in weight, Mr Crelinsten was able to put considerable pressure with a mix of positional and submission attacks, getting past guard to mounted positions and several strong Kimura attempts, ultimately taking the back as the ten minute match came to close and finishing in a dominant position to take a one sided decision victory. I always feel it's a great experience periodically for athletes to fight up a weight division to really test their skills - there are some risks involved - injuries are more likely, but nothing else provides such a clear test as to the efficacy of your technique than seeing it work well on a skilled bigger stronger opponent.

Jake shields getting it done: This last weekend squad regular Jake Shields took on Danny Davis in an MMA fight in Professional Fighters League in Washington. With the primary interest this weekend on the big UFC event, it is easy to overlook Mr Shields fight - but remember, as the two UFC welterweights Tyron Woodley and Demian Maia fought for the coveted UFC world title, Jake Shields has beaten both men in UFC competition in the past. His career record is littered with victories over UFC champions. He out on a dominant performance, getting two 10-8 rounds with positional pressure that melts opponents. Great to see Mr Shields taking his skills from the gym to the cage again and taking another impressive victory.

An inspiring story: Last night was the first EBI event for women - a milestone for professional women's grappling. There were some outstanding athletes representing their various teams, including world champions. When the smoke cleared it was eighteen year old Erin Blanchfield who won the EBI belt. She is relatively unknown in grappling circles, I thought it would be a good idea to talk a little about her and her achievement, as I believe there is much to inspire and educate us all as we train and try to make progress. Ms Blanchfield trains at an RGA affiliate run by Karl Pravec @silverfoxbjj a black belt from my sensei, Renzo Gracie. She got her purple belt there around six months ago. When she heard about the female EBI event, she began coming into the city to train alongside the squad, doing the very same drills, conceptual training and sparring that our athletes do to prepare for these events. Now bear in mind, she lives one and half hours away from NYC and still came in all that way most days a week, in addition to her night training at Siver Fox academy - it shows the dedication this young woman approached this great test. She was a great student, very quiet and respectful. She would wordlessly perform all the drills and complete every training assignment. Within a short time she showed incredible improvement and was submitting partners that previously overwhelmed her. In her final week of training she submitted two partners I had never seen her submit before. On the big night she showed the same kind of quiet, determined, well directed and technically sound jiu jitsu that she showed us in the training room all summer and went on to go further than all the more highly ranked and more well known opponents to take the belt! She submitted two 10th Planet athletes who specialize in this kind of event, and beat in over time two other athletes to win. It is a great lesson in how a determined self starter with motivation and a plan can overcome the odds and get to their cherished goal. What a remarkable performance by Ms Blanchfield- not just on Sunday night, but all summer, as she quietly and professionally laid the groundwork for her success at the big show!

Making progress: This weekend, talented apprentice(kohai), Jason Rau competed in a local submission event, Rise Submission Invitational at 170 pounds with EBI rules. Mr Rau is a student of one of my mentors, Matt Serra. He came just a short time ago to begin training in our method and has made great progress. This weekend he won every match by heel hook submission to take first place and impress the crowd. He is a fine example of someone who already had a certain skill set, and adding to it in new directions to create positive change in his jiu jitsu. So often I hear people say that some part of jiu jitsu is not for them, or that they have their way of doing things and they are not interested in some other part. Mr Rau is a fine example of what is possible when you add new skills to an already developed game. It's never too late. Even if you never actually end up favoring those skills, you will at the very least have a much better idea of how to defend if someone should use them against you. In addition you will learn new ways of using and moving the body that will help you in other aspects of the sport. Here, Mr Rau begins a nice heel hook sequence out of his opponents offense, but a quick counterattack creates opportunities for his own offense through to the win.

New York always has a surprise in store: So here I am in a shockingly empty JFK departure lounge, doing some writing and reading and plotting to burn the three hour delay in my plane departure, when alongside me sits a fellow I have not seen in thirty years! And that was on TV! When I was in college in New Zealand, I was an avid weight lifter and many of my gym partners were part of the small Pro Wrestling circuit in New Zealand. They took their inspiration from American pro wrestling, especially the WWE (I believe it was WWF in those days) one of their favorites was a bad guy character called Virgil, who was the sinister accomplice of Ted Dibiase, the Million dollar man. Their schtick was money money money (you hear that Gordon Ryan?). Money rules all. Here I am sitting in JFK and out of nowhere Virgil sits next to me (I know, no one under the age of thirty five knows who he was but there have to be some old cronies out there that remember 😂😂😂). It turns out he is a huge UFC fan and loves Anderson Silva - I have to explain that I coached Chris Weidman to defeat Mr Silva - oops! He is a great character and apparently doing very well. It's making me think about the links between pro wrestling and MMA. Sometimes the link can be destructive, but sometimes it works well - look at Sakuraba. Chael Sonnen masterfully used pro wrestling antics to build a great career. Ha ha!! NYC is crazy - you never know who you will run into, even on a boring wait in an empty airport lounge! 😊😊

Travel: I am well known for my incompetence in many areas, none more so than travel. My poor students will attest to my miserable record of missed flights, missed connections, lost luggage - pretty much every error possible in an airport/plane. #airportloser Every time I head out to JFK airport, there is some freak car accident, thunderstorm, flash flood, anything that will prevent easy passage to the airport. #theghostofameliaearhearthauntsme Tonight I made my way to the airport - preparing for leg lock seminar in Pittsburgh tomorrow. I decide that this time it will be different - this time I will be in time. Of course Friday night in summer time NYC, everyone leaves for the Hamptons, so traffic out of the city is terrible. I wisely decided to leave early to beat traffic. As soon as I leave, I get a text that my flight has been delayed two hours. when we get to the highway, there is NO traffic at all. In twenty five years in NYC I have never seen this. When I get to JFK, the line at security is usually massive - tonight, barely a person there and I Get through in less than two minutes. Usually my metal hip replacement sets off the alarms and I have to get frisked and explain how someone my age has a metal hip - tonight they just waved me through. Just as I got through I get another text saying my flight is delayed another hour! Ha ha! The one time in my life I don't need to be on time and I get to JFK in record time! #godhatesme Hope I don't fall asleep in the seminar tomorrow! It's going to be a long night!! #airtravelismynemesis 😂😞😒looking for adventure in a very quiet and boring Friday night JFK 🤔

Grappling and geography: One of the great pleasures of spending a long time in the sport of grappling is the opportunity to see various styles of grappling from around the world. My sport is jiu jitsu, in particular the Brazilian style derived from the work of the Gracie family. Living in NYC and having students who compete globally, we often get a look at others styles Of grappling from around the world, and the what we see is often incredibly impressive. Whether it be Judo players from Japan and Korea, Sambo athletes from Russia, Senagalese wrestlers from Africa, Mongolian hybrid grapplers (somewhere between Judo and wrestling) and many others, they each carry a distinctive style has has tremendously impressive strong points, from which a jiu jitsu stylist can learn and improve. One geographical area in particular has long impressed me with its incredible depth of grappling talent, out of all proportion to its population numbers - the Caucasus regions. This area, separating Europe and Asia, running from Black Sea to Caspian Sea, encompassing whole countries, such as parts of Russia, Armenia, Georgia, Iran, along with republics/federal regions such as Dagestan, Ossetia, Chechnya and others, has produced an unbelievable number of world class wrestlers that have produced incredible results in Olympic and World championships competition. The sheer number of all time greats coming out of this area clearly points to the fact that whatever training systems these fellows have in operation, it is clearly one of the absolute highest quality. The wrestlers from these regions often appear to have a distinct style and approach and like jiu jitsu athletes, pride themselves on the refinement and quality of their technique above all else. I always get the feeling that if they put their attention to jiu jitsu, they would excel at it in a short time. The NYC area has a big Russian population and so often we get wrestlers from the Caucasus stop by and they always impress with their smooth and subtle style. Here, Rustam Chsiev, combining wrestling with submissions, impresses the crowd at an EBI event, where he got all the way to the finals against Gordon Ryan.

Spreading the word: I always love teaching some of the key elements of our approach to jiu jitsu in a new environment. It's a great chance for me to focus on the fundamental parts of our game that myself and my full time students tend to take for granted when we work with each other, but which are not obvious at all to the uninitiated. Any chance to re-visit the foundations of jiu jitsu, whether it be jiu jitsu in general, or our approach to it, is a healthy thing for a student. IN ANY GIVEN SKILL BASED ENTERPRISE, MASTERY OF THE FUNDAMENTALS WILL DETERMINE HOW FAR AND HOW FAST YOU PROGRESS THROUGH THE HIGHER LEVELS. This Saturday in Pittsburgh I shall get a chance to teach some of the core features of our leg locking game to a new group. Though I currently have some severe physical limitations, most of the essential features of my system can be demonstrated. Here, I work with GarryTonon @garrytonon and Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj in Singapore at Evolve gym, covering intricacies of grip and positioning to a curious audience - and a very stoic drill partner! (Uke)

People constantly warn against the dangers of over confidence; but in all honesty I tell you this - for every match lost by over confidence, a hundred are lost due to excessive timidity.

Two kinds of strength - two approaches to combat: This weekend welterweight champion Tyron Woodley takes on jiu jitsu master, Demian Maia in what will be a fascinating contrast not only in fighting style, but body type. It is rare these days to see such diametrically opposed approaches to fighting. Mr Woodley is one of the most explosive fighters ever seen in the octagon - just a single blow from his right hand is fully capable of ending a fight at any time in a match against anyone in the division. His body is perfectly disposed to create explosive power, and accordingly he has created a fighting style based around that. Mr Maia on the other hand, almost completely lacks explosive power, but excels in isometric tension and static strength. If he secures a controlling grip and position, he is capable of holding it indefinitely all the way through to a finish against anyone in the division. Their modus operandi is so different, yet equally deadly. One gets the impression that if either man can assert their mode of strength under their conditions, they shall win easily - but who will be able to do so? That's what makes this such a fascinating battle. Normally in modern MMA, the two athletes have fairly similar, well rounded skills, which usually results in very even matches - but here the contrast is so extreme it would seem whoever can get their strength in place first will win comfortably. Behind this fascinating match up there is a valuable lesson for us all - the correlation of fighting style with body type. Our body is the medium through which we must express our skills; as such it is critical that we choose wisely our techniques, strategy and style. The better our choices in this regard, the easier the task of maximizing our effectiveness in combat. It is wonderful to see even at this level, the many possible means to combat effectiveness offer such divergent approaches equal opportunity to championship glory. This match posits the critical questions we must always ask ourselves - WHAT ARE MY PERSONAL STRENGTHS AND WHAT AM I DOING TO MAXIMIZE THEIR VALUE IN TRAINING AND COMPETITION?

Reunion: When Georges St- Pierre was getting ready to fight Jon Fitch, he kept telling me about this incredible Karate fighter, Steven "Wonderboy" Thompson @wonderboymma he had brought into the camp for sparring. He came back for the Carlos Condit camp and I was shocked at how effectively he used movement, distance and angle to set up effective strikes whilst avoiding counters. Later on, I brought him in to Chris Weidman's camp for Anderson Silva to prepare him for the striking pyrotechnics of the great Brazilian champion. The two worked so well together, they became great friends and training partners, swapping grappling and striking knowledge. Both went on to super stardom in MMA and many more accolades to be won in the future. It was a pleasure to catch up with him again Saturday night as we cornered Chris Weidman to a dramatic victory. Watching him illustrate evasive movement into strikes is one of the most impressive memories I have in coaching MMA. So often I hear people disparage certain martial arts as part of an MMA program - karate is a common target. I always laugh when I hear this - for I am quite certain that five minutes of sparring with Mr Thompson would drastically change these doubters opinions! In truth, all of the martial arts that have a sport component which necessitates live training/sparring with competition have valuable contributions to make to an MMA program. They each have areas of specialty that we can benefit from. It is up to us as individuals to find a balance between each of their offerings that works for us. Here we get a chance to catch up on old times after the show.

Perfect performance! The great Roger Gracie took on Marcus Almeida "buchecha" in a rematch today in what was essentially a battle for the title of greatest of all time. Their first bout had been a titanic struggle to a draw. Few were aware however, that Mr Gracie had fought in the immediate aftermath of a severe staph infection. This time he came in healthy and despite a long lay off from competition, put on a characteristic display of classical jiu jitsu perfection to shut down a very powerful and dangerous opponent, and, as he has done throughout his career, make it all look easy and simple. He went back to a theme exhibited so often in his matches, strong gripping sequences in the standing position to shut out his opponents standing attacks, then dragging his opponent to his guard and coming up from bottom to his opponents back in such a calm and relaxed manner that it always seems to make his opponents look like beginners - except that it is the second best jiu jitsu athlete in the world. From there, the usual inevitability of the finish and the seeming impossibility of escape for the opponent. Fittingly it was a last show for Mr Gracie. There is simply nothing more he can do in the sport, and, like all great performers, he saved the best until last 😊

What a night, what a fight!! Chris Weidman did exactly what he said he wanted to do - to show that the hallmark of champions is their capacity to deal with loss and adversity and come back stronger than before. He did it tonight against a very tough and dangerous Kelvin Gastulem who has been on a tremendous winning streak and who again proved dangerous with his powerful rear hand tonight at the closing stages of the first round. However, in front of his fervent home town supporters, there was no denying Mr Weidman tonight. He came back brilliantly with his own rear hand interspersed with takedowns and ground control. Ultimately he got the breakthrough with his tokui waza (favorite move) kata gatame - the head and arm strangle. This was a fitting end, it represented what this fight was all about - a return to his roots that made him a world champion. He came in tonight at the same weight he fought Anderson Silva, looking much better than recent fights where he sacrificed too much weight. It was a joy to be a part of his preparation again. I have not been involved in Mr Weidman's camps since his second fight with Anderson Silva so it was an amazing experience tonight to once again watch this amazing athlete thrill the crowd with his skill and heart. Heading from Long Island to Manhattan- tired but happy, ready for a day of teaching tomorrow 😊😊 Hope you all enjoyed the show as much as I did!

It begins again: Chris Weidman @chrisweidmanufc successfully weighs in today in hometown Long Island in preparation for his fight tomorrow against the formidable Kelvin Gastulem. It has been a joy seeing the old gang together again, Ray Longo and Matt Serra, along with the pride in Mr Weidmans heart in headlining a UFC in the town in which he grew up and to which he is fiercely attached. Also on the card is RGA standout @rafaelsaponatal in what should be a great New York night of MMA. Now a quiet night of rehydration, refueling and game planning and then action tomorrow night!

Another day, another room: I am a big believer in consistency in training. Most of your training should be in one room with a group of like minded people. Only in this way can a routine be established over time that can create skills that can produce great results. Nonetheless, any athlete must be able to perform anywhere and at any time. Thus it is good periodically to get out of your regular spot and train in a new place with new people. Very often a simple change in routine can get positive results. This becomes a necessity for professional athletes who must travel to compete. They must develop the adaptability to get a great workout with anyone in any room - that is a real skill in itself. Here, Garry Tonon trains in England at a Polaris event in a small town called Poole, where we showed up randomly last year and trained with some excited locals in their interestingly painted gym. The action must have been good because the entire room steamed up like an English mist!

Fighting for advantage: One of the central premises of jiu jitsu is this - ALWAYS GAIN SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE COMMITTING TO AN ATTACK. The most widely understood form of advantage in jiu jitsu is positional advantage, but there are many other forms as well. Adherence to this fundamental principle is probably the single biggest and most important commitment the student can make. It is so easy to focus upon the moves that comprise the actual attack, and fail to pay attention to gaining the initial advantage that makes it possible against a knowledgeable and resisting opponent. The higher you go in the sport, the stronger your adherence to this essential axiom of the sport must become, for at the highest levels, EVERYONE KNOWS ALL THE MAJOR MOVES AND ALL THE MAJOR COUNTERS TO THEM - victory will go to the athlete who gains sufficient initial advantage that his his opponent cannot stop it, despite knowing what it is and how, in theory, to stop it. Here, Garry Tonon works hard to gain advantage in the standing position against the powerful Yuri Simoes in an open weight EBI event.

Seeing the old gang: It was my pleasure to trek out to Long Island NY to see Chris Weidman and Gian Valente prepare for their matches this weekend at his gym. Mr Weidman and Mr Valente worked out under the watchful eyes of Ray Longo and welterweight title challenger, Stephen Thompson. Coaching such a talented athlete will always be a highlight of my coaching career. When Mr Weidman opened his own gym his ability to come in to train in Manhattan was curtailed, but whenever he comes in it's a joy to watch his skills on the mat. He is looking very well prepared for what will be a very tough match indeed against the outstanding Kelvin Gastelum - the first time the UFC has ever been in Long Island. This is a great honor for Mr Weidman - I know he is intensely proud to headline a big show in his home town. Here he is relaxing after his last full power workout with Gian Valente, Ray Longo and Wonderboy Thompson , along with Wife Marivi and his charming children. It's impressive to watch the input of Mr Thompsons electrifying standing skills combined with the tactical sense of Mr Longo's direction. This will be a fascinating match up to be sure! Both fighters have evolved and come so far. I am heading out to Long Island now to run Mr Weidman through some grappling drills, an area he always excelled in 😊😊

One move - with many faces: One of the central demands jiu jitsu makes of us is to adapt the various techniques of the sport to the limitless and rapidly changing circumstances in which we may have to apply them. Accordingly, any given technique will often have many variations that allow it to cover a vast number of contingencies. This is why at the higher levels, I often am reluctant to say someone is doing something incorrectly (though I am usually not reluctant at all to say something is wrong at beginner levels 😜). Very often good athletes can discern a different means of performing a technique THAT STAYS TRUE TO THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF THAT TECHNIQUE (and thus remains effective), BUT INVOLVES SOME UNORTHODOX ELEMENTS THAT MAKE IT APPEAR "INCORRECT." This is a good thing, for it allows for adaptation to the actual circumstances, rather than an artificial adherence to correct form that may not apply in that particular circumstance. Here, standout apprentice (kohai) student, Oliver Taza, takes gold at the IBJJF New York open with a juji gatame arm lock from his opponents back, but changes into an unorthodox leg positioning to better cover the angle and positioning of his opponents body during the transition and subsequent defensive movements. Despite the cosmetic changes, THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF THE MOVE ARE RETAINED - AND THAT IS WHAT IS IMPORTANT FOR VICTORY.

Clash of Titans: Next week in Rio de Janeiro will be a super fight as big as any in the history of jiu jitsu - the two greatest heavy weights of all time will meet for a rematch. Roger Gracie will once again take on Marcus Almeida at Gracie Pro, run by the great Kyra Gracie, who has done an incredible job getting the best people together in competition in the birthplace of the sport. Last time these two titans met it was in a twenty minute submission only context - officially it was a draw, since neither could submit the other within the allotted time, but it was clear that Mr Almeida got closest with a beautifully executed juji gatame armlock that Mr Gracie, a veritable master of defense, had to use all his skills to extract himself from. However, Mr Gracie was recovering from a severe staph infection at the time, which clearly sapped his strength i the closing stages of the match - this time, both athletes appear to be one hundred percent healthy. It will be played as a standard IBJJF ten minute match -
an excellent format for the match - both athletes excel in both submissions and positional attacks, so they will get a positive result that won't leave any doubts at the conclusion. Mr Gracie will be cornered by my sensei, Renzo Gracie, who has a been a mentor for Roger throughout his professional career and who has assisted him to most of his greatest wins. Both men can legitimately claim to be the best of all time - to see a match were they get a chance to solidify that claim is a great day for not only the athletes, but the sport itself. Of course, I am biased in favor of Roger Gracie, he often comes to NYC to train with his cousins and sensei Renzo. I consider him the pinnacle of classical jiu jitsu- positional control through to submission and in addition, one of the great role models of the sport. However, there is no denying the achievements and skills of Mr Almeida, who has built up an incredible array of wins that absolutely rival the record of Mr Gracie, and all done at a young age. In addition, he will bring a weight, strength and overall athletic advantage to the match that will test Mr Gracie's world renown skills to the limit! What a match!!

Stage entrance: The last seconds before a match begins - here, Eddie Cummings gets ready for another test on the stage at an EBI event, flanked by Garry Tonon, Ottavia Busia and myself. At this point all the physical work has been done and the there is nothing more than some last second mental reflections before the action begins. This photo captures well the spirit of those tense moments prior to stage time - the camaraderie, the intensity, the feeling of the unknown, of self doubt mixed with the desire to show the world what you have trained so hard to do. Though the crowd and even the cornermen/women are there, this moment belongs to the athlete

Subjecting the student to stress: A well known image of teaching is that of the drill instructor. In every military of every nation their modus operandi is the same - to subject the recruits to severe pressure as they learn the skills and organizational structure necessary to secure peace and wage war. Have you ever wondered why they all teach the same way? And have done so in this manner since the earliest days of military history? In every other area of human teaching, there are many different theories and methods, but in all the militaries of the world throughout history - only one. The main reason I believe, is to prepare recruits for the most stress filled environment known to man - war. As the environment in which the student is expected to perform rises in stress level, THE MODE OF TEACHING MUST REFLECT THIS. Student must be subjected to an appropriate degree of stress in daily training to prepare them for whatever stress level they are expected to perform in. Now there is no scenario in which jiu jitsu comes even close to the stress of war, but high level combat sports can be a environment significantly tougher than most people are used to. When students have professional aspirations, I tend to be considerably more demanding, obnoxious, critical, confrontational and stress inducing than I would normally be. The rational is exactly the same as that of a drill sergeant. If a student is to survive and flourish in a harsh, competitive environment, he must learn in a harsh environment. Of course this must be kept within reason. Sometimes I see senseis engage in behavior that goes too far. As a general rule however, I do favor a mode of teaching for those with competitive aspirations (or even just a strong desire to get good at the sport) that surprises many visitors with its foul mouthed, hyper critical, intolerant ways. Of course this is not a good way to operate for an average class, but among the more seasoned students with a desire to excel in the hurly burly of competitive combat sports, a little vitriol thrown into the instruction helps create minds that deal better with stress than overly nurtured students.

Active observation: As training begins I always try to keep an eye on the room and look for any need for intervention (not interrupting the class, but usually afterwards or in subsequent classes). This is an opportunity for a coach to assess whether a given move or concept is working as intended for the students. In problematic cases the essential question is whether failure is due to inadequacies in the technique itself, or my presentation of it, or the students implementation of it. Usually it is a mix of the latter two, though sometimes the first is the culprit and changes must be made. The best way to appropriate blame is by observing how the class as a whole is handling the assignment. If there is universal failure, but the technique has been shown previously to be effective in competition, then the blame should be put on me as the coach. I need to do a better job of presenting the material. If some students are successful and others failing, it is probably a failure of student comprehension and extra time needs to be devoted to remove the confusion among those who are not performing adequately. If even the most talented students are struggling to apply it successfully despite having a clear understanding of what they are trying to achieve and how to do so, then we will break the technique down after class and see if modifications can be made to make it work, or abandon it. This constant assessment of performance and judgement of the root of FAILURE is key to forward progress, not just in jiu jitsu, but in all aspects of life. Often people shy away from addressing failure, but locating and addressing failure is probably the quickest route to improvement. The key is to see failure as an opportunity for advancement rather than an episode of embarrassment or shame. If we take the latter point of view, we all would have been shamed out of the sport as white belts! Here I check out the action in Singapore at a large seminar in Evolve jiu jitsu academy. This presents slightly different problems as the students are all strangers, but the general idea remains the same.

Creating a connection and changing a mindset: Normally when we think of instruction in jiu jitsu we think of our daily technical lessons that aim to improve the precision with which we apply technique. There is however, an entirely different kind of instruction that is of equally great importance (and in some ways even greater importance). I am talking about INSIGHT THAT CREATES IN THE STUDENT A NEW POINT OF VIEW THAT CHANGES THE DIRECTION OF THEIR STUDY AND GIVES THEIR TECHNIQUE A SENSE OF DIRECTION. Consider an example from my sensei, Renzo Gracie. When I was a white belt, I hated bottom position and always sought to fight on top. Mr Gracie had observed me in training and one day when we talked I expressed my preference for getting to mounted position and doing everything from there. Mr Gracie said to me, "John, you realize the guard is just the mounted position upside down," and walked away, leaving me fascinated and suddenly eager to try a position that I had totally avoided and which he wanted me to train. It was a simple, and in retrospect, not entirely true point - but it opened my mind to a new direction in training - and that is precisely what it was intended to do. Years later its effects can still be seen. A cornerstone of my coaching philosophy is that in grappling (not fighting) top and bottom are neutral with regards our ability to enter effectively into submissions. I never forgot the power of insight as a mode of instruction over and above technical lessons. Here I discuss approaches to sankaku, the triangle, with Nicky Ryan, a technique in which he excels. Over and above the mechanics of a given move, there must be a GUIDING PHILOSOPHY which gives the techniques direction and creates a genuine sense of self expression in the athlete

Levels of intensity: One of the best features of jiu jitsu as a martial arts is the degree to which it allows practitioners to adjust the intensity of the moves to the situation in which they find themselves. This allows for choice in our application of the art - it can range from very mild to very severe, depending upon the context. Probably the single best way to assess the skill level of a jiu jitsu player is to look at their ability to play with the full range of intensity, from low to high against high level opponents in competitive situations. When you see someone effortlessly controlling a fully resisting opponent, that is a very clear sign of technical excellence. Winning is one thing, but HOW you win is always the deeper story of your skill level. This weekend, up and coming apprentice (kohai) student, Stanley Rosa, showed his rapidly improving technique through superb control. Mr Rosa is a student of my great friend, Doug Pelinkovic at RGA Bronx @bxmartialarts and often trains with the squad and in addition, I teach there once a week. The Bronx bombers have been training hard. Mr Rosa traveled to Tulsa Oklahoma to compete in Sub Wars submission only event for one thousand six hundred shekels. Fighting through a round robin event, he defeated all opponents via submission. In the final he showed excellent control in the application of juji gatame- the arm bar - to win first place. Like all the best submission holds, juji has two aspects - the control/pin aspect and the breaking/submission aspect. THE BEST PEOPLE EXCEL AT BOTH AND UNDERSTAND THAT ANY DEFICIENCIES WITH ONE MAKE FAILURE WITH THE OTHER VERY LIKELY.

Traveling man: Part of the process of improvement is traveling to test your skills, just as a thousand years ago the shaolin monks had to leave the monastery upon graduation and walk the land with their skills, so too, the modern jiu jitsu player must travel to compete and deepen his learning and demonstrate his craft. Up and coming kohai (apprentice) student , Jason Rau, did exactly that this weekend, going all the way to Iowa for The Submission Spectrum event at 185 pounds (Mr Rau normally competes at 170). Mr Rau fought five times, winning all five by submission in regulation time, one by sankaku (triangle strangle) and four via his rapidly improving leg lock arsenal. Here he displays a nicely controlled entry into cross ashi garami from underneath his opponent into a fine heel hook variation victory on the way to first place and and a thousand shekels for the piggy bank

A great performance: Robert Whittaker, the New Zealand born/Australia based MMA fighter put in a tremendous performance against Cuban middle weight sensation, Yoel Romero to take a unanimous decision victory. The fight itself was a superb example of neutralizing a very dangerous opponents weapons and enduring injury and a strong starting adversary in order create what was essentially two fights in one evening - Romero took the first two rounds with his wrestling skills and explosive leg kicking. Then rounds three through five was a completely different fight, with Mr Whittaker taking the offensive on a fading opponent, shutting down the wrestling and imposing his own game to take three rounds in a row. This was testimony to the professionalism of Mr Whittaker and his team, made all the more impressive by the fact that it was all done while carrying an apparent injury from the beginning of the match. Mr Whittaker has now dispatched the two men most people considered the two best title contenders in the division in back to back fights in decisive fashion. Along the way he has shown he can beat the best strikers, wrestlers and jiu jitsu players in the UFC. However, this win was much more than just a standout fight performance. It teaches a far deeper lesson than this. The last decade has seen the rise of "super camps" in MMA. Most athletes, especially those in the top tier, are based in a few dominant camps - Top Team, Jacksons, AKA, Blackhouse, BlackZillians etc. These camps provide massive support and infrastructure for the athletes, training facilities, medical and financial support, media help etc etc. It is increasingly a corporate approach to training. What is remarkable about Mr Whittaker and his team is that they did it all on their own, in a nation far from the usual centers of MMA. It is an inspirational story of how dedicated, self starting, highly motivated individuals can out perform the big established brands with enough hard work and passion. What a great night for Mr Whittaker and his coaching staff, and for Australasian MMA and indeed, for anyone who believes in the power of a few good men with a goal, passion and a professional demeanor

Humor in unlikely situations: In combat sports sometimes the funniest things occur totally out of the blue and amongst all the anxieties, make for great memories. In the 1980's a campy martial arts movie, The Karate Kid was released. It featured a young man moving to a new town and getting bullied by a group of toughs from a the local karate school, the cobra kai's. The young hero learns karate and takes on the local thugs in a tournament where he defeats several of them on the way to the final. The evil sensei of the Cobra Kai dojo recognizes the threat of the newly trained hero and tells one of his athletes to perform an illegal sweeping technique to break the heroes leg. He uttered the now infamous command to "sweep the leg" which has now found its way into contemporary culture as something to say anytime you want to advocate underhanded or dirty tactics to gain victory. The hero, Daniel, somehow survives the pain of the illegal technique and gets to the final against the best of the cobra Kai students, whose name was Johnny. The evil sensei again encourages the use of attacks to the now damaged leg and says, "sweep the leg Johnny." Daniel again survives and goes in to win, earning the respect of his tormentors, a hot girl friend, some dope looking cars and a pat on the back from his sensei - everyone leaves happy. Some thirty years later, Georges St -Pierre was slated to fight what would become his last title defense at welterweight against the juggernaut KO specialist Johny Hendricks. The fight camp was a very tense affair and as the fight began, Mr St-Pierre hit an immediate takedown into guillotine and the crowd roared. Then the two circled and gauged each other, there was a strange quiet spell where you could clearly hear the fighters breathing, the opposite corners instructions etc. suddenly an audience member with a booming, stentorian voice shouted out, "SWEEP THE LEG JOHNY!!!" In the midst of all the action, I turned to Firas Zahabi and said, "Dude, that was pretty f**king funny," and we got back into the business of coaching. Who would ever guess that a cheesy line from a movie I saw as a teen would come back in such a way and at such a time! 😂😂

Double Impact: Here is a remarkable case of twin turbo action - two of my favorite black belts - The St-Leger twins, Garry @gstleger and Harry @harrystleger They are not just biological twins, they are both double blackbelts in Judo and BJJ. Both competed in the world championships in Judo for the United States and have incredible skills in the standing position; but when the action hits the floor, the BJJ kicks in - now THAT'S double impact! These two tatami monsters were a huge part of one of the very best fight camps I ever participated in, when Chris Weidman prepared to take on Anderson Silva and win the UFC middleweight title. Their tremendous clinch, fence wrestling and ground skills were invaluable. Now Harry is an assistant coach at my old comrade Greg Jackson's gym in New Mexico. Garry lives in NYC and often assists me in daily teaching when my current physical problems make certain moves impossible. I have always been a strong advocate of blending standing skills (tachi waza) with ground skills (ne waza). These two outstanding athletes are tremendous examples of this. Recently Harry returned to the big apple to share some mat time with the squad and his brother for double the fun! I always tell my students, jiu jitsu is ne waza focused, thus most of our training time is on the floor, but you should at least be competent in the standing position. Our watchword is "killers on the ground and competent on the feet." These two over achievers went further and are killers in both domains!

Immediacy of input: We get thousands of moves shown to us in the course of a given year in jiu jitsu. In a time where there are schools on every block, numerous champion authorities teaching online, and a veritable plethora of enthusiasts happy to share what they know to anyone with ears - the problem for the student is not access to information, but RETAINING information. I often find the best way to make information stick in a student is to teach it immediately after they are stumped by a given problem. Sometimes as we spar, we run into a problem and fail to overcome it. There is a feeling of frustration in that moment - if the lesson is quickly taught to them in that moment - an important point demonstrated- I find it tends to stick in the student's mind better than if I simply offer cold information unrelated to their sparring experience. There is something about immediate feedback to a frustrating problem that aids retention. This has to be used sparingly however; as general rule rule I don't like to interrupt live sparring (randori). I like to see students moving continuously through sparring time as they would in a match, but occasionally if I feel the situation warrants it, I will see a situation where the student can benefit from a quick insight in response to a problem and failure - I will make the point and then get them immediately back into sparring. Usually just a quick point can make a substantial difference in performance with regards that problem and, as I noted earlier, the immediacy of the point and it's psychological link to a moment of frustration, tends to make it more memorable to the student. Here I call out a few details of wristband elbow position to a frustrated Garry Tonon during a time he was working on guillotine attacks with mixed results - in time it became one of his best weapons.

Mixing sports: As much as I am an advocate of focused training, I am also a big believer in athletes participating in other sports outside of jiu jitsu and other combat sports. For example, sports that promote versatility and ease of movement, such as gymnastics, yoga, capoeira etc, can have great benefits for jiu jitsu practice. Strength sports such as Olympic and power lifting also have their own value, as do sports that develop overall fitness and coordination such as soccer and basketball (among many). This is particularly true for very young athletes. Over emphasis of just one sport often leads to muscular and postural imbalances that can cause problems in the future. Developing bodies do better, I believe, with a wide variety of sports challenges that work the full range of human movement/ability. There is always time for extreme specialization in the future. Here, eleven year old prodigy Mikey Wilson @funkygster works his jiu jitsu skills with Katya Leontyeva, with a focus on ude gatame arm locks and heel hooks for today, as part of his jiu jitsu program. Outside the jiu jitsu dojo, he also works equally hard on wrestling, capoeira, gymnastics and break dancing (in addition to his scholarly and artistic pursuits). This wide range of movement training, along with excellent mental focus, makes him unusually adept at picking up skills in jiu jitsu practice

Happy Fourth of July from the Squad! Our great country has its ideological roots in independence, liberty of thought, personal responsibility, all tempered by pragmatism. These are not only the building blocks that made America foremost among the nations, but also excellent virtues in each of us as citizens, human beings and interestingly, as jiu jitsu students. Wishing you all the best from NYC - train hard, have fun with friends and family, and ruminate upon the shared value of our virtues as citizens, individuals and jiu jitsu players - the wisdom of our founding fathers extends in all directions. 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Fixation: Probably one of the surest ways to hinder performance is to select a given move and push hard to complete it LONG AFTER THE OPPORTUNITY FOR IT HAS PASSED. So often in a sparring session or match we develop a tunnel vision that limits our outlook to an extent where it harms performance. A MAN WITH A THOUSAND TECHNIQUES CAN BE REDUCED TO A ONE TRICK PONY IF HE SEES ONLY POSSIBILITY IN FRONT OF HIM. One of the most valuable services a coach can provide is an extra set of eyes that widen the scope of an athletes vision and alert him to other choices that can open up the action and create forward direction. The odd thing is that tunnel vision arises from a desirable origin in athletes - focus. Athletes need focus to direct them to and through the application of a given technique. However, applied too long, the virtue of focus becomes the vice of tunnel vision, as the athlete stays with one move when probability of it succeeding has become unacceptably low. Here I am calling out options for Gordon Ryan on his way to a perfect victory at EBI 11 - that night he did not need it, he found by himself the perfect compromise between focus and adaptation - a hallmark of good jiu jitsu

You can't keep a good man down forever: It extremely pleasing to see Demian Maia get one of the most well deserved title shots in UFC history against juggernaut Tyron Woodley. Mr Maia had an unusually difficult path to welterweight contention, probably due to his Grappling based fighting style which clashes somewhat with the UFC brand image. Despite numerous setbacks and disappointments, Mr Maia never resorted to the usual antics used to jump ahead of the line. Instead he focused upon one thing - winning. Seven straight wins against the best people in the division, mostly by crushing submission. The UFC has been the only major MMA organization that made money and had longevity. They did that by cannily observing what makes people want to watch a pay per view. The answer for the vast majority of fans is simple - drama and violence. Fighters that offer those two will always generate sales. Mr Maia is remarkable because he deliberately eschews both. He prefer bloodless checkmate victories and speaks in the most respectful manner to friend and foe alike. I have had the honor of coaching two athletes in preparation for bouts against Mr Maia, Chris Weidman and Rory MacDonald. I found the experience, from observing his subtle skills and game planning/countering against it, pre and post fight encounters etc to be among the most interesting and rewarding of my coaching career. When in NYC training with his great friend, Marcelo Garcia, he will often stop by RGA to say hello to my dear Sensei, Renzo Gracie. You simply could not hope to meet a nicer person. I have always believed that every great mans life tells a story. The message of Mr Maia's journey is clear. STAY TRUE TO WHO YOU ARE AND ONE DAY YOU WILL NOT ONLY GET TO YOUR GOAL, BUT HAVE THE SATISFACTION OF KNOWING YOU GOT THERE ON YOUR OWN TERMS. DON'T CHANGE YOURSELF TO PLEASE THE FRIVOLOUS LIKES AND DISLIKES OF A CROWD WHOSE AFFECTIONS CHANGE WITH THE WIND. BETTER TO BE ADMIRED BY FEWER FOR WHAT YOU REALLY ARE THAN WATCHED BY MORE FOR PRETENDING TO BE WHAT THEY WANTED YOU TO BE. Best of luck to both these great athletes. Regardless of outcome, Mr Maia will always have my unstinting admiration.

Developing mental toughness - squad style - at the dinner table after training: Straight up savage, Nicky Ryan shows a stunned Keenan Cornelius how it's done after a fine sushi meal in LA 😂😂😂😂 Try THAT with your five guys burger Mr Tonon.... #mymouthhurtsbutnotasbadasyourkneefool

Getting used to it: As a general rule in day to day training, I prefer to see athletes working with training partners a tier below them in skill level. This allows them to focus more on technical development rather than physical exertion and pressure. However, it is very important that occasionally athletes get to work with people their own level or better, particularly when competition is approaching, so that they learn to operate under harsh physical duress and not panic and break when they encounter genuine physical pressure. Young Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj , enjoying his sixteenth birthday in LA, gets some fine training in with the great Keenan Cornelius @keenancornelius . It was a fine experience for the rapidly developing youngster to feel world class pressure from a different style than he is used to and one that he must learn to deal with as he enters top level competition in the future. Developing athletes must go through the trials of being the nail - so that one day they can emerge as the hammer.

Friends and rivals: The very nature of jiu jitsu leads to intensity in personal relationships. On the one hand, it is deeply competitive- even a friendly roll at the gym has a winner and a loser. In competition it is even more pronounced. There are many people vying for one first place. On the other hand, we are all in love with the same sport and have a camaraderie of shared vision and experience. This means that often we can be involved in tough competition with someone, but at the end of the day, we are all doing the same thing and part of a brotherhood. Gordon and Nicky Ryan are currently on a tour of California- teaching private classes and seminars and also visiting our good friend Shawn Williams @shawnwilliamsbjj academy. As part of their training, Gordon Ryan trained with two of his toughest former rivals, the great Keenan Cornelius @keenancornelius and world champion Lucas "Hulk" Barbosa @lucasbarbosajj. They all had a great time training -Gordon Ryan even trained in a Gi!! 😳😜🤗 Its always great to see friendship replace rivalry in time - even though in truth the sport requires both in order to operate. Don't forget to get an opportunity to train with the Ryan brothers if you want to see our approach to the sport from two of its best representatives @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyryanbjj I don't know how these two are going to deal with a return to sweltering, chaotic, crowded New York after their Californian sojourn 😜😜😜They are taking quite a liking to the West Coast and enjoying developing a student base there 😊😊

Ne waza, tachi waza and the uniqueness of BJJ: Of all the grappling arts, BJJ probably puts the least emphasis on takedown skill. This is reflected in the points system, where takedowns score only half as much as the favored pins and there is no penalty for simply sitting straight down into ground grappling (ne waza). This under emphasis of standing techniques (tachi waza) has been a constant source of criticism over the years. As a general rule I believe that standing techniques have been underdeveloped in BJJ and that this must be addressed at some point, either as individuals (by independently studying other grappling arts such as judo or wrestling) or as a community (by changing the way the art as a whole is practiced and taught). This however, is not the topic I wish to discuss here tonight. There is another topic that few have discussed which gets little attention in the BJJ/takedowns argument, but which is of the first importance in this debate. BJJ is a ne waza-centric art. Its primary emphasis is on control on the ground. Judo and wrestling are tachi-waza-centric. Their primary concern is on the takedown itself, with a strong reward system for amplitude and power on the takedown. This creates two very different concerns on the part of the person performing the takedown in each sport. In jiu jitsu, the primary interest in the takedown is in WHAT HAPPENS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE TAKEDOWN. It is no good if you perform a fine takedown/throw but finish in a stranglehold or bad position in the aftermath - the value of a takedown/throw can be completely negated by a bad outcome on the ground AFTER the throw is completed. In a grappling style where the primary emphasis is on the throw/takedown, the amplitude of the throw becomes the only concern with no regard for the aftermath once the two combatants hit the mat. My point is this - the issue of BJJ and takedowns is not only the issue of how to get people more proficient at them, but the secondary issue that is largely ignored- HOW ARE WE TO MODIFY THEM TO MAKE THEM APPROPRIATE FOR A NE WAZA-CENTRIC ART? This to me is the more interesting project and the one which will lead to future innovations in the sport

Reflections on my students - Chris Weidman: I have been blessed throughout my coaching career to have many outstanding students infused with talent, drive and a tremendous work ethic. One of my favorite memories will always be the incredible series of wins that took Chris Weidman from a talented newcomer in the UFC to a run of victories that made him a contender and then ultimately, UFC middleweight champion - by defeating the greatest Middleweight of all time, Anderson Silva - twice. One of my favorite memories of Mr Weidman occurred when he went to San Jose California to fight Mark Munoz as part of his campaign for a title shot. The match with Mr Munoz was in a minor UFC show midweek - UFC on Fuel TV on a Tuesday or Wednesday night. We arrived on Saturday to prepare. That Saturday night in Las Vegas, Anderson Silva had his second fight with Chael Sonnen - one of the biggest fights in UFC history. We wanted to watch the fight so we went to a local sports bar, but it was completely crowded and we could not get a seat. Mr Weidman, his faithful friend, Gian Villante and myself had to stand outside and watch through the windows. It was so crowded that people spilled outside. No one knew who Mr Weidman was. Finally one young man walked up and asked if Mr Weidman was a fighter. He replied, "yes - and I want to fight Anderson Silva and beat him," pointing at the screen. As he said those words, Mr Silva crushed Mr Sonnen with a knee strike and follow up. The young man said, "you don't want to fight that guy," and walked away. When I cast my mind back to that night, I am struck by how Mr Weidman was invisible to them - a nobody - even a fool to the one person who recognized him; but in his own mind he was full of resolve and confidence in his vision and dream. As we walked away from the crowd no one could guess that almost a year later that unrecognized nobody staring through the window and who could not even get a seat at the bar would defeat the idol that they had all come to see. NEVER LET THE CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES OF YOUR LIFE DISCOLOR OR MARR THE VISION YOU HAVE FOR YOURSELF IN THE FUTURE

Neiman Gracie wins again! RGA instructor and grappling/MMA standout, Neiman Gracie had the honor of fighting in Bellator NYC - only the second time an MMA show has been put in in Madison Square Garden. He won brilliantly in the second round via classic stranglehold from the back against a very tough David Marfone in an action packed event. It was wonderful to see such a result - the move most associated with the tradition of his family in MMA, yet embedded in a very modern and well rounded game. Mr Gracie has been trained almost from birth under his father, Marcio Stambowsky, himself one of only four blackbelts under the legendary Rolls Gracie. On addition, my sensei Renzo Gracie, his cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor and the RGA Muay Thai program directors, Joseph Sampieri and Jamie Crowder. Sensei Renzo Gracie was there to corner him to victory last night 😊He put all his skills together for a very fine victory indeed on an action packed event here in NYC. His unbeaten MMA record is testimony to his professionalism in preparation, hard work and ability to learn so well from his coaches 😊😊😊

Nice match! In an unexpected turn of events at a local Grappling show in New Jersey, United Grapplers Association, in what was supposed to be an eight man tournament, most entrants pulled out, young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years old, went in! He faced the great world champion, Paulo Miyao in a nice match, fought under ADCC rules. Mr Ryan was able to get to the legs for submission attempts, but could not establish the control necessary to make them effective. Mr Miyao did an excellent job of establishing positional control, using the threat of back attacks to pass Mr Ryan's legs and get to side and mount positions with a good controlling bodylock and score his points. The match ended in an uncontrolled ashi garami. A solid win for Mr Miyao and a great learning experience for the youngster. Mr Ryan did very well indeed, giving up a considerable amount of strength and size and a massive amount of experience - for a fifteen year to even survive against such a great champion is impressive, to get some attacks in and finish the match attacking to the last is deeply impressive. As this young man grows and matures it will be a privilege to watch he becomes capable of. Great to see famous champions such as Mr Miyao in local shows and showing their skills - a good day all round. 😊

Talented individuals versus a squad: So often in jiu jitsu we see the emergence of extremely talented individuals who for a time dominate their division. It is natural to ask how they came to acquire their world conquering skills and try to learn from them. As impressive as the emergence of great individuals may be, much more impressive is the emergence of a talented GROUP of individuals. Some people have such special characteristics that their success may be due to them as individuals rather than the program in which they developed. When you see a gym put out a team of talent, clearly something special is happening. The Gracie Barra headquarters in Rio of the early 1990's is a great example. So many fine athletes and instructors came out of that environment that it is very clear that the program was of the very first quality. Thus when I asses the health of a given training program, I do not do so on the basis of its best individual, but on the average level of its people, particularly the emerging kohai (junior) students. This is particularly true when I look at the skills emphasized by a given team. Sometimes an athlete will emerge from a given school with an outstanding technique, say a juji gatame armbar. If no one else in the gym has an impressive juji, one could surmise that the athlete learned it in an idiosyncratic fashion as an individual, rather than in a SYSTEMATIC fashion as a SQUAD. THE CLEAREST EVIDENCE OF A SYSTEMS BASED APPROACH TO LEARNING AND TEACHING IS REPLICATION - can many athletes across skill level, weight division, age, sex etc utilize the skills to attain victory. The emergence of a talented individual exhibiting skills can be explained by idiosyncratic elements, but not a group of people all exhibiting similar skills - in that case there is most like an effective system at work imbedded in a sound training program. When I construct and implement a training program this is always the sign that I look for. Here, squad kohai Danny Hernandez, a very talented athlete training under my very good friend and team mate Doug Pelinkovic, gets success with our leg lock system in competition, showing its effectiveness for so many team members.

Rite of passage: Nicky Ryan attained his first adult belt today. Though he is fifteen years old, his fast approaching birthday makes him eligible for an adult purple belt. Mr Ryan's ambitions include IBJJF sanctioned competition, both gi and no gi, so having a set belt rank will be important in the next few years to get him ready for ever greater challenges as he matures. His progress thus far has been extraordinary, but he has very high standards for himself and is looking to push much, much further. We are all very proud of his amazing work ethic and maturity. In attendance were his daily mentors, Garry Tonon and brother Gordon Ryan, along with our good friend and accomplice, Tom DeBlass, who has played such a fantastic role in Mr Tonon's and the Ryan Brothers development. Smiles all round as this wonderful young talent gets his well deserved reward 😊😊

California dreaming: Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu is going to California next week for a teaching post. He will be teaching privates and seminars. This is a great chance for our Californian fans to catch up with one of the very best practitioners and teachers off our approach to the sport. Mr Ryan is known primarily as an athlete, but his teaching skills are every bit as good as his competition skills and he does an incredibly good job of showing the moves and tactics he uses with so much success on the big stage. Mr Ryan is a very innovative athlete who constantly looks for more efficient ways to get work done. If you have ever wondered how he gets his moves to work so fluidly against high level opponents, check out his teaching schedule and perhaps he can demystify some elements of his game and make them part of yours. Mr Ryan is a big fan of Southern California and is always trying to get out there as often as possible. The squad always prefers to train people over time rather than "one off" sessions so that we can create progress over time. As often as Mr Ryan travels to California, perhaps you can forge a connection and make training with him a regular thing? Meanwhile the rest of the squad will remain in sweltering, sweaty, smelly Manhattan in preparation for upcoming matches 😒😒Here, Mr Ryan is coaching his younger brother Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj and clearly has done an outstanding job as evidenced by Nicky's recent successes

Mr Crelinsten shows his mettle: The main event this weekend at Global Grappling League this past weekend was Nicky Ryan vs Marvin Castelle - a match Mr Ryan won rather quickly by submission. The co-main event was equally decisive- Ethan Crelinsten, one of our Canadian contingent, took on 10th planet standout JM Holland, and locked in a tight juji gatame arm lock for his second submission win over Mr Holland in the last month. Interestingly, this coming weekend, Mr Crelinsten will have a match with the very same Marvin Castelle who headlined against Mr Ryan, only this time it will be in Florida and under a very different rule set that allows points for pushing an opponent out bounds and other unusual elements. Both athletes have an approach which focuses upon submissions rather than wrestling skills, so I suspect the rule set will not play into the match too much. Mr Crelinsten is keeping up an extremely high work rate in local competition and getting great results

The return of the Wolverine: We are very excited to see the return of Eddie Cummings to top level grappling competition in the near future with a tremendous match up at Grappling Industries NYC event August 19th in Manhattan against the great Paulo Miyao. The squad has faced the Miyao brothers before, When Garry Tonon took on Joao Miyao and took a hard contested win. In that encounter, however, the rule set was one unfamiliar to the Miyaos. This time it will be a rule set they know very well and have excelled in - ADCC rules. It is natural for most people to see this as a match of a positional master against a submission master. Whilst it is true that one tends to win more by position and the other by submission, both are extremely talented in both domains. Mr Cummings has guard retention skills that are second to none and is also a very fine guard passer. He has been training hard and pushing his skill set and looking for new directions in training and preparation - I am certain you will see a very well prepared Mr Cummings step on to the mat August 19th. Great to see two truly top level grapplers showcase their skills in NYC!

Nicky Ryan takes the win! Fifteen year old prodigy Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj took on 10th planet standout Marvin Castelle, a twenty five year old brown belt full time instructor at the main 10th planet school and won by submission in a no time limit match, using a heel hook variation for the win in around three and a half minutes. The match took place at Global Grappling League in upstate New York today. Mr Castelle had garnered something of a reputation as a leg lock expert, but Mr Ryan was not afraid to go in for his own leg lock to take the win - when you grow up in a training room with Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and brother Gordon Ryan, the threat from other leg lockers often feels anemic in comparison. Here he is proactively jumping into the legs to take a fine win and another great step forward toward his goals. What great maturity from such a young man to train, prepare and then headline as the main event on a stacked local grappling event card and take such a fine win!

Young guns: Tomorrow squad kohai (apprentices) will go out to compete at Global Grappling League. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj will take on twenty five year old Marvin Castelle, an instructor at 10th Planet's main school. Ethan Crelinsten @ethancrelinsten will take on JM Holland another 10th Planet standout. In addition, other kohai will compete in what should be a great local tournament for the youngsters to get valuable experience and exposure on the growing submission only circuit. Seniors Garry Tonon @garrytonon and Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu will corner their understudies and give them the guidance that saw them through to so much success and which the youngsters strive to emulate. It's been a great week of training for the kohai and all are excited to put their skills to test on the stage. Wonderful to see them getting used to the idea of specialized preparation and planning to get to a goal and showing the discipline and fortitude to go in well prepared and ready for action.

Jiu jitsu as warfare on an individual scale: I am a proponent of what we might term the doctrine of scale - the idea that individual combat shares the same themes, concerns and lessons as massed combat, all the way up to wars between nations. As such, when people ask me what kind of people I study to improve my jiu jitsu, my response is often to go beyond the sources that most people go to, contemporary champions of the sport; and make forays into military theory and history. It is my belief that there is much to be learned from the many outstanding thinkers in this area that can provide insight into your development in jiu jitsu. There are a vast number of brilliant military theorists and practitioners starting long before Sun Tzu and going all the way through to the modern age figures such as John Boyd. Two military theorists who had a big effect on my approach to jiu jitsu were the Englishmen, J. F.C Fuller and BH Liddell Hart. From Fuller I learned to emphasize the great value of technical innovation in combat. From Liddell Hart I learned to emphasize indirect methods of attack above all others along with concentration of force being more important than overall force. Interestingly, Liddell Hart appears to have been familiar with the jiu jitsu/Judo notion of kuzushi (breaking an opponent's balance prior to attack) - he makes several references to it in his writing and considered it essential to successful attack. Whilst both men were brilliant in their domain, both had their flaws. Fuller appears to have leaned overtly towards Fascism in his political beliefs and got worse in this regard as he aged. In addition he seemed to have flirted with strange occultist beliefs throughout his life. Liddell Hart seems to have been involved in some degree of personal aggrandizement after WW2. Still, there is no denying their brilliance within their field and its potential value to a jiu jitsu student. In their military writings there are many gems- here is one from Liddell Hart. "Helplessness induces hopelessness, and history attests that loss of hope and not loss of lives is what decides the issue of war."

From chaos...order: Sometimes when you observe two people engaged in ground Grappling the whole enterprise just looks like a tangled mess with no direction. Unfortunately in many cases this perception is accurate. This usually occurs because neither person has a clear sense of WHERE THEY WANT TO GET TO and HOW THEY ARE GOING TO GET THERE. The first question should be easy enough to answer. Jiu jitsu clearly implores us to get to either a better position or into a submission hold or some combination of both. The real problem then, is how to get there from what is often a very confused beginning. Developing this two stage thinking - where do you want to be and how you will get there, is the key to developing a sense of constant purposeful movement that characterizes superior players. Looking at this photo it is difficult to believe that a few seconds after it was taken, Garry Tonon would emerge with a devastating heel hook variation and a fine submission victory from this awkward and seemingly unpromising situation at this metamoris event. Yet this is exactly what you must train yourself to do - to see possibilities where others don't, and then make a practical plan of how to get there faster than your opponent can conceive his own plans. This is where favorite moves (tokui-waza) can have a very beneficial effect. In a haze of confusion we will often find direction through our must trusted moves and get to a winning position.

When I first started coaching my primary interest was MMA. I prayed to the gods to send me great students. They sent me the incomparable Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman, who both rode thunder and lightning all the way to world championship immortality. When I switched my attention to grappling, again I prayed to the gods...I must have somehow angered or displeased them, because this time they sent me a bunch of dorks and nerds! What the hell is this?! Post training photo reveals the extent of geekiness in the squad! All appear to be utterly hopeless nerds who could not strangle a quadruple amputee! It amazes me that these dorks ever won a single match! The gods must truly hate me to send such a collection of slack-jawed simpletons for instruction in the kingly art #hopingforbetterlucknexttime

Jiu jitsu for a lifetime: So often I teach people for the purpose of short term gains in the sport - an upcoming match, a need to quickly master certain techniques to overcome a given opponent or area of weakness...however, the best way to approach the sport is always with the long term mindset of jiu jitsu as a lifetime activity. It is always a special thing to meet people who have been in the sport over the course of a long distinguished life. They carry insight and perspective that is always enlightening and instructive. I have found that often they can illuminate problems in contemporary jiu jitsu by offering a viewpoint that has passed out of current vogue. Today after the big Monday afternoon class at RGA, my beloved sensei, Renzo Gracie called the class in for a special moment - he awarded the coveted red and white belt to Marcio Stambowsky, a man who has lived and breathed jiu jitsu his whole life among the greatest men of the sport. He is one of only four men to receive his black belt from legendary Rolls Gracie. Even now he is a formidable presence on the mat with a beautiful game that represents many of the techniques and philosophy of his esteemed master and the other great masters of that era. His son, Neiman Gracie, teaches at RGA and fights in Bellator MMA league - father and son representing the classic and Neo schools of jiu jitsu. Joining us was Reyson Gracie, uncle of Renzo and Ruran, son of Renzo. What an incredible mix of youth and experience from the first family of jiu jitsu! Listening to the conversation and stories I learned about our sport than I did from most formal instruction! What a fine example from Mr Stambowsky for everyone today about how constant maintenance of our skills can make jiu jitsu effective over a lifetime and a formative influence on a new generation.

Team tightness: I have a strong preference for teams that work in unison on a daily basis, forging a room of people who share a vision and a program designed to take them towards it. As months become years and years become decades, this tightness creates a group of people who know their team mates better than they know themselves. Training becomes much smoother and more efficient. When I give directions to my students they can generally follow easily just because we spend so much time working together that the moves flow as easily as our conversation. When a stranger comes in to the group, it inevitably slows things down, as we have to explain the many little details and nuances that the regular students have long since absorbed into their thoughts and actions and perform unconsciously. Once the stranger is assimilated to some degree, things speed up again. Nowhere is this tightness of shared thoughts and actions more obvious and more useful than when cornering our athletes in competition. I can often convey large amounts of information in just a word or two that would be meaningless to a stranger, but to someone from our training room, may well be of great use at a critical moment. Having a specialized vocabulary for The many moves and skills we employ is a big help. It makes conveying information much faster and also makes it difficult for an opposing team to understand what we are trying to say. Here, Gordon Ryan is on his way to winning EBI 11 as Garry Tonon and myself observe and call out options that may be of some value should the pressure of the match cause him to overlook them. As we all train together and discuss our methodology together seven days a week, all the students can corner each other with ease.

On the road again part 2: Ethan Crelinsten shows fine composure and adaptability as he follows his opponents defensive movements and makes the necessary changes to get the submission victory in North Carolina at the Toro Cup during his super fight. He and Nicky Ryan will be teaching our approach to the sport at Elevate MMA at 11am tomorrow.

On the road again: Apprentice (kohai) jiu jitsu athletes Nicky Ryan and Ethan Crelinsten went on the road again - traveling down to North Carolina to enter the Toro cup against tough local competition -
Both emerged victorious via submission. Here, Mr Ryan works hard to secure the vital control of upper body grips whilst maintaining lower body control - never an easy thing against a determined opponent trying his best to break free from both. His composure and knowledge of what he has to do in order to get the job done shows as he takes his time and locks in another devastating hold for the win. Tomorrow the two kohai put their teaching prowess on display - They will cover the techniques and tactics that make victories like like this routine for them. Sunday at 11am at Elevate MMA academy in North Carolina Video by dirtywhitebelt

Catch! With most submission holds there is a significant gap between THE INITIAL APPLICATION of the hold, and the ACTUAL FINISH. Submissions, unlike strikes, do not do all their work in an instant. Once the set ups are complete, there is an initial hold AND THEN A CRITICAL PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENT IN WHICH THE MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS OF THE HOLD IS INCREASED OVER TIME UNTIL SUBMISSION OCCURS. This critical period of time is one of the most important in the sport and often distinguishes those who merely dabble in submissions from those who truly seek to master them. So much is going on. The athlete must have a clear goal that directs his movement against strong resistance to solidify and tighten the hold. S/he must also be capable of determining when the process cannot be sustained and switch to another submission or positional move. It all happens very quickly and under great physical pressure, so having the various directions that usually occur in response to a given submission attempt mapped out in advance is a big help. Here, teenage prodigy, Nicky Ryan snatches a quick entry into sankaku (triangle) from open guard. He immediately goes all out to follow the lines of his opponents resistance, shutting down as many as he can with mechanical tightness and tactical savvy (threatening other submissions etc). Focus upon this critical gap between initial application and finalization is a big feature of our training program.

Great students and a common factor: I was very fortunate to have many great students - it is valuable to ask if they had any common factors that aided their development. Georges St-Pierre, Chris Weidman, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and the Ryan brothers (among many others) all made unusually rapid progress towards their goals. Each of those men mentioned have very different attributes and personalities, but they also had common factors which I believe made them extremely quick developers. One such quality that is rarely spoken of, but which I value greatly, WAS THEIR INCREDIBLE ABILITY TO SENSE THE POTENTIAL OF A GIVEN MOVE/CONCEPT WHEN THEY WERE INTRODUCED TO IT. This is extremely important in a sport where there are a vast number of moves, but limited time to learn and assimilate them. All of these athletes could see and/or feel a move and make a quick assessment of whether this move would work well for them in the rule set they were working within. This is not a common thing. When we first learn moves, typically our early attempts are not particularly impressive. It is thus easy to get disheartened and quit or move on to something else. However, if an athlete CAN SEE POTENTIAL he will PERSIST and put the time and effort into mastering that skill to a point where it becomes a weapon in his hands in competition. The other danger is that an athlete will persist with a move that has little potential for them and waste time over moths/years in a project that bears no fruit. Of course there are exceptions to this. Eddie Cummings famously hated outside ashi garami based leg lock attacks early in his development, but finally went on to make them one of his best weapons. Garry Tonon balked at the idea of investing time in developing a strong guillotine, but finally pushed through and developed devastating guillotine attacks. These cases were the exception however. Most of the time all these athletes had an uncanny ability to assess the potential of a given move and make quick assessments as to whether it was worth investing time in its development or not. This gave their training tremendous FOCUS and minimized time wastage due to pursuing fruitless endeavors.

Stylistic difference: Very often in training and competition you will face someone with a very different style from your own. It might be because they come from an entirely different grappling background, such as wrestling judo or sambo etc. or it might be because they had a coach with a very different jiu jitsu philosophy than yours. Whatever the reason, athletes need to keep a balance between their concern about WHAT THEIR OPPONENT IS GOING TO DO vs WHAT THEY WANT TO DO. I usually find that excessive worry about what the opponent will try to do is detrimental to performance. It is good to have a working knowledge of his game so that you don't get surprised, but your primary goal must always be to IMPOSE YOUR STRENGTHS RATHER THAN TRY ONLY TO NEGATE HIS. Here, Gordon Ryan takes on the very talented Russian wrestler, Rustam Chsiev, a man who has defeated many jiu jitsu champions with a fine blend of freestyle wrestling and grappling. In this match neither man could decisively assert their game on the other in regulation time - leaving it to a tense finish in overtime where Mr Ryan's submission skills won the day. Both Athletes did a good job of fighting to keep the game in their domain rather than get drawn into timidity through excessive concern about what the other fellow would do. It made for one of the most exciting EBI finals of them all and a great example to other athletes.

Maintaining a legacy: Young Rayron Gracie, just fifteen years old, son of legendary Ryan Gracie, competed in the IBJJF World Championships this weekend, winning his first world title at Ultra-heavy juvenile blue belt in an outstanding performance that promises much for the future. Mr Gracie moved to NYC to train with his Uncle Renzo Gracie and cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor Gracie and has made incredible progress. In addition to his rapidly growing technical skill, he is renown for having a heart as big as his body - this young man will be a giant when he grows up! Keep your eyes on this one - already a world champion and has his eyes set on many more titles! 😊😊😊

Kohai taking titles: This weekend was Sapateiro 9 - the 145 pound division. Two squad apprentices (kohai) were sent, Jonathan "JC" Calestine and Ethan Crelinsten. Both men submitted all their opponents in regulation time (EBI rules in effect) to the final. It was notable that along the way they defeated EBI veterans, JM Holland via heel hook and Mike Davila by toe hold and ADCC trials standout, Ian Murray via heel hook - showing how they are getting ever closer to the next level of competition at a very young age and with very short time in training. In the final the two team mates met each other. Every day in the gym they spar and it's always a very even match - so too in the final of sapateiro 9. However, this time JC was able to catch a powerful lock to the ankle and secure a great win. He walks away with another great win, two thousand shekels and the great satisfaction of a 100% submission in regulation record - very difficult to achieve at this level - but it is our goal every time our athletes step on to the mat. Photos by Guilliana Fonseca

Information wars: I always feel that in the history of human conflict, access to information and the ability to use it to advantage, has almost always been the deciding factor in victory or defeat. Most people always attribute victory to attributes like toughness, size, experience etc. yet history shows many examples of smaller nations that possessed information on some technical innovation along with the will to use it, defeating many larger nations. So too, in jiu jitsu. I put a premium on information/knowledge over all other factors. That is not to say the other factors are unimportant, just less so than information/knowledge. This shows when the squad goes to teach to fans of our approach. We work hard to convey information in ways that students can rapidly understand and assimilate into their own game. This often involves a tricky balancing act between painting a big picture to give students a general sense of direction; along with the fine details to enable them to realize that direction. Here I am going over some of the details of our ashi garami system in Singapore as people get a good look at how we transmit an unusual degree of force into our opponents knees and ankles. It's always easier to convince people when you have students using the exact same techniques to defeat world class opponents the night before! I also got a chance to enjoy Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan teaching their own variations of our approach to a fascinated crowd. Like all my students, they teach as well as they compete - only much more well mannered and spoken than me! 😜😜Of course there are many factors in your jiu jitsu development, but I have always found that making knowledge/information the bedrock upon which all the others rest leads to the most sustained long term progress in the sport.

The foundation of our approach to bottom position ground grappling - kuzushi: There are many ways to play effectively from underneath your opponent in grappling. Some play a game of reactive game of waiting, when their opponent makes some kind of tactical or technical error, they seize upon it and attack. Others play a game of immobilization, they wrap tightly around their opponent to hold him in place and gradually work their way into offense, variations of closed guard and rubber guard are good examples of this. Our approach is to actively seek to break our opponents balance. This action is traditionally referred to as kuzushi. Kano made it the foundation of his approach to standing grappling in Judo. We look to extend that into ground grappling from bottom position. Our primary focus is always TO GET OUR OPPONENT'S CENTER OF GRAVITY BEYOND HIS BASE OF SUPPORT. Once this is done, we work of his reaction to gain either positional advantage or go directly to submission attacks. Many outstanding jiu jitsu players have used this method with great success in all weight categories. Specialized guards have been created over the years to facilitate kuzushi. If you are to make it the basis of your game, then you must train diligently in the means of creating kuzushi on a resisting opponent and learn to tie these in with the attacks of the sport. This approach to the game breeds a fast attacking style that CREATES opportunities rather than waits for them. In addition it makes for a dynamic game rather than an immobilizing/stifling one. All the various approaches have their advocates and successes. In our experience we have found the kuzushi based method to be preferential given that we seek quick entries into our preferred submissions whenever possible. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of elevating his opponent up where he will be forced to base out and leave extended limbs available for attack

Give - in order to take: A tactic that we often use in submission Grappling is that of "attack by concession" This involves conceding good position and allowing our opponent an apparent advantage. Normally I would frown upon such tactics - certainly this is not wise for a beginner to attempt, nor against someone you believe is easily capable of exploiting that positional advantage at your cost, nor in a real fight where striking is involved. However, if you have justifiable faith in your ability to generate effective movement even in bad position against your opponent, then temporarily giving up position can be a fine means of creating opportunities to attack. Very often opponents will take risks with limb extension in dominant positions that they would never take in neutral positions, as a result, when an escape is made, those extended limbs can are often very vulnerable for a brief period. In addition, this tactic can often be useful against a very cautious or timid opponent who is simply not engaging in neutral positions. The key of course is to first be strong at pin escapes and second, to be able to seamlessly tie together your escape skills with your submission skills. Here, Garry Tonon makes use of a method of escaping mount that all my athletes excel in, the "kipping escape." It is very different from conventional escapes from mount, but provides a superb platform to enter immediately into a wide array of submissions the moment you are free. Just half a second after this photo was taken, Mr Tonon was attacking his opponent's legs. I remember as this occurred the crowd murmured in concern as the opponent mounted, sensing impending doom, and were shocked to see effective offense come out of such a situation.

Old friends: An unexpected surprise in Singapore as I got to meet an old friend from some of Georges St-Pierre's fight camps, Kru Yod. The full story of our meeting is too long for an Instagram post, so I put it on my Facebook page - you are welcome to check it out there. Kru Yod is a very successful trainer at Evolve gym now. He was a big part of the preparation for Mr St-Pierre's bouts with Carlos Condit and Nick Diaz. It was great catching up with an old friend and seeing positive changes in his life. If you have time, see my Facebook page for details on the story of these remarkable Thai trainers.

Rear mount and classical jiu jitsu: In the classic point structure of BJJ, which was designed to illustrate to the student the positional philosophy that underlies the sport; there is no distinction between front mount and rear mount - they both score the maximum of four points. This is because the classical point system is designed to work with the notion of striking from dominant position in which case both front and rear mount are extremely effective. Even in sport jiu jitsu without striking, the lapels in the front of the jacket offer tremendous strangulation potential through jiu jime- the cross collar strangle - almost as good as rear strangleholds. In no gi submission Grappling however - where there is no striking and no lapels - I COUNSEL MY STUDENTS TO FAVOR THE REAR MOUNT OVER FRONT MOUNT WHENEVER THE OPPORTUNITY PRESENTS ITSELF. We put a very heavy emphasis on getting to the back, maintaining back position and finishing from the back - considerably more in fact,
Than front mount position. My students relentlessly hunt the back and put a disproportionate amount of time into developing their skills in this great attacking position. Here Ethan Crelinsten, apprentice squad member (kohai) enters the Ultimate Mat Warriors event, run by 10th Planet standout Boogie Man Martinez. Mr Crelinsten won gold, all four matches by submission to win himself two thousand shekels and gain more invaluable competition experience and help prepare to rise to the next level of competition. Here he shows his quick transitions to the back along with his finishing skills.

Touchdown in NYC: Just landed at JFK with the squad - in a cab and heading to RGA for Monday noon class. It's a grey old day here in the apple - great day to train early and leave time to reflect and thank those who served our mighty nation. Seventeen hour flight and Mr Tonon and Mr Ryan are ready to train - share in that championship attitude today. Let's rally the team and get some good preparation in for upcoming challenges at noon - see you there 😊😊

Pikachu checks in at the airport: We are waiting for our plane at Changi International Airport in Singapore - on to Dohai and then NYC. Out of nowhere Nicky Ryan reaches into his luggage and pulls out the weirdest outfit I have ever seen in my life - apparently it's called a "onesie" and he has the pikachu Pokémon variation. He put it on and sat next to a horrified squad! When I criticized in rather harsh language his choice in clothing he took an indignant air and launched into a passionate defense of onesies as a clothing option for men. Then he unleashed the line that floored us all - "actually I bought this for Gordon." It turns out both Ryan brothers are onesie fans!! No wonder they won't wear a gi! They are used to the snugly softness of their onesies!! Garry Tonon's face tells his side of the story. I am trying to pretend I don't know Mr Ryan and trying to change my ticket to another plane. I can't believe he got through security in this outfit - I guess they were just happy to see him leaving the country 😂😂😂

Enjoying the view in Singapore: Three hours before airport - squad heads to Marina Bay Sands hotel - 47th floor and a stellar view of Singapore with City on one side, water and the mighty port with thousands of ships from around the world making their stop on the other. An incredible place and a fascinating look into the heart of modern Asia. From the Far East, back soon to the West - we shall miss this place.

Fun day of seminar work here in Singapore at Evolve gym: The squad showed some of our leg lock concepts and tactics to a big crowd at Evolve gym. It was wonderful to watch Garry Tonon teach in a masterful manner his own approach to leg locking - an incredible reactive method that he used to defeat Shinya Aoki and numerous other champions. Young Nicky Ryan showed the link between leg and back systems that he and his brother exploit so well to gain victories in competition. The attendees put up with my foul language and horrendous sense of humor and learned very well the core principles of our ashi garami system. Looking forward to forging links to our friends here in Asia to show our approach to the sport. Now it's off to the airport to return to NYC and see my dear students in the blue basement where they have doubtless been enjoying the absence of my dark and horrid presence 😜😜Some Acai, some jiu jitsu discussion and then it's homeward bound! 😊😊

Reflections on the Singapore adventure: Garry Tonon won his super fight with Shinya Aoki with one of his trademark moves last night in front of a packed stadium and a very large TV audience. Going beyond that, there was much about the event that was gratifying to observe. First, it was wonderful to see a grappling match showcased on the main card of a big MMA event. It was great to see the crowd get excited to see two grapplers use their skills to put on an exciting match with a decisive finish that got as much audience reaction as the MMA fights. I TRULY BELIEVE THAT PROFESSIONAL GRAPPLING, TAUGHT AND PRACTICED THE RIGHT WAY, CAN BE EVERY BIT AS EXCITING AS AN MMA FIGHT AND DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE SKILLS THAT CAN BRING VICTORY IN MMA. I hope this is the first of many such combined MMA/grappling shows and that the divide between the sports can be narrowed. I hope that one day the athletes who represent our sport and who give so much in their pursuit of excellence can be rewarded with money and fame closer to that of their MMA brothers. I believe advances in this direction will be of great benefit to both sports. I hope that one day there can be professional grappling events on a scale not far below MMA events where athletes can showcase their skills in an exciting format that thrills crowds, advances their skill level, helps prepare them to transition more easily to MMA and compensates them for their commitment. Second, it was wonderful to see a resurgence in Asian MMA. Asia was one of the key birthplaces of our sport - there is a culture of respect here for the athletes and the skills they showcase that is unique and deeply admirable. We North Americans could learn much from them in this regard. It was great to see One FC put on a tremendous show that brought back memories of PRIDE and the glory days of Asian MMA - they just need more development time to grow and who knows how far they can go! Tomorrow we teach a big seminar here in Singapore where we will show some of the techniques Mr Tonon used to gain his victory to the local jiu jitsu athletes then back to NYC and the blue basement of learning to get ready for the next show!

One FC representing Asian MMA/grappling in style: Great to see a resurgence in Asian MMA with One FC putting on an outstanding production that rivals the biggest North American shows for production quality. Here Garry Tonon walks out into a dramatic entrance atmosphere to face rival Shinya Aoki. The sold out stadium created an electric atmosphere for a grappling match and bridged some of the divide between the two sports in a memorable and dramatic way

Victory in Singapore: Garry Tonon won his big match with the great Shinya Aoki tonight in a sold out Singapore indoor stadium broadcast to 118 nations. Mr Aoki showed both his MMA and Judo experience. He did a fine job controlling the initial action on the fence and even took Mr Tonon's back for a time, though did not threaten from there. A nice sasae footsweep saw him again take top position and use his height advantage to intelligently bodylock the hips for control. Using small movements of elbow and knees, Mr Tonon created space and inverted his body to enter his opponent's legs. From there it was an quick path to submission victory as Mr Tonon used his overwhelming advantage in this area to turn the direction of the match and get a decisive win. It's been a fascinating week of preparation and an introduction to the Asian MMA/grappling scene.

Getting ready for the show: The athletes go through rehearsals for tomorrow nights show - the audience introduction that is the tradition at most Asian shows. Production quality looks very good and the match ups are very interesting indeed. Asian cultures have a long and distinguished history of sport combat and it shows here - this should be a great show.

Three great forces at work: Morning workout in Singapore two days out from showtime. The forces of nature reveal themselves in a massive downpour and thunderstorm as the squad works out. I have always said - you don't understand real rainfall until you have been in Asia. It's a fine reminder that in an industry where we endlessly work towards ascendency among our our powers in physical power and strength, ultimately we are all equally weak in the face of the humbling powers of nature. The second great power is that of ROUTINE. As soon as we arrive in a new city or country we immediately establish a local routine around which we base our match preparation. It is our belief that ALL HUMAN GREATNESS TAKES BIRTH IN ROUTINES THAT ALLOW US TO DEVELOP THE SKILLS THAT WILL MAKE US STAND OUT AMONG OUR PEERS. Routines allow us to control a schedule and allocate the time required for skill development - it is those skills that will create greatness. FOR EVERY MOMENT OF EXCITEMENT IN YOUR CAREER YOU WILL NEED A HUNDRED HOURS OF ROUTINE TO PREPARE YOU TO SUCCEED IN THAT CRITICAL THRILLING MOMENT IF YOU ARE TO BEAT THE BEST. A third force at work here is narrative. Stuart Cooper, an Englishman deeply involved in the world of jiu jitsu, chronicles on film the work of outstanding jiu jitsu exponents. Here he films Garry Tonon's preparation at Evolve Gym and records his thoughts on this great match up with the outstanding Shinya Aoki. Such work is very important for the growth of jiu jitsu. Just as the memory of Achilles and Hector would have died if not for Homer, so the achievements and thoughts of jiu jitsu icons must be recorded if future generations are to be inspired and learn from their experience. Now it's on to medical check in and media time -
Then the routine kicks in again tonight for second workout.

Late night big city vibe - Asian style: Last workout of the day complete and late dinner at a Korean restaurant here in Singapore. Singapore hosts every Asian culture and what better Late night meal is there than Korean BBQ? 😜😊 A great night of training, plotting, game planning and general shenanigans for the squad as we investigate this fascinating city. Up early for first workout tomorrow and Mr Tonon goes through a long day of media obligations, weight/hydration checks (they do things a little differently here to ensure athletes do not lose vast amounts of weight prior to competition and thus compete much closer to their actual weight than they do back home), then second workout at night. We find a routine in a new environment as quickly as possible to become acclimated and efficient as strangers in a strange land can in the time available - part of putting on the best possible performance at show time

Match preparation: The squad checked in to Evolve gym Doby-ghaut an important transport center for Singapore. Second night time work gets the body cycles ready for night time match. Mr Tonon works with Nicky Ryan and Matthew Tesla as this fast paced city carries on through the night outside. There is a wonderful mix of modern city life infused with Eastern heritage that makes for a fascinating training environment and match venue. Now it's on to late dinner and bed in preparation for long day of media promotion and training tomorrow 😊😊

Singapore bound: At JFK with Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan - heading to Singapore for the match with the great champion Shinya Aoki- NYC training complete - final preparation in Singapore with our friends at Evolve Gym. Long journey ahead, but as always, the biggest challenges and greatest steps require us travel far, either in distance, time or effort, and usually all three. Looking forward to another great challenge for the squad and our approach to the sport and exciting projects ahead when we return to NYC! 😊😊

Extended families: One of the great things about jiu jitsu is the brotherhood created by shared teachers and students. One of my great mentors as a beginner in the sport was world champion, Matt Serra. His student, Jason Rau, trains a lot with the squad. He arrived with his teachers strong positional game and quickly began to pick up the submissions game training with us. Today he won The Grappling Industries Open weight event (Jason is a welterweight) all four matches by submission. Here he is submitting Todd Muckenheim in the final via heel hook variation. He does a great job of staying on the leg throughout determined resistance and getting his submission. It's a fine example of an athlete adding to an already strong game to push himself in new directions and get good results.

Counting down: Garry Tonon works through the final week of NYC preparation for his upcoming super fight with the great Shinya Aoki in Singapore on May 26. It will be a fifteen minute grappling match at an MMA event. Next week will be the final steps in contest preparation in Singapore. Mr Tonon had to make full use of his training experience as his main training partners were unavailable. Eddie Cummings had to go to Texas for a match that wound up getting cancelled. Gordon Ryan was badly injured in a freak weightlifting accident at the gym and most of the kohai are overseas. Learning to maximize the value of the partners you have around you is a big part of progress and preparation and Mr Tonon did a good job working through his drills and sparring without his usual partners and working the skills we believe will be important in this great match. Tomorrow will be last day in NYC and then the long journey to the heart of Asia for the big show!

Training vs fighting: A fundamental tenant of fighting is to avoid your opponent's strengths whilst imposing your own. Interestingly, in training I recommend that you often do the exact opposite. In fighting and competition (shiai) THE OBJECT IS VICTORY. In training, the object is SKILL DEVELOPMENT - DO NOT CONFUSE THEM. As such, one of the best ways to train is to identify the strengths of your various partners, AND REGULARLY EXPOSE YOURSELF TO THOSE STRENGTHS. This is a splendid way to build skills, particularly defensive skills. Here, Georges St-Pierre works with Nicky Ryan. Of course Mr St-Pierre could easily take Mr Ryan down and play a game of disengagement, but he recognizes that such a tactic would offer very little skill development. Instead, he opts to maximize training value by going against Mr Ryan's formidable leg locking and guard passing skills from bottom position. When students make a clear distinction between training and competition and the different priorities of the two, rapid skill acquisition is common. Failure to make the distinction usually leads to students who have a small skill set of favorite moves which does not grow over time. Training sessions tend to become very repetitive and dull. KEEP IN MIND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN TRAINING AND COMPETITION AND YOU WILL BE REWARDED WITH GROWTH OVER TIME, no matter how frustrating it may seem in the short term. Be mindful of one of the central paradoxes of jiu jitsu training - THE MORE VULNERABLE YOU MAKE YOURSELF IN THE TRAINING ROOM, THE LESS VULNERABLE YOU WILL BE IN COMPETITION.

Round 2: The squad always tries to keep a busy competition schedule against the best. We are excited to announce a greatly anticipated rematch between Marcelo Garcia/Team McGregor standout, Dillon Danis and Garry Tonon at Polaris Grappling on August 19 in London, England. Mr Danis and Mr Tonon famously met before at the world championships where Mr Tonon put on a fine display culminating in a powerful heel hook for the win. Much has changed since then. Working extensively in MMA circles has greatly improved Mr Danis' wrestling. His leg locks and strangles, particularly his guillotine, have also greatly improved. Perhaps most importantly, he has gone up to 200 pounds - Mr Tonon walks around at 170 and cannot try to gain weight as the world championships are soon after this event. Accordingly this match will have a very different background to their first encounter. Mr Danis recently lost a very close match in EBI overtime rules to Mr Tonon's team mate, Jake Shields, but even in defeat, he showed a great skill set and increased strength and athletic ability that will definitely play a role in this rematch. Once again, Mr Tonon will have to rely on his movement skills, technical precision and confidence to find victory against the bigger and stronger athlete. The squad always looks forward to our overseas adventures - hoping we can get more squad standouts on this London card and send a team to show our English/European followers our style and approach!

Jiu jitsu in Singapore: On May 26, Garry Tonon will take on Japanese MMA and Grappling icon, Shinya Aoki in a 15 minute submissions only match in a cage during an MMA event. This will doubtless be one of the most anticipated grappling bouts of the year as both men have a reputation for spectacular moves and the confidence to pull the trigger when they see opportunities. The next day Mr Tonon, Nicky Ryan and myself will teach a seminar at Evolve gym showcasing many of the techniques and tactics that have proven so successful for our athletes in competition. Martial arts have always had such a strong presence throughout Asia, so it is a great honor for the squad to travel deep into Asia and show some of our material. This week it will be a long one in the blue basement of learning at RGA as Mr Tonon goes through his final preparation, then it's on to Singapore - a long trip indeed, but the allure of a great opponent and a chance to teach in a new environment makes it all worthwhile. Looking forward to meeting friends in Singapore! 😊😊

A fine win for Jake Shields tonight against Marcelo Garcia/Team McGregor standout Dillon Danis at SUG 4 tonight. Mr Shields overcame the odds (at one point he was a 7-1 underdog) to take a tough victory in the EBI format overtime on fastest escape time. It is a testimony to Mr Shields tremendous work ethic that he can take on a star grappler much younger than himself in a format that he has little experience and take a victory. It was so impressive to watch over the last two months as Mr Shields came in twice a day every day to train with the squad, some of them half his age. Most athletes with Mr Shields experience and record begin to coast in training - he never did- every session was like a contest and he took on the difficult skills of EBI overtime, particularly escapes, and made tremendous progress, despite the fact that it was far removed from his normal game and skill set. What a fine example of a mature athlete staying focused, learning new skills, adapting over time and coming through for a tight, but well deserved victory. Stockton bitches!! 😊😊

No rest for the kohai: The quest to rise in skill and prominence is a constant one for the apprentices of the squad. Ethan Crelinsten, squad kohai standout who just won the ADCC trials, went right back into competition yesterday at the 16 man 155 pound EBI format Global Grappling League. With $1000 on the line, many very talented local grapplers got in on the action. Mr Crelinsten emerged victorious again - winning every match by submissions ranging over the whole body - armlocks, strangles and leg locks. Here we see him using elements of our back system to strangle talented EBI standout (and former team mate) Mike Davila and get to the final. In the final he went against talented Brazilian black belt, Alexander Da Silva, who had done very well to get to the final. There he prevailed with a well applied knee bar (hiza gatame). A happy Mr Crelinsten celebrates with team mates and a thousand shekels for the pot! This busy schedule of training and competition builds a reservoir of knowledge and experience that will prove invaluable later in the athletes career. Photo #outrunthereaper

Foreign operations: Kohai (apprentice) squad member, part of our formidable Canadian contingent (but with European ancestry) Oliver Taza, has an outstanding day in competition this weekend. He won the European trials for the ADCC world Grappling championships and has secured his ticket to Finland later in the year to battle the best grapplers on the planet. He fought four times, winning three via his tokui- waza (favorite technique) the inverted or inside heel hook. Along the way he defeated two black belts (Mr Taza is only a recent brown belt), both are former European champions. Here is some video footage taken from the final (sorry about the far away perspective- it's the best we have available) where Mr Taza combines Sumi gaeshi sacrifice throw with a nice step into cross ashi garami to secure his heel hook and the win. Great work by our two Canadian standouts Mr Taza and Mr Crelinsten to qualify for the world championships and represent their nation and our approach to the sport.

Ryan brothers dominate: Last at night at Fight2Win Pro 34, another great event for the promotion, the squad standout Ryan brothers took center stage and stole the show with two impressive victories. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan won his match with a well applied ashi garami to heel hook in less than 30 seconds. The promoters were puzzled as to what level of belt Nicky Ryan should fight at - he is too young to have an adult belt. I don't blame them for the confusion, I am his teacher and I don't know what belt to give him! In the end they went with purple belt and Nicky is now the fight to Win belt holder in his weight category. Big brother, Gordon Ryan was the main event where he took on the very talented and successful Eliot Kelly, multiple time world champion, ADCC trials champion and A man who has defeated some legends of the sport such as Xande Ribeiro. Mr Ryan however, was not to be denied. His confidence was very high coming off a very good training camp and he got his characteristic submission based game into operation. Mr Kelly showed some very skillful defenses, but the sustained pressure Mr Ryan can impose is very difficult to deal with and eventually the breakthrough came via a beautiful sankaku (triangle) combined with armbar (juju gatame). I am very happy Mr Ryan was able to show his sankaku skills. Both Ryan brothers excel in this technique - in fact they have invented their own unique versions of it that we named after them, but their success with leg locks and back attacks has overshadowed their incredible sankaku skills on the big stage. I believe this will change in the future- in the gym it is their main weapon - it's only a matter of time until this translates into competition (shiai). Mr Ryan expressed to me great admiration for his opponent, Mr Kelly, complimenting him on his defensive skills, wrestling skills and fighting spirit. Both men came out looking to win in an exciting fashion, which created a memorable match. A great night for the Ryan brothers whose diligent work, inventive approach to technique and growing confidence continue to impress me.

Colorful characters: This weekend , one of the most colorful characters in MMA history, Chael Sonnen, will return with his growing show, Submission Underground for the fourth time. It will be headlined by two of the most colorful and talented grapplers in the submission grappling circuit - Dillon Danis and Jake Shields. Mr Danis is a founding member of the. "Dream team" a very talented group of grapplers working out of NYC under the tutelage of the great Marcelo Garcia. He is often associated with another great martial artist, Connor McGregor, with whom he is an assistant coach. The squad has faced Mr Danis before - at the ADCC, Garry Tonon had a fine match with him. That day Mr Tonon prevailed with a very powerful heel hook variation, but since then, Mr Danis has greatly improved. He has had dominating victories over BJJ world champions, Jackson Sousa and AJ Agazarm. In those impressive victories he showed great progress on his wrestling and leg locking skills along with great confidence. He goes into the match a 7-1 favorite, understandable, given his recent form. However, his opponent, Jake Shields is exactly the kind of man who likes to prove Vegas oddsmakers wrong and has made a career doing it. He has trained very well with the squad. He came here with a fine positional game and has worked hard to improve his submissions skills. This should be a great match between two athletes who bring a larger than life aura with them, combined with the talent to back it up, along with the confidence and attitude to let it all shine on the big stage. Break out the popcorn and the Diet Coke, this one will be a fire cracker!

Old school and new school: It was a fun day training at RGA in NYC today. In the afternoon class, squad standouts Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon, Ethan Crelinsten and Jake Shields worked hard to prepare for upcoming matches (more on that soon 😊) Then afterwards, one of the original RGA senpai, Matt Serra came in to say hello, train and show some of the recent developments in his game. It was so much fun watching some of the evolving facets of my mentors game - some things remained, others were very new - as a total package - so impressive! I love to see development in both the sport overall and in individuals. I am lucky to have been surrounded by great people and involved in the sport long enough to witness both.

High altitude action this weekend: This Friday, May 12 in Colorado, the Ryan brothers step up to compete again at Fight2Win Pro 34 in super fight action. The format will be ten minutes of Action and a decision based on submission danger and positional control should it go the distance. Nicky Ryan will take on talented local purple belt Derek Alumbaugh and Gordon Ryan will headline against the extremely talented and tough Eliot Kelly. Mr Kelly has a long resume of high level success. He mixes wrestling and jiu jitsu into a winning blend that has seen him win at the highest levels in both gi and no gi competition. He is ADCC American trials winner from last year and has repeatedly won world championships in a range of belt and age categories, beating legends such as Xande Ribeiro along the way. He fights at super heavyweight - Mr Ryan's best weight is at welterweight, but he has worked hard to gain weight and has finally broken the 200 pounds barrier to try to narrow the size gap with some of his future rivals. Fight2Win continues to grow as a venue for developing athletes around the nation and combines fast pacing of matches throughout the event, good atmosphere, some all American razzle dazzle and high level super fights to create interest. Both Ryan brothers have trained very diligently indeed and are now working to adjust to rare mountain air of Denver. Should be a great show!

Weaving jiu jitsu into life brings life to your jiu jitsu: A theme I try hard to instill in my students is to take the lessons of jiu jitsu and apply them to other aspects of their lives. So much of our lives, in business, commerce, relationships, politics etc take the form of competitive and cooperative games - just like jiu jitsu. It is surprising how often insight drawn from jiu jitsu can illuminate other aspects of our lives (and vice versa). When this happens, jiu jitsu takes a much richer and deeper meaning for us. We see it no longer as a game or recreation, but as a way of thinking. I had the chance to express this theme in the popular TV show Billions, where one of the main protagonists uses themes learned in jiu jitsu to gain advantage in his battles against a foe. Most competition and cooperation follow the same basic structure, so we should not be surprised at overlap between jiu jitsu and other aspects of life. Often however, the themes are clearer in jiu jitsu and learned there first and applied to life later. Here, Paul Giamatti takes a Kimura from a position that people naive in ground grappling might consider inferior, but takes a win through tactics and technique - and sees a deeper lesson that will inspire and energize his character in more important ways...

Kohai making waves in Texas: It was another great weekend for the squad kohai (apprentices). Jonathan Calestine and Ethan Crelinsten entered the Onnit invitational 4 event in Texas yesterday and both submitted all their opponents, including EBI standouts Ricky Lule and Sheridan Moran, along with an IBJJF brown belt no gi world champion, mostly with variations of heel hooks and toe holds. Mr Calestine has been improving greatly of late, with the characteristic long training time and strict focus upon refinement of techniques and tactics that the squad expects. Both of our athletes went all the way to the final where finally the two team mates had to take each other on. In the gym they are very evenly matched. On this occasion Mr Calestine prevailed with riding time advantage on OT to take a narrow victory. The mantra of our kohai is always "onward and upward" - that's the spirit that takes us all from apprentice to master. Great to see these two outstanding young athletes taking that spirit and weaving it into the fabric of their lives and goals.

Teacher and student: My Sensei, Renzo Gracie, and student, Georges St-Pierre, enjoying a fun moment after a great Saturday afternoon class at RGA with the squad and Jake Shields getting ready for upcoming competition. Mr Gracie always lifts the atmosphere of the training room when he comes by to watch progress - so much experience, so many insights and such a personality to make them memorable to his students.

Excited to see Gordon Ryan back in action in two different capacities next week. He competes in the Fight2Win promotion (more on that soon) and then teaches a seminar at Musclepharm gym. The interplay between competing and coaching is a fascinating one in jiu jitsu. I am a believer in the idea that teaching always helps development of the teacher as much as the student. The level of my own game rose dramatically when I started teaching full time. Mr Ryan, like all my best students, is a very fine teacher. He has many improvements and advancements of the philosophy that our team utilizes. For our friends in Colorado- this is a great chance to learn from a passionate student of the game who has a great deal of truly interesting knowledge to offer that can kickstart a jump in your level and perhaps change the way you think about the sport. If you can get there - don't miss it! 😊😊

Spillover: I am a big believer in the notion of spillover, where changes in one area can create changes others. One of the biggest problems beginning students face is learning to overcome the natural instinct to wrestle mostly with their arms and shoulders and learn to wrestle predominantly with their legs and hips. One of the very best means of doing this is to strongly emphasize the use of sankaku (triangle) in their daily training. Learning sankaku requires them to use their legs with dexterity and precision. The attributes required for success with sankaku cross over into so many other skills in the sport that soon I notice increased use, effectiveness and confidence in the students with regards their leg work in the sport. As such I constantly work sankaku skills into their training at every opportunity, knowing that it will create growth in areas they had not associated with it. All my top students excel in sankaku - interestingly, our leg and back attacks have been so successful that few have seen how much we emphasize it, but that is bound to change in the future. Here, fifteen year old kohai (junior/apprentice) standout Nicky Ryan shows off his very impressive sankaku skills, a move that he strongly emphasizes and favors.

When the hard work is done: Nothing brings people together like shared adversity. Hard training and shared goals make some of the strongest friendships and make the punishing routine of championship training tolerable. If shared adversity is the best way to help build team unity, story telling after training is a close second! When you have a cast of characters like Jake Shields, Georges St-Pierre and the squad together - you know there will be no shortage of crazy stories to tell after class to bring a smile and laughter to everyone's face! The martial arts never had a shortage of crazy characters and events, so story time after training is always a highlight of the day. I always encourage this kind of thing - it's a great way to cement the camaraderie they will build a training program that forges elite athletes and forward progress for all. Training cannot be a joyless slogging match if it is to be sustained over time - there must be a release and sense of good times. Every gym has there their coaches and athletes who make training time intense and beneficial, but just as valuable are those characters who make it fun just to be there - I am lucky enough to be surrounded by people who are both!

The why versus the how: A big part of my teaching method is to seek as often as possible to explain the "why" of a given move over and above the "how." Usually jiu jitsu is taught in a framework of how to do things. That is fine and absolutely necessary. Without the knowledge of how to perform the various tasks of the sport, there can be no progress. However, I find students react well to being told in addition WHY we do things as we do. Doing so provides a CONTEXT and FRAMEWORK within which techniques can be ordered and understood. This makes it easier for students to recall the information later, and crucially, gives them a clear view of the big picture the instructor is trying to convey. Just a few words at the outset of a training session creates a context for the moves and techniques we will work on and creates a real sense of purpose for the entire training session. Remember moves have not only a TECHNICAL importance, but a TACTICAL importance also. This tactical value is best conveyed by explaining clearly WHY things are done as they are. Getting students to think this way creates students who can be creative and independent, rather than a group of people trained only to follow instructions and who will struggle to create their own game or improvise in sparring. Here, we briefly go over the rationale behind parts of our back defense system - then it's on to the heart of the workout - drilling and sparring!

The man in the mirror: Have you ever sparred with someone whose game was almost identical to your own? We spend so much time developing our own unique style of jiu jitsu - what happens when we run into someone whose game is almost a carbon copy of ours? It is actually a fantastic learning experience, albeit sometimes a frustrating one! It gives direct insight into the strengths and weakness of our own game, particularly in the area of our vulnerabilities to attack. In all my coaching experience I have never seen such closely matched grappling games as those between two former rivals, Georges St-Pierre and Jake Shields. Their styles are so closely matched that if they concealed their faces and wore identical clothing when they sparred, it would be a struggle to tell them apart! The whole thing looks like a computer chess program playing itself! For both athletes it represents much more than just a tough sparring session- it's a great way to look deeply at themselves and their game in the continual quest for improvement. Here both athletes relax after another tough session in preparation for their upcoming events

The many faces of jiu jitsu: Teaching the Monday afternoon class at RGA was an opportunity to reflect on the many faces of jiu jitsu. Georges St-Pierre came in for some hard training in preparation for his title challenge late this year against the great Micheal Bisping. Across from him was Jake Shields, getting ready for a grappling match under EBI rules against Dillon Danis at the SUG event in two weeks. With Mr St-Pierre was Garry Tonon, preparing for his bout with Shinya Aoki in Singapore in one month - a thirty minute sub only affair. Three different athletes preparing for three very different events/rule systems. Yet the fundamentals of jiu jitsu apply to all. I love to coach all the different faces of jiu jitsu and often find that improvement in one area has benefits in others. Here, Messrs Shields, Tonon and St-Pierre do positional work, guard passing and back control as they test their skills against each other in the gym, but always with their eyes on upcoming challenges on the big stage

Coping with loss: All competitive athletes reaching upwards will have to learn to deal with losing. It does not matter whether it's on the big stage, in the gym, at the onset of your program or at your peak - it happens to everyone - no exceptions. I am often asked by people how they should deal with loss. There are two main problems here. The first is important in the immediate aftermath of a loss. Here the main problem is EMOTIONAL - the problem is not why it happened, but THAT It happened. As time passes, the emotional phase gets replaced by the REFLECTIVE phase - the athlete begins to reflect upon WHY the loss happened. Then we must analyze ourselves deeply and distinguish between a faulty training program and a good training program that the athlete failed to adhere to. That is a big topic - too big for an Instagram post (even for me! 😉😜) With regards the emotional phase I always say the same thing "YOU FOUGHT BRAVELY AND WITH FINE TECHNIQUE, GIVING EVERYTHING YOU HAD, BOTH IN PREPARATION AND THE BOUT ITSELF. THERE IS NOTHING MORE YOU CAN ASK OF YOURSELF AS A MAN, NOR ANYTHING MORE THE AUDIENCE CAN ASK OF YOU AS AN ATHLETE- NOW, LET'S GO FORWARD TOGETHER.

Traveling with jiu jitsu: I always tell my students - when you learn jiu jitsu, you never walk alone , where you go, it goes with you. Kohai standout Matthew Tesla has a deep love of the Scandinavian countries and often travels there. This presents him opportunities to show our approach to the growing jiu jitsu community of these great nations. Recently Mr Tesla entered a local tournament in Sweden - The Nordic Open - featuring two divisions at 88kgs and 99kgs. He entered both despite being only 77 kgs himself. He won both divisions - eight matches in total, all via submission in the manner we prefer. Here is a fine standing entry to ashi garami followed by a nicely applied heel hook. Just as the martial arts monks of the old days walked the earth and took their skills with them to help those who needed it, so too, the modern jiu jitsu athlete must take his skills with him or her and help students wherever he visits if the sport is to grow and prosper.

The iron law of posture - FOR EVERY PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, THERE IS A POSTURE THAT MAXIMIZES YOUR ABILITY TO PERFORM THAT ACTIVITY WITH THE LEAST EFFORT AND MAXIMAL EFFICIENCY. In jiu jitsu and indeed, all efficient physical activity, EVERYTHING BEGINS WITH POSTURE. I assure you, ANY DEFICIENCIES IN POSTURE WILL COST YOU IN PHYSICAL EFFORT - as that cost increases, your performance will deteriorate through fatigue and the chances of your opponent successfully attacking will rise. If you are to make progress in the sport, you must make a deep study of the main scenarios you find yourself in and research the various postures that will form the foundation of success in those positions. The problem is that jiu jitsu is an extremely dynamic game - in just a short time there can be a vast number of different positions and scenarios and you must, if you are to maximize your performance, be able to switch seamlessly from one posture to another in response. THE INTERFACE BETWEEN POSTURE AND MOVEMENT PRESENTS A CHALLENGE IN LEARNING THAT WILL OUTLAST YOUR LIFETIME - it is oceanic in its scope and complexity - BUT IT IS THE ONE WHO NAVIGATES THESE DEEP WATERS BEST WHO WILL PREVAIL IN JIU JITSU. In the early stages of development in my students, I PUT FAR GREATER EMPHASIS ON POSTURAL INTEGRITY THAN INDIVIDUAL MOVES. A single move will always be of very finite value, but a posture-centric mindset will give birth to an infinity of well executed moves and create excellence far quicker than any given move. Here, ten year old Mikey Wilson and fifteen year old Nicky Ryan work their postural drills from seated butterfly guard, finding exactly how a given posture can improve or detract from their goals in that position - one in which they both already excel through this kind of training.

First - do no harm: Students of medicine are often instilled with modern versions of the Hippocratic oath, which state that the basis of medical treatment is to first, do no (additional) harm to the patient on top of what he or she is initially suffering from. The same idea, with a little modification, is critical to success in fighting and jiu jitsu. In all combat sports - first - DO NO HARM TO YOURSELF FROM WHICH YOU CANNOT RECOVER AND GO ON FIGHTING. Fatigue and injuries are all part of competition, but CATASTROPHIC injury is a whole different thing. In this case the fight is over and no recovery is possible. Most accidental catastrophic injuries are the result of an athlete trying to avoid an undesirable outcome to a scramble/takedown/throw where uncontrolled moving body weight is involved. I always urge students to take the safe route of falling to their backs in a safe fashion in these cases - even if it means taking a position of disadvantage for a time or conceding points (or in Judo and some forms of wrestling - the match). The risks are tough for athletes to weigh - they want to maximize their chance of victory and are natural risk takers and they know that most of the time, injury will not be the result. The problem is that when injuries DO occur under these circumstances, they are horrific and fight ending. I prefer a safety first approach where athletes always defer to safe falling and then working out of whatever position they find themselves on the ground rather than subject themselves to massive physical forces to avoid a fall. Here a famous clash between Shogun Rua and Mark Coleman shows what happens when immensely powerful athletes crash to the floor in extended positions. Mr Rua knew that falling underneath Mr Coleman was undesirable and took the (understandable) risk of posting out an arm to prevent the takedown. However, the power of Mr Coleman's takedown completely broke the extended arm and the fight was immediately over. Pandemonium broke out in the ensuing confusion, but the result was clear. The original philosophy of the fathers of Brazilian jiu jitsu was survival first - victory second. In cases like this, their wisdom is apparent.

Big ambitions start small: Very often I will be asked how athletes got to the high level of competition they currently work at. What many people are not aware of IS THE SMALL AND HUMBLE NATURE OF THE BEGINNINGS OF MOST GREAT ATHLETES. It is natural for them to make this mistake. Athletes are only noticed when they get to a certain level. All the myriad small, local trials and competitions they battled through to get to that level are unknown to the general public. This is the most natural and effective way for emerging athletes to work. START WITH SMALL, LOCAL CHALLENGES AND PROGRESSIVELY WORK YOUR WAY UP. So often I see talented athletes try to skip steps in the order of progression and end up with problems. People know the squad mostly through their success in high profile professional grappling events. Few are aware of just how many low level competitions against unknown locals they fought through prior to making it to the big stages. This was a very unglamorous but very necessary step in their road to success. The experience gained at the lower levels is of critical importance when fighting at the higher levels. So many times the squad would travel on their own dollar to obscure events in the tristate region to take on unknown opponents - all the while gaining competition experience and confidence that would one day provide the foundation to much greater goals. Many emerging athletes are in a rush to shorten this important start, or worse, bypass it altogether. Don't - do your time - gain your knowledge and experience and THEN move on. This is true also for non competitive jiu jitsu players. Make your goals in the gym PROGRESSIVE. Start with small goals and THOROUGHLY CONQUER THEM before moving on. In my experience, smooth progression in goals gains better long term results than giant leaps. Here a very young looking squad (I think Gordon Ryan is eighteen here) relaxes after matching victories in local tournament in New Jersey, one of a vast number that they entered around this time. It was at these local shows they laid the foundations of the game they took to the big stage

Kohai keep pushing forward: Kohai (junior) student, Oliver Taza had another outstanding performance at the Sapateiro Invitational event this weekend. He has four bouts - won all four by submission- including an impressive leg lock victory over EBI standout Josh Hayden. This was a real test test for Mr Taza, as he is a welterweight, but the event was for 195 pounders so he was a small competitor. This is exactly the kind of harsh tests the kohai must seek - it will give them the tough competition experience that is so valuable when fighting at the next level. "Onwards and upwards" is the ethos in which the kohai must imbue themselves - that is exactly what Mr Taza is doing and that is why future success will come to him.

Seminar - Squad style: Today I went to teach our approach to jiu jitsu at the dojo of my close friend and Renzo Gracie team mate, Magno Gama in Astoria, Queens, New York. Mr Gama is one of Mr Gracie's original NYC black belts. He comes from the famous classes of the 1990's and came up with me under Mr Gracie, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. He was one of my favorite training partners and experimenters in the early days of the development of my leg lock system. He runs a great dojo in Queens New York where he teaches his talented students with passion and skill. Today I was ably assisted by Mr Eddie Cummings who wowed the crowd with some beautiful movements into leg attacks and triangle (sankaku) attacks. Mr Gama is an inspiration to his students. He came to America as a young man, found jiu jitsu, learned from one of its greatest teachers, took the great risk of opening up his school in one of the most competitive cities in the world, and through his talent and knowledge, created a body of dedicated students who impressed me on the mat today with their capacity to learn new skills. It was wonderful to see Mr Cummings demonstrate his mastery of sankaku- so often people think he only does leg locks - yet I watch him train every day and his triangle attacks are as good as anyone I have seen. Often students tell me that they cannot do triangle attacks because their legs are too short. Whenever I hear this, I use Mr Cummings as an example of an athlete with shorter legs who excelled in its use. Congratulations to Mr Gama on his incredible success with his school and the example of following a dream and through planning, hard work and patience - making the dream a reality 😊

Orwell, war and jiu jitsu: The great English writer, George Orwell, once defined warfare (he fought in the Spanish Civil war) as ninety five percent complete mundane boredom and five percent pure terror and fear. Those extremes are equally represented in jiu jitsu - though with TENSION and RELAXATION replacing boredom and terror. In sparring and competition, the majority of any given match should be fought in a state of relative physical calm and relaxation so as to conserve energy and create efficient movement. However, when the opportunity presents itself for a major advance or total victory - there must be a flip of the switch and total physical commitment to the move with big power outlays as long as it takes to get the job done or there is a possibility of follow up attacks should it fail. If it does fail, the switch must be turned off and a return to relaxed state must be made. This constant interchange between long periods of relative relaxation and short periods of maximal effort is a big part of jiu jitsu mastery. Learning to balance them is a great factor in determining your efficiency. Learning the physical skills of the sport is one thing - but putting them in the context of efficient pacing and tension levels is quite another. Here, Garry Tonon is seen in a moment of maximum tension as he applies a match winning heel hook on Zack Maxwell at a Metamoris event. The power of isometric tension and bodily extension is clearly evident here.

Appearance and reality: One of the best aspects of a life in the martial arts is the characters who surround us. A notable feature of many of these characters is the degree to which they appear quite harmless to the average person, but are absolute killers in reality. Most people put a great value on appearance as the basis of fighting ability, but if our time on the mat teaches us one thing - it is that appearances can be very deceiving! Sometimes appearances ARE accurate. Ryan Gracie looked like he could defeat an entire football team singlehandedly and could. However, his brother Renzo, my sensei, looks like a friendly fellow of average build who most people would overlook as a threat prior to fighting - yet he was every bit as deadly. I always remember the story of my student Eddie Cummings first trip to tristar gym in Montreal. Mr Cummings had been winning many local tournaments and was now in demand for seminars. I encouraged him to go to tristar - home of Georges St-Pierre, where many MMA fighters work out. On the day of the seminar, Mr Cummings arrived and saw the promotional poster in the wall. It featured a photo of him ripping a mans leg off and his nickname "WOLVERINE SEMINAR" was used. Many people had come and now Mr Cummings went to the front desk and asked to go in to get changed into rashguard and shorts. The person behind the desk was used to MMA fighters with powerful physiques and Mohawks- he said "ok, it'll be $100 dollars to train, you can get changed inside." Mr Cummings, being a man of polite disposition replied, "Um...I am Eddie Cummings." "Like I said, it's a $100." "Ah...I'm the guy who is teaching the seminar." The man replied, "You're the wolverine?" To which a cringing Eddie Cummings has to reply "Yes - I am the wolverine." "Seriously." "Yes! I AM THE WOLVERINE!" There was a stunned silence, some skeptical looks and then Mr Cummings went out on to the mats and taught the class once again how appearances do not always give an accurate portrayal of combative ability 😊😊

Finding a match: One of the challenges in jiu jitsu is finding training partners with whom you have a good physical match and feel that you can move well together to learn and perfect the movement skills that will create progress in the sport. Imagine you entered a dojo where every single person was a massively muscular and strong three hundred and fifty pounds of athletic power . You are an average sized man. Learning would be a very difficult thing. In live sparring everyone would crush you and you would have a hard time practicing and perfecting the moves in such an environment- even avoiding injury would be a challenge. This is more or less the situation that most females and young pre-teens and teenagers often find themselves in. Their partners are so much bigger and stronger that they either don't apply strength at all out of politeness and concern (which makes for rather hollow training) or they go too rough and overwhelm the smaller student and crush their confidence, learning curve or body. One of the best matches to get around this problem which is particularly useful in a training room with low numbers of females, is to match young male pre-teens and teenagers with adult woman. This cuts the size and strength discrepancy considerably and makes for much more dynamic, realistic and challenging sparring for both parties. This method has often been used in Japan, where the female Olympic women's team often trains against a local boys high school team as preparation. Of course there are times when this is not necessary- some women have no problem whatsoever going with adult men in regular class and get their best results this way. Nonetheless, this matching of young, smaller males with adult females is often a useful training match to create good progress in many female athletes and young aspiring male athletes. It cures the common problem of size discrepancies creating sparring conditions that are either artificially soft or too rough and suppressive. Here, ten year old Mikey Wilson gets a great workout with Katya at RGA - both athletes get a good sense of unrestrained movement as they practice their strangling skills through a range of positions.

What a performance! There were quite a few outstanding performances among the many athletes at the recent west coast ADCC trials in California. One of the standouts was that of fifteen year old Nicky Ryan who competed brilliantly against very tough adult competition. Mr Ryan won every match he entered by submission except that against his team mate, Ethan Crelinsten, which he narrowly lost on points. Then he came back and win the last match for bronze medal by submission. It was not just the fact that he was submitting people - it was the manner in which he did it - excellent smooth entries, combination attacks into tight locks that showed early mastery of the game of control leading to submission. He he uses elements of our sankaku (triangle) system to get an impressive win. Sankaku is one of Mr Ryan's favorite finishes and you can see here he excels at it.

Champion attitude: It was a breakthrough weekend for Ethan Crelinsten, one of the squad's Canadian contingent - he won gold at the West Coast ADCC trials and a ticket to the World Championships later this year with a tremendous performance in what may have been the largest trials event in ADCC history. Winning is impressive in itself, but the nature of the victories made it a truly standout performance - he won every match by submission save for his bout with team mate Nicky Ryan. I always enjoy teaching our Canadian students. They make big sacrifices to travel so far to train with us. They remind me of my early coaching days when a young Georges St-Pierre would travel all the way to NYC to build his dream. The kind of dedication it takes was much in evidence today - Ethan Crelinsten came back to the gym for two hard grappling workouts just one day after winning the biggest event of His life. This is exactly the attitude I like to see. Most people are satisfied with any form of success and stop - champions see an initial success as a stepping stone to greater success in the future and immediately get back to work

Stepping up to the plate: There was a fascinating event yesterday at the ADCC west coast trials yesterday. Braulio Estima was scheduled to match the great Leandro Lo in a super fight of 20 minutes under ADCC rules. Mr Lo is arguably the number one jiu jitsu player in the world today, certainly top three. He is a five time world champion and has in the last twelve months won a huge array of medals and beaten a who's who of the jiu jitsu world. He is known for his extremely impressive guard passing skills and sweeps from bottom. In recent years he has, through an extraordinary strength and size building program, gone all the way up to heavyweight divisions and continues his gold medal success. Mr Estima injured himself during warm ups for the bout. The promoter looked for a last ditch replacement- Gordon Ryan has spent the day coaching and cornering the junior squad members - I had stayed on the East Coast to corner Eddie Cummings in Philadelphia on Friday. With only ten minutes preparation, Mr Ryan immediately took the match despite the size and strength disadvantage. The match was an interesting one. Mr Ryan had not prepared at all for ADCC rules so just went all out for attacks. Mr Lo was forced to play a defensive tactical game that saw him set an ADCC record for the most stalling penalties in a bout - four. He did secure two takedowns to go ahead on points. Mr Ryan made the tactical error of countering the takedowns with Submissions- if he had just fought the takedowns and ignored the submissions he may way have won on stalling penalties - but that is not our way. More importantly he showed he can go with the best people and have no fear on the ground - just needs more tactical awareness. This is amazing given that he has trained less than half the years of Mr Lo, is smaller and weaker, had zero preparation and is only twenty one years old. We are so proud of his progress and can't wait to begin training again for the next big event.

The kohai step up at American ADCC trials: An extremely impressive day for the squad kohai (juniors) at the west coast ADCC trials today. Our Canadian squad members had a very fine day indeed with Ethan Crelinsten winning gold at 66kg and a ticket to the world championships in Finland. Oliver Taza got to the semi finals. Nicky Ryan put in another incredible performance as this fifteen year old prodigy submitted his opponents all the way to semi finals where he lost narrowly on points to team mate Mr Crelinsten (who went on to get gold). He finished with a bronze medal - more importantly he finished with the realization that at such a young age he can easily mix it up with the adults at national level and get to the top 😊😊Matthew Tesla submitted his opponents before dropping a match on points to team mate Oliver Taza. We are so proud of these young men and their achievements and more importantly, the preparation and lifestyle they instill in themselves to make such achievements possible.

Winning vs winning with style: Winning is the fundamental goal of athletes in competition - nonetheless the squad has always been proud of not just winning, but winning in a particular way - hunting ruthlessly for the submission. Our athletes will either get it or die trying. Eddie Cummings came into challenge for the Fight to Win Pro 145 pound belt against title holder Samir Chantre. He constantly looked to engage but he and the audience were frustrated by a distinct lack of engagement from his opponent. That lead to an easy unanimous decision Win for Mr Cummings and the 145 pound belt - but still, for us and, I suspect, the audience, it had an unsatisfactory feeling to it. The great majority of the ten minute match was spent with Mr Cummings chasing his opponent to the boundary of the mat and trying to force any form of grappling engagement - but to no avail. In the end he won because he was the only one attempting to engage. The good news is that he has the belt and his jiu jitsu has risen in level after excellent preparation- unfortunately there were no real opportunities to show that tonight - but I am confident that with new belt and title in hand - he will soon get opportunities in the future 😊😊 Heading back to NYC from Philadelphia now. Happy to see Mr Cummings back on stage and winning new titles and looking forward to future matches that give greater opportunity to show our style to the audience.

The return of the wolverine: tomorrow night in Philadelphia, Eddie Cummings returns to center stage to take on three time world champion Samir Chantre - himself a master of leg locking via figure four toe hold, in what should be a great encounter. The rules of fight to Win events are a ten minute match without points, if it goes the distance, the athlete demonstrating greater submission potential (where submissions are understood as a viable threat that forces a serious defensive reaction) and/or positional control will take a decision victory. Mr Cummings has prepared very thoroughly as always and has many new elements to his game, many of which are his own invention and extremely impressive. Can't wait to see these two great champions clash!

Gordon Ryan will be teaching a seminar featuring techniques and strategies used by the squad and in addition, his own unique methods that he has independently created and which he uses with great effect both in the gym and in competition. I am very proud to see one of my students teaching at the new gym of my 1990's RGA team mate, Shawn Williams - what better way to launch the new school! Californians will get a chance to see Our approach to the sport that Mr Ryan has done so much to showcase.

Active patience vs passive patience: Beginning students are often told to be patient in the sport of jiu jitsu - it takes time to be successful. There is obviously a large measure of truth to this. Nonetheless, when I coach I emphasize the difference between what I term ACTIVE PATIENCE vs PASSIVE PATIENCE. It is absolutely true that the skills of any complex activity take time to develop. Skills are born in the same state we are - weak, vulnerable and unlikely to survive without nurture and outside help. In time they develop strength and maturity. Just as a weak and helpless baby can one day grow into an Achilles or Hector; so to, SKILLS THAT ARE WEAK, FEEBLE AND UNPROMISING TODAY, CAN, OVER TIME AND TRAINING, MATURE INTO UNSTOPPABLE TOKUI-WAZA (favorite moves) THAT CAN WIN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS. We must be careful however, to avoid thinking that since time is required to develop skill, then we should simply sit back and let time run and watch our skills accumulate. This PASSIVE approach to patience is the enemy of progress. It is essentially a form of lazy complacence where one assumes that by simply showing up and going through the same routines, progress will be made. Patience itself is not a virtue - ACTIVE PATIENCE - the notion of actively working towards well defined goals with a specific plan whilst recognizing that time will be required to get those goals, is the virtue athletes need. Active patience is the acceptance that skills take time to develop, combined with the recognition that those skills won't develop themselves. They will only grow through intelligent planning towards a specific goal. Garry Tonon is an excellent example. When he first began studying with me, he had no effective strangles from in front of his opponent. I immediately set him to work on developing a strong high elbow guillotine. For months he struggled. At the six month mark he despaired of ever having a strong guillotine. Then finally he started having breakthroughs in the gym against lower belts. Soon it became a trusted weapon. He used it brilliantly on the big stage against the much larger and stronger Kit Dale to win a match that gained him widespread attention

Fighting the big men: Some of the most impressive wins in the short history of the squad came in their many outings against bigger and stronger opponents in open weight divisions or super fights. There is no clearly sign of the worth of a training program in jiu jitsu than the production of athletes who can take on high level opponents who have a big size and strength advantage and consistently win. In my experience THE TWO BEST MEANS TO SUCCESSFULLY ATTACK BIGGER, STRONGER OPPONENTS IS TO ATTACK THE LEGS AND BACK. Whilst I encourage my students to train to attack the whole body, these stand out in my opinion as best in allowing a smaller athlete to take advantage of the innate weaknesses of the human body to a greater degree than any others. A very fine example of this attitude was on display when squad member, Garry Tonon took on heavyweight world champion Luiz Panza - a man known for impressive physical strength which, in conjunction with good technique, allows him to exert tremendous breaking pressure with Achilles lock variations. The clash took place under IBJJF rules at the no gi world championships, so heel hooks, one of our signature moves, were illegal. Mr Tonon immediately went into a battle for the feet, taking on Mr Panza at his speciality- the Achilles lock. A deadlock occurred, so Mr Tonon slipped behind his bigger opponent and took the back. Once there, he was able to take advantage of the fact that the human body is well adapted to deal with threats from the front, but much less so to deal with threats from the rear. Very quickly he was able to slip in a well applied stranglehold and take a fine victory. This was an important match for Mr Tonon's development. He had always been a good scrambler to the back, but learning to UNIFY weapons - leg attacks and back attacks - greatly increases their effectiveness. REMEMBER ALWAYS THAT THE HUMAN BODY IS FULL OF ASYMMETRIES - AS SUCH SOME AREAS WILL BE WEAKER OR MORE VULNERABLE THAN OTHERS. If you wish to defeat a stronger opponent, knowledge of these asymmetrical elements and how they relate to the techniques and tactics of the sport is the key to success.

Teaching here - Teaching there: Just wrapped up a weekend teaching to the fine folks of Sudbury, Canada along with my great friend and mentor, Ricardo Almeida. It was all organized by Renzo Gracie Ottawa stalwart, Pat Cooligan, who has done an incredible job of taking our Sensei's philosophy and techniques and introducing them across Ontario and beyond. Now I am racing through airports and back in NYC! A big week of training coming up starting first thing Monday morning as Eddie Cummings goes back on stage to take on three time world champion Samir Chantre next Saturday in Fight to Win Pro 31. Nicky Ryan goes west to California with teammates Matthew Tesla and Jason Rau, to attempt to become the youngest athlete ever (fifteen) to qualify for the world championships at the American ADCC trials. Then it's uptown to the Bronx academy to check out progress of the Bombers as they continue to impress me with their development. It's always a special feeling returning to NYC from travel - I have loved here 25 years and it's never lost it's charm, pace and excitement for me - but even that feeling pales compared with the excitement of returning to train the troops in the dojo as they work hard towards their dreams and aspirations.

Another bout - another belt: Gordon Ryan won the 205 pound division belt at Fight to Win 30 last night in a very tightly contested match against Lucas Barbosa last night New Jersey. It was not the decisive result that our team always strives for. Mr Barbosa fought with an intelligent tactical strategy of snatching at two submissions along with some late attempts to pass. Neither the pass or the submissions were close. Mr Ryan looked to engage from bottom. He came close to nice reversal from bottom. The judges appeared to conclude that this was the only move of the match that came close to completion and so scored it in Mr Ryan's favor. Any time a match is that close there will always be controversy as to the result- usually the opinions are split according to team affiliation, personal like or dislike or one's general beliefs about the nature of the sport. There are several things that I believe all side will agree on. First, the two athletes are very evenly matched. Second, the match would have been much more satisfying if it was twenty minutes long rather than ten. I know Mr Ryan would be very enthusiastic about a rematch. Perhaps it could be done as a first defense of the belt with 20 minutes duration. Or if The organization is reluctant to opt for a longer match, at another venue without a belt. I felt that perhaps sacrificing just one of the many preliminary matches to create a longer main event would be a good idea. Well done to both athletes for a tight match. As always we are very proud of Mr Ryan's performance and his preparation. Here, Mr Ryan warms up for the event with Garry Tonon and Tom Deblass. Now the squad will prepare for ADCC trials in California and fight to win 31 featuring Eddie Cummings vs the great Shamir Chantre next weekend in Philadelphia.

Meeting up with Senpai: When I was a beginner student under my Sensei Renzo Gracie, our senpai (big brothers) where Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All three were world champions in their respective areas. All three were highly successful in jiu jitsu and MMA. All three were amazing teachers who inspired us every day we trained. Here I am in Sudbury, Canada teaching next to Mr Almeida at the NOMAD martial arts convention. It is magical to see the same looks of wonder on the faces of the students here as we had in NYC all those years ago 😊😊Here is he teaching a superb class on the essential principles of guard passing. I never forgot the power of role models like Mr Almeida in the classroom to bring out the best in the class overall. That is why I try so hard to create a group of outstanding students who I know will create a level of excitement and interest that will make the level of the ENTIRE ROOM rise.

Gordon Ryan back in action tomorrow night: Tomorrow night at Fight To Win Pro 30, Gordon Ryan will battle the brilliant and physically very powerful Brazilian grappler, Lucas "Hulk" Barbosa in New Jersey in a ten minute bout without points - if it goes the distance a decision will be rendered based upon submissions and positional control. Mr Ryan has been training exceedingly well. This matchup of two great grapplers should be thrilling!

Exciting days ahead: Great week of training with the squad. Gordon Ryan has been peaking well for his superfight against world no gi champion Lucas "Hulk"Barbosa this Saturday night in New Jersey at Fight to Win pro 30. Once again Mr Ryan, a welterweight, will test himself against the big men at light heavy weight. Then April 15 in Philadelphia, the return of Eddie Cummings on his bout against three time world champion Shamir Chantre at Fight to Win Pro 31. I really believe Mr Cummings game has attained a new level of development and I am very excited to see him competing again. Across country in California, fifteen year old Nicky Ryan will battle at the American ADCC trials in an attempt to become the youngest person ever to qualify for the world championships. With him will be outstanding kohai student, Matthew Tesla as he attempts to qualify for ADCC at 170 pounds. Behind it all is Garry Tonon, working hard in preparation for his grappling superfight against Shinya Aoki in what will be one of the highest paid, most watched and most anticipated grappling matches in history going down in Singapore on May 26. All great events, all great goals for the squad but as always we are all mindful of the fact that these lofty goals are only attainable by the most mundane means - hard, intelligently directed training in the dojo. The greatest goals are aspired to from the humblest and most everyday beginnings

Overcoming limitations: With some recent problems with my left knee, even demonstrating jiu jitsu is problematic for me now. Last night I taught a seminar at the dojo of my good friend and teammate, Carl Massaro. Through the capable help of our mutual student, Frank Rosenthal, we were able to give a good representation of our squads ashi garami game. It was very pleasing to see the room quickly pick up the main concepts and techniques and begin applying them. It gives me confidence that whatever happens in the future, I can still be of use to my beloved students and the sport. It amazed me to see relative beginners to the leg locking game quickly slipping into position and applying the locks correctly despite my current inability to show them physically myself. Thanks to Carl Massaro and his students for a lovely night of training and learning in New Jersey 😊😊

Reflections on my students - Gordon Ryan - stages of skepticism and learning: In the early days of the squad, Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon would come in every day to train and compete almost every weekend. Mr Tonon told me about a talented teenage student he had named Gordon Ryan. He said he would try to bring Mr Ryan in to begin training with us. Sure enough, a few days later, a tall young man, jumped out on to the mats in the morning class and introduced himself. Mr Tonon immediately announced to myself and Mr Cummings, whilst we were going over some ashi garami movements, that Mr Ryan was deeply skeptical about the value of leg locks and fully believed all leg locks were a useless waste of time and simply did not work on him. Mr Ryan smiled confidently and announced he had never been leg locked by anyone and did not consider them a threat. Of course when drilling was over, a rather offended Mr Cummings immediately went to spar with Mr Ryan and proceeded to leg lock him from one side of the academy to the other! At the end of the class, a rather chastened Mr Ryan agreed that leg locks did indeed work and he would begin studying them immediately. Over the next few months he had great success at entering into leg locks, but struggled to actually finish them. As time passed, a new form of skepticism emerged in Mr Ryan - he came to believe that leg locks worked for other people, but not for him! I immediately showed him some variations in grip that greatly tightened his locks and immediately he started getting good results. A few days later, Mr Cummings returned from a short journey and asked to roll with Mr Ryan. In a stunning reversal, Mr Ryan successfully applied two beautiful heel hooks in one round of sparring- shocking both Mr Cummings and himself. For the first time he came to believe not only that heel hooks work, but that they could work for him against the best in the business. In my experience, THE STRONGEST BELIEFS WE HOLD ARE THOSE WHERE WE BEGAN WITH TOTAL SKEPTICISM BUT WERE PROVEN WRONG IN SOME MEMORABLE AND TANGIBLE WAY UNTIL WE BECAME BELIEVERS DESPITE OURSELVES . THOSE are the beliefs we will rely upon in the stress and fear of competition

Details vs General movement: Very often I get students come to me asking for details of a given move - the more details I give, the happier they get. This is a natural and good thing. However, I strongly believe that fixation on details can have detrimental effects in some instances. The moves of jiu jitsu are not all the same in overall character. Some of the moves are very STATIC in nature i.e. There is relatively little movement. For example, rear mount is a relatively static position, most of the control and finishes from here are small movements. In cases of static positions, details are paramount and very useful. Other moves/scenarios are much more DYNAMIC with large and fast movements. For example, a drop seoi nage throw. In the case of very dynamic movements, details are still very important, BUT THE STUDENT MUST FIRST LEARN THE GENERAL DYNAMIC MOVEMENT BEFORE THE DETAILS IF HE OR SHE IS TO BE ABLE TO USE IT EFFECTIVELY AGAINST RESISTANCE - THE DETAILS WILL COME LATER. Wherever the overall quality of the movement is just as important as the details for success- BEGIN WITH THE OVERALL MOVEMENT AS IT WILL BE USED IN SPARRING AND COMPETITION- you can always go back to details later. If you begin the details, students will have a lot of theoretical knowledge but lack the movement skills to actually apply it. Here I am coaching ten year old squad prodigy Mikey Wilson details of our back attack system. Due to the fact that this is mostly a static position, the emphasis is on small details of placement and positioning and tactics.

Interpretations: Here is an old photograph probably taken around 2000 at Renzo Gracie's old academy. It is a good representation of one of the central features of jiu jitsu - multiplicity of views. Mr Gracie, myself and three of his most distinguished black belts, Matt Serra, Shawn Williams and Robert Constance are watching action unfold in front of us. There are five pairs of eyes watching one event. You can be quite sure that each of us is seeing a very different picture from the man next to him. Sensei is probably seeing an incredibly quick and efficient entry into an arm in guillotine, Mr Serra is probably scheming a way to clear the arm and take a high elbow guillotine. Mr Williams is probably looking an a means of sitting back to closed guard and trapping an arm in a way that sets up many of his favorite attacks and Mr Constance is probably seeing the opportunity for a turn over into a pulverizing pin. I am probably looking for an entrance to either legs or back. One event - five interpretations. All of them were very effective. Everyone agrees that there are many incorrect ways to move and act in jiu jitsu - BUT DO NOT EXTRAPOLATE FROM THIS THAT THERE IS ONLY ONE RIGHT WAY. On the contrary, for almost any given scenario in the sport, there are a multitude of effective methods. Which one you choose is largely determined by your personality and body type, though sometimes your teaching history can be a factor also. One of the great privileges of training under Mr Gracie was the freedom he gave us in choosing our styles - that is why you see so much variation among his students. Use effectiveness in sparring and competition as your primary guide. As you grow in experience you will be able to feel and ultimately just look at a move and make good assessments as to its mechanical and tactical value. Until then, if it works well in sparring against good people, that's a solid sign that you are on the right track. Variation is a leading source of progress in jiu jitsu. Sometimes it may lead you temporarily astray, but don't worry, recovery is simple and progress will begin anew.

Morning class: Nothing wakes a person up faster than a man highly skilled in the arts of strangulation and joint breaking doing his best to do exactly that to you. The troops at RGA NYC go at it in sparring rounds (randori) while the rest of the big apple slowly wakes up outside. Georges St-Pierre works elements of back attack and ashi garami systems with Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon in some hard fought rounds as the action unfolds across the room. The unifying factor across the room - performance improvement in the kingly art. Some are professional athletes with specific upcoming goals, others are amateurs with a more general goal of skill enhancement- but the path forward is the same for both - increasing knowledge and embedding that knowledge in a set of physical skills that can bring you closer to those goals.

Three the hard way: The full squad is back in action in truly great competition action against three of the best grapplers in the world in the near future. Gordon Ryan starts it off with a very tough match up against IBJJF no gi world champion Lucas "Hulk" Barbosa for the 205 pound title at Fight to Win Pro 30 in New Jersey on April 8th. Mr Ryan's last matches were at his actual weight - 170 pounds welterweight, but he wants to test himself as he so often does, against the big men at light heavyweight. Mr Barbossa recently won gold at Five Grappling Super League, surpassing great world champions like Leandro Lo and Tarsis Humpreys with a mix of great technique and crushing physical power that showed why even the strongest men in the sport call him "hulk." Then Eddie Cummings returns to action in a truly fascinating battle against one of the best leg lockers in IBJJF competition - three time world no gi champion, Samir Chantre, a brilliant tactician on the mats in Philadelphia on April 15. After this Garry Tonon will take on the great MMA grappler Shinya Aoki at ONE Championship: Dynasty of Heroes in Singapore on May 26. Mr Aoki is a truly brilliant grappler with an amazing competition record in MMA He is a master of entering submissions from standing, often with spectacular flying variations. This will be a great match between two of the most dynamic grapplers on the planet. I am always excited to see my students compete, but now more so than ever. The reason is because all three senpai (senior students) are really starting to develop their own unique technical innovations that go beyond my teachings and into an independent and very exciting repertoire of moves and tactics that is thrilling for me as a coach to observe. I am certain 2017 will be a year where these young men rise to a new level of development. Though my body is currently having some issue and problems, my mind has never been so excited by these technical developments that these three outstanding technicians of the science of control and submission are developing. I have been watching in the gym - soon the world will watch on stage against three truly impressive opponents!

Varying intensity: Sometimes people hear about the frequency with which my students train and ask how they are not over trained to the point of injury and breakdown. The reason is because we know how to vary the intensity of workouts according to the context in which the workout is performed. If every workout is at maximum intensity, the injury and burn out rate would be unacceptably high. Intensity must be varied as part of a program leading to a specific goal, rather than as a constant hammering towards a general idea of getting better at jiu jitsu. Typically, if there is going to be a very tough morning workout, it will be followed by a relatively soft evening workout. This ability to SEE TODAYS WORKOUT IN THE CONTEXT OF A WEEKS WORK TOWARDS A GIVEN GOAL AND SCALE IT UP OR DOWN DEPENDING ON THAT CONTEXT IS A HUGE PART OF DEVELOPING THE LONGEVITY NEEDED TO MASTER THE COMPLEX SKILLS OF THE SPORT OVER TIME. Last night was a perfect example. I went to Long Island to join Chris Weidman and his two primary trainers, Ray Longo and Matt Serra for some fine tuning of grapple boxing skills (the interface of striking and grappling skills on the ground in MMA) in preparation for Mr Weidman's bout against the very tough and talented Gegard Mousasi at UFC 210. Mr Weidman had already had a very tough sparring workout earlier in the day and has only a week left in another very tough training camp. Thus the second workout consisted of light technical and tactical drills - perfect for a second workout that will improve performance without causing physical problems for the athlete. It was a pleasure to see once again the incredible grace and power of this great middleweight as he whipped through the drills with the same vigor and skill I saw so many times in his lead up to winning the middleweight title. I demand that my athletes workout every day - but I do not demand they workout HARD every day. Learning to pace your workouts over time, scaling back when necessary, is the key to long term development that can garner great results over time.

Reflections on my students - The master of distance - Georges St-Pierre: More than any other athlete I worked with, Georges St-Pierre was a master of the subtleties of controlling and exploiting the distance between himself and his opponent. This mastery of distance management is an absolutely critical part of MMA. In the vast majority of professional fights, more time is spent in this part of the game than any other. When people talk about the development of Mr St-Pierre's game, they often make reference to his many coaches and the influence these people had on him. Interestingly, the whole skill of distance control and covering distance to the takedown, WAS A SKILL THAT MR ST-PIERRE MOSTLY TAUGHT HIMSELF. As a teenager under the sometimes unorthodox tutelage of Kristof Midoux, Mr St-Pierre was constantly put in sparring situations where he had to box his way to a takedown on much older, more experienced opponents. As time passed, trial and error, experimentation and eclecticism in drawing in disparate skills from various combat arts produced an uncanny ability to strike into takedowns. Sometimes during fight camp after dinner or during some free time Mr St-Pierre will ask me to take a fighting stance and he will practice his repertoire of feints, deceptions and misdirections that enable him to get to his opponents legs for the takedown. I have done this with him for well over a decade. Yet to this day, he invariably misdirects me and easily gets to my legs - leaving me feeling like a fool as once again I am deceived by the same tricks 😂😂 Thus was born this great athletes best weapon - he had many influences - but his primary weapon, the one which more than any other was the source of his success, was his own invention. It was a peculiar blend of his early days in sport karate, his wrestling training, fencing tactics and most of all, his adaptation to the demands of takedown sparring in his early years. Here he works with MMA standout David Branch on the theory of distance, both men are about to return to the UFC later in the year where once again they will be able to show the importance of this critical skill

Every major move has its own character: All the major moves of the sport of jiu jitsu have their own unique character - their good points and bad points - which are a reflection of their mechanical features. As students, it is exceedingly important we try to increase the depth of our understanding of the character of all the moves we intend to make a big part of our game so that we apply them in the appropriate context. When we look at Kimura (ude garami), we see it is among the most complex and interesting of the major moves of the sport. Like many of the main submission holds, it can function as both a means of submission and a means of control through grip. It often functions in jiu jitsu in much the same way as the knight functions in a chessboard - a means of unorthodox entry into tight situations that resist normal methods and which can open up many other attacks from other pieces. Here, Shy Ace, among the best of my students in the specialized use of our Kimura system, uses a fine rolling entry to open up a defensive opponent and bring his submission game into operation.

Reflections on my students - the birth of the wolverine: Most great deeds have inauspicious beginnings. When Eddie Cummings first entered my morning class I saw him as a squirmy fellow armed with nothing more than a mediocre high elbow guillotine. One morning I came in and my regular Uke (demonstration partner) was absent. I chose Mr Cummings as a replacement and he proved very good. Afterwards he asked intelligent questions and we talked. I learned he was a graduate student in physics - a problem solver. As weeks and months passed I noted how he never missed classes and was rapidly learning. He expressed interest in more leg lock material. I started showing him more details of my approach to lower body submissions. Then he and Ottavia Bourdain decided to take leg lock study to a new level and do private classes every day - almost always in leg locks. An interesting part of this period is that Mr Cummings was initially VERY set against the outside ashi garami position that is one of the signature moves of our leg lock system and for which he would become famous! He thought it was totally wrong headed and would never work! I still tease him about that to this day! 😂😂 In time I managed to convince him of it effectiveness and he made incredible progress in application skills and theoretical understanding. As he began competing he quickly accumulated a vast number of submission wins, usually via leg lock. His defining moment in those early days however, a series of matches never recorded. Mr Cummings was invited by a friend of a friend to compete is an underground open weight grappling event in the basement of a gym somewhere in Brooklyn where he was obviously the smallest competitor. That night he fought around twelve men, winning everything by submission - fighting on a tiny mat on a grimy concrete floor in front of a crowd of maniacs gambling on the outcomes. As the smallest and nerdiest competitor, everyone bet against him. When he won, he was offered the princely sum of twenty rumpled one dollar bills! When people today see Mr Cummings win big events like EBI and take $20,000, they don't realize that it all began with crazy bouts for less than $2 a match

It all begins in the training room: The squad was thrilled to watch team mate Garry Tonon put on another match-of-the-year-candidate performance last night in Oklahoma- but each member has their own upcoming goals - so after a brief discussion, it was noses to the grindstone and hard training time. A specialized triangle (sankaku) session followed by some very tough sparring. Eddie Cummings, Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan, Matthew Tesla, Frankie Rosenthal, Ottavia Bourdain and Jake Shields show the wear of a hard session with top competitors while I sit there and pretend I was part of it 😂😂 I am always fascinated by the contrast between the the big shows and the humble and tough conditions that make success in the big shows possible. The big shows may be the FACE of the sport - BUT THE TRAINING ROOM IS THE SOUL OF THE SPORT. In thousands of small, obscure gyms across the globe are tens of thousands of dreams and ambitions - from those origins a few will emerge with the skills and attributes to make their dreams become real.

Flawless Victory: Garry Tonon defeated the outstanding grappler Justin Rader in Oklahoma last night in a thrilling display of brilliant attacks versus resolute defense. Mr Tonon had trained extremely well prior to the belt and went in with great confidence- as always he showed every bit of it onstage on a match filled with spectacular movement all pushing in the direction of submission. Ultimately it went to a decision as a stranglehold was being applied with seconds left on the clock. There was never any doubt which way the decision would go and Mr Tonon had successfully defended his welterweight no gi belt. Fight to Win put on another fine event and the squad is proud to help out with a display of jiu jitsu that was both crowd pleasing, yet a fine display of the a full range of the techniques of our sport applied at a very high level against one of its toughest competitors. For those in Oklahoma- don't forget that Mr Tonon will be teaching a seminar showcasing many of the very techniques he wowed the crowd with last night! 12pm at Oklahoma Martial arts - check his Instagram for details! He is as good a teacher as he is a competitor and his show at the seminar will be every bit as good as the show he put on last night 😊😊 The whole squad now has amazing bouts coming up in the near future - details coming out soon! 😉😜We are all looking forward to Mr Tonon's return as he, Gordon Ryan and Eddie Cummings, along with all the kohai, resume training for big upcoming events that will require them to push to a new level of development 😊😊

Back in the saddle: Propped up by some cortisone I came back to limited teaching duties today. It was great to see youngest squad member Mikey Wilson back on the mats. He and Nicky Ryan worked on elements of our back attack system, an area that Mr Ryan excels in. Joining us was the formidable Jake Shields, who continues to impress us with his development here with the squad. I got a chance to teach our approach and philosophy of back control and attack, and also display my superior taste in walking canes 😜😉There is more to my style than just rash guards! It felt great to teach even if recent problems with my body made the physical side of teaching impossible today - there is so much about our game that is mental/philosophical that I felt that some valuable input could be made regardless. There was much excited talk after training about Garry Tonon's match tonight at Fight to Win in Oklahoma tonight. Mr Tonon has trained extremely well and is excited to put our approach to the game to another test against the very talented and tough Justin Rader. Keep your eyes on that show - it should be a fine one indeed!

Entering into the unknown: Those moments when an athlete faces an opponent for the first time are always an entrance into the unknown. There is a danger in this. We all fear the unknown and our imagination can work upon us in ways that make it all terrifying. It is natural to wonder if the opponent has skills, techniques, knowledge, strength or tactics that we don't. That fear can have disastrous effects on performance. As fear increases, we become increasingly conservative in our choice of technique to use. We limit ourselves to only our must trusted techniques and hesitate when opportunity arises. Learning to deal with and overcome this fear of the unknown is what separates the great performers in the gym from the great performers on the stage. Interestingly the presence or lack of presence of fear is not an indicator of whether the athlete will perform on the stage. I have seen athletes who felt no fear perform poorly and others who are terrified every time they fight perform brilliantly. Each must find their own way around those moments of entering the unknown. I have my own opinions about this problem and often use them with my athletes. It is far too long for an Instagram post - but one day I hope to write or speak about it, for in all honesty, it is the last critical obstacle that the athlete must learn to master if he or she is to maximize their performance in competition

Defending what's yours: Garry Tonon defeated the very tough Dustin Akbari to win the Fight To Win welterweight belt. Now he must defend it against three time world championship ADCC veteran Justin Rader. Mr Rader has built a fine grappling career around excellent wrestling, superb Submission defense, a very nasty guillotine and great tactical sense. Mr Tonon will have to travel to Mr Rader's home territory in Oklahoma City to defend his title. Friday night the two American standouts will clash in a ten minute submission only match. Should it go the distance, a decision based on control and submission attempts will be made. Mr Tonon has trained with his usual enthusiasm and completeness. Recent improvements in his positional game, particularly in the subtleties of limb positioning, are something I look forward to seeing in his upcoming matches. Looking forward to overseeing these last few days of training and then the big show Friday night. Fight to Win continues to impress with great shows and excellent match ups - this match between two great American welterweights in the American heartland should be a real show! Fight to Win 28

Reflections on my Sensei - The little things reveal the big things: Often I am asked to tell stories about the many adventures of my sensei, Renzo Gracie. He has an action packed life that could easily make a top rated reality show. Yet when people ask me to tell a story that illustrates his character, I tell a story that has very little drama and action, yet says much about his character and his philosophy. Back in the mid 1990's, Mr Gracie and I had finished a late training session prior to an upcoming professional fight in Japan. We were in his car looking for a place to eat. A few days prior I had read in the newspapers about a spate of of murders of NYC taxi drivers. In response, the taxi union had installed a special orange light on the back of NYC cabs which they could discreetly turn on if they felt threatened in order to alert policemen driving past them. As Renzo drove, I saw a cab in front of us with the panic light activated. I told Renzo what I had read - before I could even finish, he gunned the engine and in a flash raced ahead of the cab and turned in front of it to stop it at the curb like some crazy cop show episode. Before I could even get out of the car, Mr Gracie was at the drivers window. I got to the rear door on the other side and opened it. Inside was a terrified driver and in the back seat, an extremely good looking and glamorous woman in a very short skirt - they thought we were thugs rather than rescuing heroes! Very quickly it became apparent there was no danger either to anyone or from anyone and the driver had simply accidentally turned on the device. The four of us laughed and bade each other well and we got back in the car and drove off. Years later I reminded Renzo of the incident - he did not even remember it - there was so little action it did not even register in his memory among all the drama he has been a part of. Yet to me it illustrates much. Mr Gracie always told me, MARTIAL ARTS WERE NOT CREATED TO MAKE THE STRONG STRONGER, BUT TO GIVE THE WEAK A HELPING HAND IN A PREDATORY AND UNKIND WORLD. Many people speak this message, but I was always very proud to know my sensei LIVED it.

Upcoming action: Gordon Ryan, having just won EBI 11, will soon be back in action. At EBI 11 he fought at his actual weight - 170 pounds. Normally he cannot compete at that weight, as team mate Garry Tonon usually competes there. As he result, most of his competition outings have been well above his real weight. Once again he will face a bigger and stronger foe in the form of Lucas "Hulk" Barbossa, an outstanding competitor from team Atos, who has won world championships in both gi and no gi competition. Mr Barbossa has recently been competing at light heavyweight- taking the five grappling championship title over other jiu jitsu standouts like Leandro Lo and Tarsis Humphreys to show he is competing at the very highest levels. It will be a short match of eight minutes of submission only followed by a judges decision based on submission attempts and control. Mr Ryan is training diligently as always and constantly experimenting and refining his techniques- he will need to if he is to prevail against such a powerful and talented foe. Great to see Fight to Win grappling organization putting on such great shows and high level match ups.

Making a statement: It's one thing to win a tournament- it's quite another to predetermine HOW you will win the tournament. Two days before EBI 11, Gordon Ryan told me he would not use any joint lock submissions, but instead, limit himself to strangleholds with the arms (no sankaku/triangles using the legs) as the means of victory. Oftentimes people complain that our squad only wins via leg lock because we have an advantage in that department and that we are thus a team of "one trick ponies." In fact, anyone familiar with my teachings will know I actually have a preference for strangleholds over all forms of joint lock, including leg locks. A huge part of our training is spent in refining our back and front headlock systems to get into strangleholds, yet most commentators only speak of our leg locks. I was initially worried about this limitation- in general I prefer to use HANDICAPPING - the practice of limiting your submissions to a few chosen ones and not allowing yourself any others as a method of TRAINING rather than something to do in competition. Mr Ryan, however, had trained very diligently and his strangles were very sharp indeed so I felt confident he could get his plan to work. Handicapping is one of our most commonly used training methodologies, it was odd, but extremely impressive to watch it being used in high level competition. Here, Gary Tonon and I call out the sequences of our back attack system to Mr Ryan in the finals as he closes in on the stranglehold- but there is no need - he knows them so well it is like clockwork as opponents are progressively tied up and rendered defensively ineffective.

Keeping it fun: often people seem to assume that a gym putting out champions is probably a stern and strict environment where people follow very formal behavioral rules. In fact I prefer an environment where the training is heavy, but the atmosphere is light. I find the room has better training longevity when people ENJOY the atmosphere rather than ENDURE it. As such, visitors are often surprised when they hear us calling out off color jokes and insults to each other as training begins. When training is over, it's story and stand up routine time. Humor is the means by which students bond and get through tough tests and the inevitable disappointments of a highly competitive and difficult game where many play, but only one can win. Here, Georges St-Pierre takes some serious abuse from myself and Garry Tonon, I'm going to guess it has something to do with his choice of workout apparel 😂😜😖In which case it is well deserved 😂😂😂Finding that balance between work and play is important for the health of any training program.

Mr Tonon goes forth: Squad standout Garry Tonon will be teaching a big no gi seminar in Oklahoma on 03/25/17 at Oklahoma Martial Martial Arts Academy. Mr Tonon comes across as playful, but when it's time to teach, he is dead serious about getting performance increases. He has a superb knowledge of technique and tactics and the ability to pass that on to others while creating a warm and fun atmosphere as he does it. Of all my students, Mr Tonon is foremost in exploiting and controlling the interface between standing grappling (tachi-waza) and ground Grappling (ne waza) - a critical part of our coaching program. In addition,
He is the best at creating scrambles and controlling their direction towards our favorite finishes. Often people talk to me about Mr Tonon and describe him as a intuitive grappler who just has an innate ability to get to winning positions - they are invariably shocked when they see him teach and see that there is a highly practiced method to what he does and that others can be taught to do it as well. If you are in Oklahoma and have a chance to get to the seminar - do it! You will learn the precise methodology of one of best grapplers on the planet. Mr Tonon is an extremely innovative student who constantly adjusts and improves upon the material I show him to arrive at a fascinating game that is very much his own. As with all my senior students, I often feel I learn as much from him as he does from me. If you want to see some of the most innovative and cutting edge grappling technique - get to Mr Tonon's seminar. 😊😊

Perspective from the past: In mid October 1812, Napoleon Bonaparte began his retreat from Moscow in an unusually severe Russian winter. For three months his men endured freezing, deathly temperatures, constant attack, starvation and disorientation all whilst dressed in summer clothing. When his men finally made it back to friendly territory four fifths of them were dead or missing. Whenever I wonder if snow or cold should interrupt training, I think of their story and realize that nothing in our soft comfortable lives will ever approach what they went through and that the things we complain about or use as excuses seem feeble indeed from this perspective. Whether it be Napoleon's retreat, Washington at Valley Forge, the Soviet army in the Battle of Moscow or any other of the myriad examples of humans prevailing in conditions so harsh that one can only feel shame for complaining about our minor problems, this historical perspective keeps us honest in an age where so many look for the weakest excuse to avoid work or training. History teaches us very clearly that we can endure far more we usually tolerate. Snow in NYC? Three champions had no difficulty in getting to the gym to hone their skills. Georges St-Pierre, Jake Shields and Matthew Tesla relax after a session working back attack sequences. Snow day for most? Not for champions...

My sensei, Renzo Gracie, always taught me to look for ways to apply the lessons of jiu jitsu to other aspects of our lives. This is why I constantly teach jiu jitsu as problem solving activity. Life itself is mostly a tale of our attempts to solve the myriad problems that life throws at us minute by minute, hour by hour and year by year. So many of the tactical themes of our sport apply to situations outside the dojo. I wanted to convey this theme to a larger audience and the writers of the popular TV show "Billions" did a fine job of working it into season 2 of the show. Here, Paul Giamatti gains insight from technique and tactics in ways that his character can use in his great struggles against his rival. I am sure all of you have had similar experiences of jiu jitsu influencing your thoughts and actions far from the tatame.

Two sides of my students: Most of you know my students through their efforts in competition (shiai). There is however, a whole other side to them that you may not be aware of - their ability to teach to others what they do in competition. I have always believed that the ability to teach the sport well often has a beneficial effect upon your own performance. This is not always the case, I have known some outstanding competitors who were not gifted teachers and vice versa, but as a general rule there is a lot of truth in it. I find that clarity and succinctness of expression in the technical and tactical elements of the game helps not only our ability to get others to understand what we do, BUT OURSELVES AS WELL. As such, our own internal dialogue when we try to overcome and solve problems is quicker and more efficient. In addition to performance enhancement, getting my students into teaching the sport lets them see beyond mere competition and into the deeper social aspects of jiu jitsu, particularly the theme of mutual benefit that Jigoro Kano made the foundation of his approach to grappling. I often involve my senior students in the teaching process. Many times I ask them to teach a move back to me that I had shown them previously. Other times I make them demonstrate a move to the class while I assist. When my body has physical issues and I cannot physically demonstrate a move, I will have them demonstrate whilst I narrate the salient features. As a result, all of my senior students (Senpai) are excellent teachers. Some of my favorite times to watch them teach is immediately after a big competition where they have employed some aspect of our game, and then watch them teach it to a group at a seminar shortly afterwards. Invariably the audience is shocked at the level of detail involved and their ability to explain those details in ways that increase performance. Here Gordon Ryan shows details of our back attack system at Shawn Williams academy in LA, just a week after EBI 11 where he used it so successfully to take gold.

Party at Renzo's!! My beloved sensei and world's coolest human, Renzo Gracie is celebrating his 20th birthday tonight 😉😜 at his beautiful home in NJ! The whole crew is here and it's wonderful to see so many old friends and laugh about old times and plot new plans 😜😊 Nights like these remind me of the profound impact my sensei had on so many lives and the value of jiu jitsu outside the dojo. Of course like a bunch of degenerates we are watching the UFC and enjoying old school legend Vitor Belfort mixing it up with new generation athletes - kind of like the party at Renzo's 😊😊enjoying a wonderful party for a wonderful man and his many wondrous achievements 😊😊

The squad dominates in Florida: The two squad members who went to Sapeteiro 7 grappling tournament at 175 pounds beat everyone to both get to the finals where they had to face each other! Matthew Tesla, who has only started competing recently won the event with another outstanding performance. Jason Rau defeated everyone to make his own way to the final on the opposite bracket. In the final Mr Tesla gained victory over his team mate via heel hook variation. The two squad athletes used a combination of leg attack, back attack and front headlock systems to quickly accrue submission wins over their respective opponents under EBI style rules. Probably the most significant match of the day was between EBI 11 standout semi finalist Craig Jones and Mr Tesla. Mr Tesla's victory clearly shows he is operating at a high level and will look to make appearances at other professional shows. Sapeteiro continues to provide an excellent venue for athletes developing their submission skills and building their resume. Kohai students Mr Tesla and Mr Rau have worked very hard to increase their prowess and it is wonderful to see the fruits of their labor on the stage.

Reflections on combat jiu jitsu: EBI 11 featured a show within a show - a combat jiu jitsu format fought in between the regular event bouts. It allowed palm strikes and slaps on the ground in addition to the usual full array of submission attacks. Could this be a viable format for future shows? Let's begin the discussion by pointing out exactly what CJJ was intended to do, since there seems to be some confusion here. It was NOT intended to answer the question as to whether jiu jitsu works in a fight. MMA has already answered this question and answered it much better than any CJJ tournament ever will. What it WAS designed to do was to create grappling matches where athletes could not stall excessively and clam up to avoid the submissions game or make use of contrived positions in ground grappling that have no relevance to real fighting. The idea was to use the Palm strikes and slaps to open opponents up and create movement that would promote the use of submissions. This is a fine goal. We have only one four man tournament as evidence - not enough for a definite opinion, but enough for some initial thoughts. First, the format was fun and popular. The in house crowd liked it and I think it's fair to say the average fan can understand and appreciate a simple slap to the face much more readily than an intricate hand fighting sequence to a stranglehold. One the other hand I have some reservations. The slaps did NOT create more submission attempts or more movement than the regular rule set, indeed, the slaps could be used as a substitute for real action (submission) rather than as a catalyst to it. The highest submission rate of the night by far was Gordon Ryan in the regular event who didn't need slaps to create movement and submission opportunities- just good technique and a mindset that orients him in that direction. My main concern is that elite grappling athletes will stay away from ebi if it becomes a CJJ format. I can't imagine any bjj world champions entering a CJJ competition, yet ebi needs them if it is to be taken seriously as a promotion. As such I believe the best use of CJJ is as a fun and entertaining "show within a show" not a main event @flograppling

"Hi John, how is Gordon doing?" "Very well, Mom - in the finals, won everything so far by strangulation in regulation time." "Very nice, whose next?" "Vagner Rocha Mom." "Oh yes - he's tough. How is the match going?" "Very well, Mom - he's got Vagner's back already." "Ok, tell him to trap the defensive arm with a cross grip on the opposite side he fell towards." "Yes Mom." "Now, tell him to to get the index knuckle of the strangle hand to the point of Vagner's chin and work from there." "Yes Mom." What happened? What's that noise?" "Gordon just won, the crowd roared and Gordon screamed "Porra!" very loudly." "Alright, very good, well, don't forget to work your ashi drills before you go to sleep, clean the floor, brush your teeth and get a good nights sleep." "Yes Mom." 😂😂😜😂😂 @allinphoto

The value of rematches: One of the best indicators of the effectiveness of a given training program comes from rematches. They provide invaluable information because comparisons in performance can be made relative to an opponent - the comparisons are not always perfect, as other factors might influence the respective outcomes, but they are far better than most methods of assessing progress. For these reasons I always pay particular attention to rematches. I was always very proud of the fact that Georges St-Pierre never lost a rematch in his career - that was a good indicator of a training program that constantly took him forward in performance levels. A fascinating rematch occurred at EBI 11 when Gordon Ryan took on the very tough and capable Vagner Rocha. The two had fought to a long draw around six months ago. Mr Ryan had done most of the attacking but was unable to finish his many attacks. In response we worked a lot on using leg attacks to create reversals into top position. Mr Ryan is extremely adept at creating top pressure combined with finely measured leg pummeling to free his legs and work to superior positions- the one he favors most is the back. This time he was not to be denied. Using some of the more basic elements of our back attack system he broke through and got the stranglehold that eluded him previously. This was a good sign of his continuing progress and that constant additions and refinements of tactics and techniques can make what seemed impossible yesterday, relatively simple today. @allinphoto @banevis

Squad style seminar in LA - Featuring Gordon Ryan: Fresh off his third EBI title this weekend, Gordon Ryan will be teaching a seminar this Saturday at my good friend and team mate, Shawn Williams dojo this Saturday March 11. I am very excited about this - it's a great opportunity for our Californian fans to see up close some NYC style jiu jitsu. Of all my students, Mr Ryan has the deepest knowledge of my back attack system. A common misunderstanding of our system is that it is merely a refinement of already existing systems. Mr Ryan will have no problems dispelling that misunderstanding with his deep knowledge of this critical aspect of our game. Mr Ryan, like all my senior students is very innovative and independent. He has developed many additional additional elements, not only of back attacks, but throughout his game, that go beyond my teachings and are his own invention - many of them are incredibly effective. One of my proudest days as a coach occurred when Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon taught some moves at a charity seminar in front of myself and My sensei, Renzo Gracie. Mr Gracie turned to me and said admiringly , "these guys teach like college professors." Mr Ryan excels (like all my students) in leg attacks, kimura, front headlock, triangle(sankaku) and armbar (Juji gatame). Whatever he chooses to teach, I promise you, you will learn and profit from. Hoping our Californian fans enjoy the seminar as much as the ebi show! You won't find a better teacher or a better host school in which to learn. 😊😊 @banevis @jeffreyschu

Two teams - a word of thanks: Squad Senpai Gordon Ryan put on a superb show Sunday night, showcasing his strangulation skills. It was a fine reflection of his individual progress and his team work with other squad members in preparation for the event. Such stand out performances are great for the sport. They inspire young developing athletes and give them a strong technical role model to follow. It is easy to focus all the attention on the athlete and his support team. There was however, a second team at the event on Sunday night, a team that does not get the spotlight, but whose work is every bit as important as the stars onstage - the EBI production team. These dedicated men and women operate in the background and always do their best to create a smooth running and efficient operation. Believe me, it's not easy. There are so many intangibles at a live sports event that it always seems miraculous to me that they get it done as well as they do. Were it not for the great work done by these people in building the infrastructure for the show and running it under the pressure of live performance - NONE OF OUR HARD WORK, TRAINING INNOVATIONS, PHILOSOPHY AND SKILLS WOULD EVER SEE THE LIGHT OF DAY AND WOULD REMAIN UNKNOWN IN A BASEMENT IN NYC. On behalf of the squad, to the entire ebi production staff, from team leaders Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila, all the way through the many hard working individuals carrying out crucial but thankless tasks that make it all happen - thank you 😊😊Thanks for a well run, innovative show that has let Grappling athletes have an exciting and well run event that can allow them to showcase the art we all love and put so much time into.

LA to NYC: There is always a surreal feeling about going from LA to coach an EBI show Sunday night, then red eye home to New York City to teach at Renzo Gracie Academy Monday morning and then on to The Bronx to teach at night. It's a marathon, but an instructive one. It shows very clearly the two faces of our sport. The core of it will always be the private face of the sport - the unheralded grind in the basement where the skills and attributes necessary for success are forged. The public face is that of competition (shiai), where those hard won skills and attributes can be rewarded with accolades and recognition attained. The glamor is in that public face, but the heart and soul of the sport is in the private face - that's why even though it's tiring, I love that red eye flight home to see the crew and get ready for the next challenge. Back to the hustle and bustle of freezing cold NYC, subway uptown, then on to the Bronx to work on those skills and attributes 😊😊 @allinphoto @jeffreyschu photos

Gordon Ryan wins EBI 11: Gordon Ryan won every match by submission tonight in LA to take his third EBI title - his first at his actual body weight of 170 pounds. He focused almost entirely on strangleholds, utilizing some of the more basic elements our back attack system and front headlock system to win the maximum possible prize money of twenty thousand dollars. It was his best training camp in a long time - no longer plagued by a lower abdominal problem that had made the previous few camps very tough, he took out a very tough Vagner Rocha with a superbly applied stranglehold in the finals. Team mate Oliver Taza braves a severe knee injury suffered in his last week of training and lost a close match in overtime via riding time, but impressed me with his heart and composure under very tough circumstances- he will rest and then come back to show off his skills in the future. Thanks again to the staff of EBI who always do such a fine job of putting on an exciting production. Mr Eddie Bravo, Viktor Davila and his crew did it again - filling a new venue and creating a really exciting event and atmosphere. There was a very exciting debut for the combat jiu jitsu tonight - i will discuss that soon. Thank you all for your support from the squad! Hope you enjoyed the show! 😊😊🍾🍾😊😊@jeffreyschu

My original competing Grappling student, Eddie Cummings, will be teaching a seminar at Musclepharm headquarters in Denver Colorado. Mr Cummings has spent the most time of all my competing students in private classes with me. He has an unparalleled knowledge of my leg lock system. Unfortunately his incredible success with leg locks in top level level competition has blinded most people to his skills in upper body submissions. In this sense he is something of a victim of his own success! He also has a very strong positional game with excellent guard retention and passing skills. Mr Cummings, like all my best students, is an extremely inventive fellow who has gone beyond my teachings and has many very effective variations of his favorite skills and positions that are uniquely his own. On top of all this, his background in academia makes him a truly fine teacher - he can really take his knowledge and make it accessible to you. If you can make it to Denver Colorado, take the time to learn from this man - you will get a deep insight into the squads philosophy, tactics and methods. New York City style in Denver - you will love it! 😊😊

All done: Both Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza weighed in successfully at 169 pounds - now some down time and final preparation for the big show tonight. This will be the first LA ebi show not run at the traditional LA venue, the orpheum theater. Instead it will be at the Florentine Gardens - looking forward to a new venue and another chance for the squad to showcase skills and a philosophy @jeffreyschu

The Squad rolls deep in LA: On the way to EBI weigh ins - everyone on weight and walking tall. Nicky and Gordon Ryan testing out the Rolls Royce Silver Phantom coup - back seat big enough for some ashi garami drills I am sure 😊😊

It's a dogs life: Tough day of training at the mansion for our two bull dog buddies who appear to be very unimpressed by our ashi garami drills. After a grueling day of chilling at the pool, feasting on some A grade steak and testing out the new bed with a series of power naps, the bull dogs collapse in exhaustion. It's not easy being top dog in Beverly Hills 😂😂

The squad gets a last workout in prior to EBI 11: The squad always loves to head down to teammate Shawn Williams' dojo in Korea Town LA whenever preparing for competition out west. We went over some extensive sweeping drills from bottom position into submission. Now it's time to watch what happens at UFC 209 to see the future direction of the welterweight division and then last minute ebi 11 preparation- mostly weight cutting.

Rolling to the gym - Beverley Hills style: Staying at friends house in Beverly Hills gives the squad some uncharacteristic luxury prior to training at Shawn Williams academy later today. Young Nicky Ryan looks like he's taken a shine to those cars! I bravely battled the ferocious guard dogs before stepping into the Rolls Royce to go practice ashi garami, front head lock, Kimura, Juji gatame and sankaku drills with the squad 😊😊 I'm used to the squalor of the NYC subway as the means to getting to a gym - a blue dungeon in NYC - this Californian sunshine and extravagance takes some getting used to! 😜😜😂😂

On the road again: Back at JFK airport - bound for LA and EBI 11. Looking forward to meeting up with the squad out West and getting to the big show. Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza have trained extremely well and are looking to showcase their skills squad style on stage. Plane is boarding - time to go 😊😊

Rising to the top: As a coach I always love to watch the most essential dynamic of a healthy training room - the work done by junior students (kohai) to rise to senior status (Senpai). Watching the growth of the juniors is always uplifting to me as a coach and is the best feedback I get as to the relative health of the training program I run. A notable addition to the ranks of the kohai is a young student of my great friend and teammate Matt Serra, Jason Rau. He came to us with a strong positional game and has taken to our methods very well indeed. Keep your eye on the progress of this talented young man. Next week he will compete in a tournament that has helped launch so many of our kohai to the next level - Sapeteiro 7. It will feature a sixteen man tournament featuring many outstanding grapplers, some of whom are in this weekends EBI event. It will be at a weight of 175 pounds and the athletes will duke it out for two thousand shekels in what should be a thrilling experience for the competitors and the fans. I'm looking forward to a display of skills from Mr Rau blending old school positional skill with squad style submission work 😊😊Working out with him are fellow kohai Matthew Tesla and Frankie Rosenthal along with MMA legend Jake Shields - here they work their armlock Juji gatame drills before getting into sparring

Fireworks: There is no bigger show than the UFC and this weekends UFC looks like it will be a great event. Two of my favorite divisions, welterweight and lightweight will get some much needed clarity and closure after recent disorder. The majority draw in the first match between Tyron Woodley and Steven Thompson prevented Demian Maia from getting his much deserved title shot, but hopefully now we shall get a positive result and the welterweight division can move forward. Georges St-Pierre always told me Mr Thompson was the best standing striker he ever saw or worked with, but Mr Woodley did extremely well with him in the standing position in the first fight. Both men can hit well from extreme distances, covering vast amounts of ground to land blows - one with crushing one punch KO power, the other with stunning accuracy and timing. The bout I am most interested in is at light weight. I have always been extremely impressed by Khabib Nurmamogedov. His takedown and ground control skills are of the highest level. Several people I know in the industry whose word I trust have told me numerous stories of Mr Nurmamogedov dominating very highly ranked athletes in weight divisions above his own. He has a smothering control that makes his opponents look powerless in comparison. On the other hand, his opponent, Tony Ferguson has a fascinating style based around scrambles and devastating attacks as he directs those scrambles in ways that few opponents can keep up with. One fighter is a master of control - the other is a master of chaos- this is going to be very interesting indeed!

The Return: UFC President Mr Dana White publicly announced today what has been negotiated back and forth over the last few months between his company and Georges St-Pierre - a return to the octagon that would involve something new and extraordinarily challenging. That new challenge will be a rise in weight class against the new middleweight champion, Micheal Bisping. Mr Bisping won a sensational match via knockout over Luke Rockhold to add to a hard fought win over the greatest middleweight of all time, Anderson Silva and a subsequent win over middleweight legend Dan Henderson. Mr Bisping started his career as a light heavyweight, but dropped down to become a huge middle weight. In contrast, Mr St-Pierre is by contemporary standards an average size welterweight with a walk around weight of 192 pounds his entire career. Interestingly his win over Dan Henderson made Mr Bisping the athlete with the most wins in UFC history - overtaking Mr St-Pierre in this distinction (though Mr St-Pierre has far fewer losses). Going up weight divisions is always a tricky affair as the danger of injury in training with bigger partners goes up and the penalty for making mistakes in a match is higher, but Mr St-Pierre is determined to push forward into the challenge and take this new phase of his career in this interesting new direction. He has been doing well in his grappling training and is still in great shape despite three years away from professional fighting- two great champions, both beginning their careers at roughly the same time, both outspoken proponents of better testing for PED's in MMA, both holding at some time the record for wins in the octagon, one much bigger than the other - this should be interesting! 😊😊

Tough day at the office: With EBI 11 coming up this Sunday, training has been going at a high gear these last few weeks. Today Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza locked horns with the outstanding Jake Shields and Mathew Tesla among others to test in live sparring the techniques and strategies the squad develops for the big shows. The competitors list for EBI 11 welterweight event is very impressive indeed - getting ready for the intensity of top level grappling whilst maintaining athlete safety in the final days is always a delicate balancing act. Professionalism and prioritizing the show over the gym is the key to getting it right.

Recently I was asked to appear in a scene in the TV show "Billions." The scene required us to show a beginner in jiu jitsu in a first introductory lesson. The writers asked me if there was a move that represented well the general nature of the sport to a wide audience, most of whom know nothing about it. My answer was a confident "yes" - Juji jime- the cross collar strangle performed from the mounted position. My reasoning was this - the classical approach to jiu jitsu involves taking an opponent to the floor where he is more easily controlled, then working past his legs, through a hierarchy of pins culminating in the mount or rear mount. From there, applying a submission hold to end the fight. I chose Juji jime because beginning jiu jitsu should always be in a gi, both for practical and cultural /historical reasons, and of course Juji jime requires a jacket. Moreover, strangleholds represent the notion of a bloodless and relatively painless victory - one of the key features of jiu jitsu. Even a naive viewer would be able to recognize the value of the mounted position, the effectiveness of a stranglehold and the virtue of victory without the need for bludgeoning a foe to bloody defeat. On a deeper level - to those who DO study the art, I chose Juji jime because it represents something very different - the notion of PROGRESSIVE BASICS. Juji jime was taught to us all in our very first beginner classes - yet we will all be using it until our last days in the sport - refining it, perfecting it, learning all of its subtleties and nuances. THE BEST TECHNIQUES IN OUR SPORT TAKE A FEW MOMENTS TO LEARN, BUT A LIFETIME TO PERFECT. This notion of path from beginner to expert is perfectly represented by Juji jime from mount - the tokui waza (favorite technique) of the great Roger Gracie. In his hands it was anything but a beginners move - it was an unstoppable engine of destruction that he used repeatedly at world championship level and taught the jiu jitsu world the value of building upon the beginners foundation in the sport and over time, making it the most advanced move of them all.

Teammates and Countrymen: It was a fine weekend for the Canadian section of the squad! Kohai teammates Oliver Taza and Ethan Crelinsten have been doing what all kohai (junior students) must seek to do - build up their skills to a point where they become Senpai (seniors). Mr Crelinsten has been training and competing brilliantly at local level as part of his climb to the top. He is developing well along the lines we exhibit - to demonstrate control leading to submission across the entire body, with equal facility from top or bottom position. Today he was able to win every match in regulation time by submission at the Radius Invitational in Connecticut. Normally Mr Crelinsten competes at 135 pounds - but today he entered at 155 to test his mettle against bigger and stronger opponents. He took on and defeated local standouts Ian Murray, Zach Masslany and Jon Battle to win the eight man tournament and take home one thousand shekels! He did it by working utilizing advanced elements of our back attack system that he has been working very hard upon and developing impressive prowess. It is always great to see the marriage of ambition and work ethic and tinder it rewarded with success. Well done to our Canadian athletes who travel so far to work on the skills that take them ever closer to their goals.

Building to a peak: A critical part of contest success is the notion of progression to a peak performance on given date of competition. This of course, is the basis behind the idea of a camp in preparation for a bout. Often a very valuable part of this notion of peaking is the use of preparatory bouts before the main event to help prepare you for what you consider may be problematic elements in the main upcoming event. Outstanding kohai student Oliver Taza is making his EBI debut on March 5th. As one of the smaller welterweights he wanted to prepare himself for the physical intensity of top level grappling - a part of the game that often surprises debutants. Accordingly he entered a superfight this weekend against bigger and stronger UFC Middle weight Caio Magalhaes (if Mr Taza did MMA it would be at lightweight). Mr Magalhaes is a blackbelt in jiu jitsu from the great Nova Uniao team and grappling was his MMA foundation. In a very tough physical match, fought inside a cage, Mr Taza worked his way to an excellent submission win via heel hook variation after twelve minutes of hard fought action. An excellent result in itself - but all the more so as preparation for the main event and the physicality to be expected there.

EBI 11 camp runs into an unexpected problem...

One selfie - four UFC fighters: UFC standout Rafael "Sapo" Natal takes the selfie of the year at the afternoon class as the squad prepares for upcoming events. Mr Natal is joined by UFC brothers past and present, Jake Shields, who has just moved to NYC to train full time with the squad, David Branch, two division WSOF champion who has just signed with the UFC and begins his run to to the top at 185 pounds , and squad OG, Georges St-Pierre, on the comeback trail. Great afternoon of training in the blue basement - so much ambition, so much potential. These are men who know that ambition, passion, drive, discipline guided by a sensible plan, can create greatness in the gym and build the confidence to take it from the gym to the world stage and do something truly great. Where else can you find a random scene like this on an average Thursday afternoon? #onlyatrenzos 😊😜😊

Drilling for perfection: An interesting feature of our sport is that when moves are performed well, there is a feeling of "fitting in correctly" that is unmistakable. Even relatively inexperienced students can feel a well performed move locking into place. So too, imperfections are obvious to perceive as your partner can wriggle free easily by exploiting whatever mechanical imperfections you have made. When drilling, STUDENTS MUST BE MINDFUL OF ACTIVELY SEEKING TO FIND THAT PERFECT "FIT IN" WHERE THE GEOMETRY OF THEIR BODY FITS EFFECTIVELY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF THEIR WORKOUT PARTNERS BODY IN A WAY THAT CREATES THE TIGHTNESS OF FIT THAT ENSURES SUCCESS. That is why I don't have my students drill for numbers of repetitions or for time. When numbers or time are the goal they will focus on that rather than on mechanical form. When I see mechanical form is at a satisfactory level - I move them on to something else - I am not guided by time or numbers. Here Georges St-Pierre works on his front triangle (omote sankaku) on a standing opponent - a situation that requires particularly close attention to correct mechanical form if it is to succeed

Loneliness in a crowded room: Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza take some time out to reflect on what they must get done in an early morning training session for EBI 11 - The first EBI of 2017, the first EBI for Mr Taza, the first welterweight EBI for Mr Ryan and the first time two squad members have allowed to compete in the same EBI event since EBI 6. The juxtaposition between jiu jitsu as a sport trained as a team, but fought as individuals, is a strong one. These two battle every day, as do all members of the squad - keeping a spirit of camaraderie and mutual benefit is the key to preventing it becoming a free for all with team cohesion falling to a degree where the entire training program degenerates. Each athlete has different skills and attributes - I coach a very recognizable general approach to the game, but I also recognize the importance of self expression and individuality if an athlete is to maximize his potential. In a room where everyone follows and believes the same general philosophy, it is crucial to keep that sense of how you are going to do things your way and find a balance between shared beliefs and individuality. Hence I like to see my athletes in those lonely moments of self reflection before and after training. Those quiet moments have a way of leading to the buzz and roar of the crowd at showtime

"You think he's gonna get that ashi garami?"
"Nope - not even close."
😊😂😜🤣😊
Another day of skill development, joined by one of the most skillful of them all - creating some memorable coaching moments. My favorite? Mr St-Pierre watching Garry Tonon miss an inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami and telling him, "I am not impressed by your performance. " 😂😂😜😜😂😂

Three the hard way: If you are to accomplish anything great in life, be prepared to work hard over time with a sound plan. Outstanding kohai students Oliver Taza and Stanley Rosa both have ambitions. Mr Taza will compete soon in the upcoming welterweight EBI alongside Gordon Ryan. Every Monday he trains three classes with me (in addition to the rest of the week). The first two at RGA in midtown Manhattan and the last at night all the way up in the Bronx at my student and friend, Doug Pelinkovic's Dojo. Up at 6am for the first class and getting home at 11pm to get ready for the next day's training. Many people have ambition, but only a few have the discipline, patience and work ethic to make those ambitions reality. It helps a lot to have equally ambitious and hard working partners. Here Mr Taza works with one of his best training partners, Stanley Rosa, as I push them through front headlock drills and then into sparring. I always like to see dojo friendships build between like minded athletes - the road to the top is a long one - but easier when walked in good company.

Theory and practice: As a general rule I like to start my athletes training sessions with a clear sense of what we are trying to accomplish - What are the skills we are trying to develop and how they are important to our approach to the game? Only then do we get into the physical practice. I generally find the athletes do a much better job of practicing a given move if they have a clear understanding of how that move relates to their overall game and the mechanical features that make it work. As we go to drill a given move I will first outline the main points I want them to emphasize as they work, common errors to avoid and the context in which to apply such a move relative to our game as a whole. In this way you can avoid aimless drilling sessions where the move is done for repetitions and the emphasis degenerates into filling quota numbers rather than mechanical understanding. The former merely fills time, only the latter improves performance. Here I work exactly this kind of practice session with young athlete Mikey Wilson. Though only ten years of age, he carries himself with adult maturity so I teach him as an adult. He works our back attack system with fifteen year old Nicky Ryan, who excels in this position. By the time the session finishes he has far more than a set of repetitions- he has a solid theoretical understanding of the position and the physical skills to implement that knowledge and teach it to others.

Comeback: Founding member of the squad, Georges St-Pierre will be returning to UFC competition. Mr St-Pierre has always privately expressed interest in a return to professional fighting to his coaches. His original reason for retirement was most due to the virtually uncontrolled use of PEDs in MMA competition. The UFC has, through its partnership with USADA, made considerable progress in this area. While not perfect, the situation is definitely better than three years ago. After some hiccups in negotiating a return, a deal has been signed and Mr St-Pierre will begin moving forward towards competition. Returning to top level competition is never an easy thing in any sport. as the old saying goes, time is a cruel thief who robs us of our former selves. The skills of MMA are highly perishable and getting them back after three years of inactivity and two major knee operations is a difficult task indeed - made more so by the speed at which the sport itself changes and evolves. However, if there is one person to do it, it is Mr St-Pierre. He will take on the challenge with his usual drive and perfectionism. It is not yet settled who his first opponent shall be, nor the time it shall be fought, but as soon as Mr St-Pierre is ready, training and preparation will begin in earnest. It will be interesting watching the younger squad members work in grappling with Mr St-Pierre, and then Mr St-Pierre with them in MMA. I am sure there will be some memorable training sessions!

New look, old lesson: The Renzo Gracie Academy has a new look with some very nice mural photo displays of Sensei Gracie up on display! Here we are clowning about in front of a large rendition of my favorite photo of Sensei 😊😊taken in the aftermath of his submission win over the great Pat Militich, one of five UFC champions he defeated in the course of his career. Interestingly, Sensei used his tokui-Waze (favorite move) - the arm in guillotine strangle to win that night. In training for the match he badly damaged a nerve in the shoulder and neck on his strong side and so could not perform his favorite move. Mid match he maneuvered his body to the other side and performed the guillotine on his weak side. Such was the depth of his technical knowledge of the technique, he was able to secure and finish the move even without the physicality he normally was able to apply to it. This kind of physical adaptability through knowledge is critical in a sport where circumstances often demand that we work outside our comfort zones. If you only have a PHYSICAL understanding of a given move, you will find it difficult to coach yourself through its application on your weaker side in an emergency. All those years of teaching the mechanical aspects of the guillotine came through that night as Mr Gracie patiently worked his way through the move and gained one of his greatest victories.

Smooth Operator: The most important gauge of how well you are progressing in jiu jitsu will always be your performance in sparring and contests against a wide range of opponents. Some athletes can have a rough and tumble style and be very effective with it. There is a lot to be said however, for a smooth, aesthetically pleasing style (provided it is effective of course). Indeed, I would go further and say that aesthetics can be linked to performance. Smoothness is suggestive of EFFICIENCY- which is a huge factor in performance. I always encourage my athletes to work with aesthetics in mind. I find that pride in the aesthetics of their work creates a mindset where they constantly look for efficiency in movement - a mindset that will greatly benefit their long term development in the sport. Here, outstanding kohai student, Oliver Taza shows fine form with a very efficient drop into ashi garami followed by heel hook variation. His relaxed demeanor makes for a smooth entry into the move that does not convey his intentions to his opponent in this very short match at a recent local grappling event. Mr Taza is preparing for his EBI debut in less than a month and used this contest as part of his preparation for the big show.

A different kind of show: Normally when the squad talks about an upcoming show, they are talking about a grappling or MMA event. Recently however, I had the opportunity to work on a very different kind of show - the popular TV show "Billions" Season 2 starting up this week, will feature jiu jitsu and hopefully expose our beloved sport to a very different audience. The cast and crew of the show were extremely professional and enthusiastic and did a fine job of bringing jiu jitsu related themes into the show. Writer and producer David Levien in particular used his jiu jitsu training to great effect to create realistic scenes that carry a message and influence the action. Star Paul Giamatti greatly impressed me by training for his scenes and going through considerable discomfort to master some moves and do an amazing job of portraying the trials and experiences of a beginner in our sport. He was a genuinely nice fascinating person - deeply cerebral and wide ranging in his interests and knowledge. Here he talks me through the basics of acting while I talk him through the basics of strangulation- a fair swap 😉😜 As the squad always says - hope you enjoy the show!!

Senpai returns to inspire the room: Its always a pleasure to see old friends return to the training room. They bring knowledge and experience and something more - the ability to inspire via example. None more so than the most senior (Senpai) student of them all - Georges St-Pierre. Mr St-Pierre came in to train the morning class - the class he used to come to years ago in preparation for his first world title run. Today he drilled and mixed with a new generation of athletes in a different sport - submission grappling - but the presence of a man who reached so far and who wants to reach further still adds an electricity to the training room that always warms my cold heart. That path from the gym to the big stage is one that every professional athlete must trod. None spent more time on that trail than Mr St-Pierre and none went further. What a great example to the kohai (juniors) as they make their own way towards their respective goals.

Back in Black: Nicky Ryan had a great weekend - winning first place honors in the Global Grappling League submission only event in Ithaca NY yesterday. Mr Ryan traveled upstate with Team mate Oliver Taza. Mr Ryan competed in the eight man elimination 145 pound division. He won his first two matches with a stranglehold and Achilles lock before taking on the very talented Junny Ocasio, fighting out of Unity gym in NYC. Mr Ryan won a thrilling decision in overtime on riding time advantage to take first place. As always it's a pleasure to see the kohai (junior students) going out and performing so well in local tournaments as they make the improvements to get to their goals. Mr Ryan has been training very well and continues to amaze me with his development for such a young man - just fifteen and competing in adult divisions and doing so well. 😊😊

Jiu jitsu and human spirit: Some of the best experiences I have had through jiu jitsu have nothing to do with competition or titles, but instead work at the level of social work and human advancement. A dear student of mine, Claude Levy, often travels to Africa for work and family. When a true jiu jitsu student travels, jiu jitsu travels with him! Mr Levy often teaches friends and impromptu classes with locals in the kingly art. The amazing thing about jiu jitsu is that as soon as people feel it, they immediately take note of its value - even if they have no prior experience. Getting jiu jitsu out into the world is always a good thing. Who knows - a spark can light a fire and a fire can become a blaze and a blaze become an inferno. Who is to say where the next great champion will come from? Is it not possible that casual exposure to a new art could not set in motion events that could create something truly significant? That is why I love to see students carry jiu jitsu wherever they go. Mr Levy teaches to games keepers who often use grappling technique to restrain poachers who threaten endangered African wildlife - a cause that is particularly dear to my heart. Every serious jiu jitsu student has a teacher inside of them somewhere - the learning experience is so intense that we love to reenact it as teacher. Whilst competition may be the means of gaining distinction in jiu jitsu - There will always be more pleasure in jiu jitsu as a means of bringing people together than any competition.

Anticipation: The higher you go in the sport, the more you will seek to NARROW YOUR OPPONENTS OPTIONS INTO A FEW EASILY ANTICIPATED OPTIONS THAT YOU CAN NULLIFY BEFORE THEY CAN BE EMPLOYED. This is the path of the jiu jitsu expert. At the onset of a match, things can go in any direction. Your task is take events in a direction you desire and to gradually limit your opponents options until the only option left is to tap in defeat or face the consequences. Thus GAINING THE INITIATIVE AND THEN FROM THERE, PROGRESSIVELY LIMITING YOUR OPPONENTS CHOICES UNTIL HE HAS NO CHOICE is the mark of superior jiu jitsu. Nowhere is this methodology more clearly seen than in the case of submission holds. For any given submission hold, there are a few main avenues of escape. It is never enough to merely apply the hold on a skilled opponent - YOU MUST GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND APPLY THE HOLD IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU BLOCK THE ANTICIPATED COUNTERS BEFORE THEY OCCUR. You must study the counters to your favorite submissions and look for ways to stop those common counters whilst still applying the original hold. Here, Garry Tonon locks on a tight triangle stranglehold (sankaku jime) and immediately goes the extra distance to nullify the standard counters to triangles. This power of anticipation is made possible by imposing your moves and thus limiting your opponents options for movement. This cycle of imposition and anticipation is at the heart of good jiu jitsu.

Beginners class: Usually I teach the advanced classes at RGA in NYC. Sometimes however, I get asked to substitute in a beginners class when another instructor is sick or out of town. I always jump on the opportunity when it arises. There is something magical about a beginners class. It immediately returns you to the most important aspects of the sport and brings back the feelings of wonder you had when you first began in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. When teaching advanced students, my main focus is to get them TO IMPOSE THEIR GAME UPON THEIR OPPONENT. Beginners however, lack the skills to do this, and so here my main focus will always be PREVENTING AN OPPONENT FROM IMPOSING HIS GAME UPON YOU. Interestingly, the lessons of the beginner class have primacy - for in all truth, YOU WILL NEVER IMPOSE YOUR GAME UPON ANYONE IF YOU CANNOT FIRST PREVENT THEM FROM IMPOSING THEIR GAME UPON YOU. Those early days in the sport, as frustrating as they often are, we we get pinned and controlled and have no idea how to get out, are the essential part of a journey that perhaps one day will see you able to impose your will upon whoever is in front of you.

Little school - big dreams: Bronx NYC: So often people tell me they need to get to a bigger and better school to realize their dreams. Or they see some new equipment, different gi's, mats, exercise equipment etc etc. In fact the single most important factor in determining how far you go in jiu jitsu or any other endeavor is PASSION. Only if you are sufficiently passionate about what you do will you put in the requisite training time, research, auxiliary work, and overcome the inevitable disappointments and heartbreak needed to excel. No amount of fancy exercise equipment, world class instruction and training partners will ever make up for a lack of underlying passion. Passion is the soil in which the other elements needed for progress towards your goals are nourished, take root and grow towards the sky. I am often astounded by the high level of visitors to RGA in NYC who train in small local gyms and yet display skills out of proportion to their pedigree. Their passion for the sport made them take the extra steps and despite seeming disadvantages, they made great progress. Always remember that my teacher Renzo Gracie spent more than half of his time in the USA teaching out of rented kung fu studios, racquet ball courts, drug rehab buildings, exercise gyms and any other place that would have us, before he settled into our current location. IN THAT TIME HE PRODUCED THREE JIU JITSU/GRAPPLING WORLD CHAMPIONS AND NUMEROUS HIGH LEVEL BLACKBELTS WHILST FIGHTING PROFESSIONALLY AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS. In all honesty I tell you - WHAT LIES INSIDE THE DOOR OF WHATEVER GYM YOU TRAIN IN IS NOT NEARLY AS IMPORTANT AS THE ATTITUDE INSIDE YOU THAT YOU BRING TO THAT DOOR AND ENTER WITH. Every Monday night I love to go up to the Bronx to see my dear friend, Doug Pelinkovic and help teach at his local school. The Bronx has a very different vibe from Manhattan where I work and live. In that small gym there is passion and dreams. Sometimes my students from Manhattan come up to get a third workout in for the day - here kohai standouts Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza share the mats with Stanley Rosa and the Bronx crew to work on the skills that can elevate them closer to their goals.

Kohai on the march: Matthew Tesla, kohai (junior) brown belt squad member, continues to make his push towards senior status. Yesterday at Grappling Industries NYC event he entered the open weight division featuring 25 athletes up to blackbelt, despite weighing only 175 pounds. He won 4 of his 5 matches via submission to win gold and an all expenses paid trip to Grappling Industries 2018 World Championships event in California 😊Mr Tesla has been working very diligently in the gym on his skills. This has created a newfound confidence that was apparent in his strong run to the medal podium. Here he latches on to the leg of his black belt opponent with a fine ashi garami and controls the action from entry to finish. So often students ask me about developing confidence. I always say that confidence follows naturally from ability. If you develop the skills - confidence will follow. Some will get that confidence earlier, some later, but if the ability is there, one day it will come, and when it does, great things happen.

Tapping - part 2: Garry Tonon got caught in a very nice triangle one week ago by a very talented athlete (Antonio Carlos Jr) and fought hard to get out but tapped when he could not. Mr Carlos Jr was caught in a triangle variation the week before by Gordon Ryan and tapped. A week after that Mr Tonon was ready to fight again and this time win. You can see that in a world of high volume matches, professionals will tap so that they can continue with their careers uninterrupted and go on to success just a short time later. If you fight at a high level, you will get caught, no matter how good you are. Better to tap and resume training immediately so that you can avoid the errors that got you in trouble and move on to a higher level of performance. Of course there can be factors that change this and make you very reluctant to tap, but in standard grappling competition this is the sensible approach and the one I always encourage my athletes to take. Here Garry Tonon enjoys the fruits of victory, a week after a loss, an hour after a win, ready to enjoy himself that night and train hard the next day in preparation for another bout in a few weeks. 😊😜🤕😉😃#cash/chicks/championships

Tapping - Part 1: The decision to tap out due to strangle or joint lock is a deeply personal one. I always encourage my athletes to tap immediately to avoid injury. My reasoning is that if you have been put in a finishing position the mistakes have already been made, once you believe those mistakes cannot be undone - tap - as this allows you to immediately begin training so that those mistakes can be avoided in a rematch. When the athlete refuses to tap to a joint lock there will be a considerable period of time where training is impossible and there may be damage that never fully recovers - both of which will make the rematch more difficult. I understand that in MMA things can be different as there is a generally higher intensity level and athletes fight much less often. In grappling, athletes can compete every week for months in some cases. Getting badly injured can cause considerable interruption to the athletes yearly competition schedule, so I think it's generally the smart option to tap as soon as damage becomes probable. Sometimes there are other factors, prize money, prestige, honor or animosity that can make an athlete refuse to tap. A good example occurred when AJ Agazarm refused to tap to a very tight knee bar attempt from Garry Tonon last night. The variation employed by Mr Tonon is particularly strong and the effects of it, and Mr Agazarm's decision not to tap, can be readily seen in the immediate aftermath. There is much to commend in bravery and a spirit of resistance, but this must also be balanced with a sense of professionalism in a sport where the athlete may have to perform many times a year and train year round. Hats off to both men for a fine and dramatic show of technique against mental toughness.

A win for the G in a Gi: Last night in California, Garry Tonon defeated AJ Agazarm in a hastily arranged match after both competitors had their initial opponents pull out at the last minute. The match was notable for being in a gi - Mr Agazarm insisted on this knowing that Mr Tonon has not trained in one for years and that it would prevent him using one of his favorite weapons - the heel hook. In the end it made no difference- Mr Tonon took the fight to Mr Agazarm utilizing other elements of his submission arsenal, especially his kimura and knee bar, to put Mr Agazarm under extreme pressure and win a unanimous decision victory. The two have a history and do not enjoy each other's company, so the match had an intensity that the crowd enjoyed. As he does so often, Mr Tonon took on a challenge at an apparent disadvantage and prevailed in an entertaining and memorable way - showing that technical sophistication and entertainment don't have to be opposites. Well done to Fight2Win for their production and getting the most out of a show beset by last minute withdrawals. I wonder if wearing the gi again made Mr Tonon a little nostalgic...

Changes: It's been a strange week or two for the squad. At the Sapeteiro 6 event won by Gordon Ryan we had at least four of the main competitors pull out on short notice. Then the next week at SUG 3 Garry Tonon was offered three different opponents in a week due to pull outs, Gordon Ryan was offered two. Now this week at Fight2Win again there are numerous pull outs. Gabriel Arges, the very talented world champion has had to pull out of a much anticipated match with Garry Tonon due to late training injury. Gordon Ryan had defeated Mr Arges via heel hook in the past, but Mr Arges has won many matches over opponents of the highest level since then - it would have been a great match. Jeff Monson had to pull out of his match with ADCC gold and silver medalist Joao Assis. For a moment it appeared that Gordon Ryan would come in on 24 hours notice to take on Mr Assis in what would have been a fascinating battle, but Mr Assis declined, understandably citing a need for additional training time to face Mr Ryan. Then Bill Cooper pulled out of his match with AJ Agazarm. In the end we are left with a rather strange match up - Garry Tonon vs AJ Agazarm IN A GI!! 😜😂 This should be interesting. Mr Agazarm has spent a significant amount of time training with our team, but that was always no gi. Mr Tonon never had a problem with him in that context, but Mr Tonon has not trained seriously in a gi in a very long time. Add to this that Mr Agazarm has a rather low opinion of Mr Tonon's skills, whilst Mr Tonon has an even lower opinion of Mr Agazarms skills and will be cornered by our dear friend Jake Shields, who has an even lower opinion of both Mr Agazarms skills and character and cheered on by Mr Ryan who has the lowest opinion of Mr Agazarm of them all 😂😂😂 This one may turn into a dog fight! Mostly we like matches that appeal to us because of technical and tactical elements on display encased in the sportsmanship of jiu jitsu - every now and then we just like to see two people that don't like each other go at it 😜😜 - I have a feeling this match will be the latter type 😂😂 I can't wait to see if Garry remembers how to tie a belt properly 😉😜

Degree of difficulty: Simply winning is not the goal of great grapplers. If victory is all you seek, just fight weak opponents. In this way you will always be victorious - AND NO ONE WILL CARE. The real goal is winning against great opponents. That is what gets people's attention. We are judged not just by winning, but by the degree of difficulty associated with winning. No grappling athlete does more to find challenging matches than Garry Tonon. Due to the fact that so few athletes his own size will match him, he almost always has to fight extremely talented opponents many weight classes above him. This Friday on California at Fight to Win Pro is no exception. Mr Tonon will take on the extremely talented Gabriel Arges, world champion in both gi and no gi jiu jitsu. Mr Arges has an extremely impressive game, including some of the best leg locking skills in IBJJF competition. He has submitted current ADCC world champion Claudio Calasans with a superb knee bar at the world championships. He normally competes at 194 pounds - so as always it seems, he will have a considerable weight advantage over Mr Tonon, whose normal weight category is 155, along with a significant height advantage. Due to the fact that he fought just last week in Portland, Mr Tonon could not return to NYC to train in preparation for this match, but has been preparing with friends in California. The format of the match is an interesting one - ten minutes of sub only followed by referees decision based upon submission attempts and positional control. I will fly out to California tomorrow to corner him. It is great to see the many grappling shows getting stronger. The west coast is definitely leading the way here with several strong organizations, each offering different and very interesting formats for the athletes to showcase their skills.

Variation: A common strand of thinking that I observe in coaches and athletes is the idea that there is a correct way of performing a given move and any deviation from that is a step in the wrong direction. This kind of sentiment works well in a beginners class where you are trying to give students a firm foundation upon which to take their first steps, but as you progress higher in the sport, there comes a realization that there is almost always more than one correct way of performing that move. Much more important than the move itself is the set of MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES that underly the move. BEGINNERS TRY TO STAY TRUE TO THE MOVE AS IT WAS SHOWN TO THEM, BUT EXPERTS TRY TO STAY TRUE TO THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES BEHIND THE MOVE AND WORK FROM THERE. This allows them considerable leeway in their actual performance of any given move so that fascinating variations and improvisations can occur, but which still work in accordance with the essential mechanical foundations upon which the move is based. This sometimes has amusing consequences - you will see a beginner claiming a world champion is performing a move incorrectly because he is using a variation different from the one he was shown, but in truth, that champion is operating in accordance with the same over arching principles. Here kohai brown belt student, Stanley Rosa, an outstanding young instructor of Bronx Martial Art academy under my good friend Doug Pelinkovic, performs a fascinating variation of kimura into a powerful submission win over outstanding Pedro Sauer black belt David Porter at a recent grappling show. Unorthodox leg and hip positioning does not prevent him staying true to the critical features of a strong kimura attack as you can see from the impressive power he generates in very little time.

Reflections on my sensei: Innovation in jiu jitsu: My sensei, Renzo Gracie had a very broad repertoire of technique and always sought to add new moves to his arsenal. Like all jiu jitsu players however, he had his tokui-waza (favorite moves) that he would call upon in critical situations. There is no question that the move he is best known for is his arm in guillotine. It allowed him to prevail in two of the most defining moments of his career - against the much larger Sanae Kikuta in a 52 minute battle in Japan, and against the great Pat Militich. When I consider my sensei's version of the versatile guillotine strangle, I am always deeply impressed by its mechanical perfection and the smoothness and subtlety of his set ups. I believe the development of Mr Gracie's arm in guillotine can teach us much about the nature of innovation in an art where almost everything has been done by people before us. When Mr Gracie arrived in the US in 1995, he rarely used any form of guillotine and certainly did not have any arm in guillotine - so clearly it was not something he learned in Brazil with the rest of his jiu jitsu. Nor was he the first person to employ the arm in guillotine - the first time I saw it done was by Oleg Taktarov in UFC 6 in his first match with Steve Beneteau, and I am sure there are probably examples before that which I am not aware of. Nonetheless, in the mid 1990's, the arm in guillotine was rarely seen and certainly not a standard technique in the sport. As his professional career developed and more of his training time was spent in no gi training, Mr Gracie played with many ways to grip opponents in ways that allowed submissions and sweeps from bottom position. One of his favorites became the front headlock position. As he played with it he had some initial success from that position and thus began his investigation into the arm in guillotine. As months became years he built a game around the position, entries, control and finishes, that covered every possible reaction an opponent could make. MOST INNOVATION IN JIU JITSU IS NOT BEING THE FIRST, BUT IN ADVANCING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE IN WAYS THAT IMPROVE PERFORMANCE

Nice work Mr Sonnen: Chael Sonnen is doing a good job with his fledgling grappling show and tonight put on an entertaining show that featured some very nice grappling action showcasing the area between MMA and grappling using EBI rules format to create fast paced matches with plenty of action. Squad members Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan were there. Mr Ryan took on Kentucky leg locking specialist Joe Baize. He told me prior to the match he would limit himself to guillotines and juji/sankaku (armbar/triangle) finishes. That is a very challenging way to enter a match - but he did it with a nicely applied juji out of sankaku control. Mr Tonon fought a tough match against his much larger opponent, Antonio Carlos Jr. All credit to Mr Carlos Jr. He hit a splendid flying sankaku and finished it in excellent fashion to win a fine victory. Sometimes fighting at the highest levels can be a topsy turvy experience - just last week, Gordon Ryan defeated Mr Carlos Jr via sankaku (a different variation) at Sapeteiro 6. When very talented athletes fight, just one little error or miscalculation can determine the result and so there can be total shifts in victories and losses within a week, as happened here - that's what makes the sport so interesting! Now the squad must go into training for more matches next weekend in California 😊😊

Walking the walk: Our team often talks about taking on bigger, stronger opponents to prove the efficacy of our methods. No one does this better than Garry Tonon. His opponent, IBJJF world champion and UFC standout, Antonio Carlos Jr, a man who has defeated Bernardo Faria, Leandro Lo and Romulo Barral on multiple occasions, including by submission, weighed in for tonight's event in Portland Mat 230 pounds. Garry Tonon weighed in heavier than usual - 170 pounds. This will be the biggest weight difference he has had to contend with since he fought Buchecha in ADCC when he had just been awarded his black belt. Adding to the difficulty is a big height advantage to Mr Carlos Jr. People can say whatever they want about Mr Tonon, but they can never criticize his willingness to back up his words with action and showcase the art against bigger opponents. In this last week he was matched against three men for tonight's event - Hector Lombard, Chael Sonnon and Mr Carlos Jr - each one far bigger and stronger and than him and each one bigger than the one before him. The first two had to pull out, leaving the biggest and best qualified. No one his own size would accept the match, but Mr Tonon as always accepted whoever he was offered. He and Gordon Ryan have trained very well - now it's on to the stage - this time a cage - and under the lights

To the winner go the spoils: Kohai student Jonathan "JC" Calestine put on his best competition display yet today, winning the 145 pound division of The Finishers Tournament 3 - a popular local event. It included outstanding local grapplers such as JM Holland, Mike Davila and John Battle, but JC was able to get past them all to win the first place honors. JC has always looked good in the gym - Eddie Cummings often insists that I match him with JC as often as possible when he is preparing for big events as he believes JC is the most difficult among the Kohai to finish. Today he was able to let his gym skills shine on the stage and gain victory - with many more to follow I am sure. Great work JC and great work by the shows organizers for drawing such strong local talent into an event that provides ideal training for those looking to gain the kind of experience they will need to rise to the top.

There's no business like show business: Tomorrow night in Portland Oregon, MMA's greatest showman, Chael Sonnen will run the show at Submission Underground - but the squad will look to be the ones putting on the show 😜 Garry Tonon takes on Brazilian jiu jitsu and MMA standout, Antonio Carlos Jr - a powerful athlete far bigger and stronger than himself who has beaten some of the biggest names in IBJJf competition and who brings a very exciting set of submission skills. Gordon Ryan takes on Kentucky Leg lock specialist Joe Baize, who had a sterling performance at EBI 8. Rules will be standard EBI, but with a shortened time limit of only eight minutes. It will be interesting to see how this affects the work rate and pacing of the matches. Mr Sonnen is doing a fine job of integrating the area between MMA and grappling in his shows and has a natural sense of how to get people's attention in ways that will grow the sport. Our team is interested to see how the use of a cage will affect the matches. This is the first time the squad has had to grapple in a cage. Both our opponents have extensive MMA experience and thus expertise in cage work - that will definitely makes things interesting. A core element of our style is that great jiu jitsu must have an aesthetic element to it in addition to its effectiveness. Our team loves to put on a show. Of course the result will always be paramount, but we train to create a dynamic game that always pushes towards submission - this makes the squad natural showmen. In amateur sports the only thing of value is the result - this gives it an admirable purity. The idea of a professional sport - a sport that people see as ENTERTAINMENT, a medium of entertainment that people pay to watch, requires that the athlete do more than win - he must win a fashion that MAKES PEOPLE WANT TO WATCH. This is a difficult requirement, but one which every professional athlete must work on. Each must find their own way. Ours will always be based around dynamic movement leading to control and the ruthless pursuit of submission above all.

It appears that Jeff Monson has pulled out of the submission underground event and will no longer be facing Gordon Ryan in what would have been a fascinating battle of experience, size, strength and submission defense vs agility and submission offense. The organizers of Submission Underground have substituted leg locking specialist Joe Baize as substitute. Mr Baize competed at EBI 8 which Mr Ryan won - but they never met as they were on opposite sides of the brackets. I remember Mr Baize putting on a very good performance. He was probably the smallest man in the tournament yet won his first match well by submission (leg lock) and did very well against the much larger and stronger Felipe Fogolin, almost catching his legs on multiple occasions before getting tired and caught in a stranglehold. Nonetheless I was impressed by his skills, calmness under pressure and willingness to mix it up with bigger athletes. The nature of the match now is very different - it will be a match centered around submission skills - where leg submissions are the specialty of both athletes. Both men know what it takes to get to the legs and finish on the legs. It's been a frustrating week for the squad running through multiple opponents pulling out of match ups at the last minute - we are proud of our record of professionalism of showing up come what may. Now it seems we have two dangerous opponents who play the submission game very well and are ready to play ball Sunday night in Portland.

Seminal moments: I am a huge believer in the notion of SEMINAL MOMENTS in the development of athletes and even recreational jiu jitsu players. These are critical episodes where a student has built up physical skills over time and then in one opportunity, SUDDENLY AND DRAMATICALLY MANIFESTS THOSE SKILLS IN A MEMORABLE AND DYNAMIC FASHION. These moments are huge for your development. They represent the interface between physical skills and mental attributes such as confidence. Once such an episode occurs, you will believe in your ability to replicate this skill and jump to a new level of performance - but UNTIL such a moment, something inside you will always hold you back a little when the opportunity comes. These moments need not be public - in fact they most often occur in the gym, seen by no one except you and your training partner - but their effect can be dramatic. These seminal moments cannot be forced. You must work to create the base level of skill that makes them possible - but only some subliminal flash inside of you can make them happen. Where in the past you hesitated, one day something inside clicks and you let all your guns fire - and then you will never look back. As a coach I can help build up the skills to make it possible, but only you can snatch that moment and make it yours. This is why these seminal moments are so important to your development. They represent your independence from a teacher. They are a coming of age in some aspect of the sport. At the recent Sapeteiro 6 event, kohai student Matthew Tesla had such a moment. Taking on 10th Planet icon black belt Boogyman Martinez, the recent brown belt, who has always shown immense promise in the gym, but who always held back in competition, suddenly had his moment. No second guessing, no hesitation, no doubts - just the mindless realization that he could do this on his terms in his way - fire! Look for these seminal moments in your training - you can't force them, but you can put yourself in a position where if the opportunity is there, you can take it when ready - treasure and relish those moments - they are yours and yours alone.

Smaller man vs bigger man part 2: This weekend squad Senpai (senior students) Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon will take on much bigger opponents. Mr Ryan will take on the hulking two time world champion and five time world medalist Jeff Monson. Initially Mr Tonon was to face off against the very powerful Hector Lombard, but Mr Lombard had to pull out due to a scheduling conflict. Then Mr Chael Sonnen showed his usual fearlessness and stepped in on short notice - but had to pull out when Bellator fight company expressed disapproval of the bout. Mr Sonnen did a fine job of finding a new opponent. UFC standout Antonio Carlos Jr. will face Mr Tonon. Mr Carlos Jr has a very impressive background in jiu jitsu - he was a double world champion at brown belt and since then has recorded multiple victories over jiu jitsu icons such as Leandro Lo, Romulo Barral, and Bernardo Faria. He represented great teams in both jiu jitsu and MMA- Checkmat and ATT. Clearly his skills are of the highest level to defeat such great opponents. He is a real physical specimen - well over two hundred very athletic pounds and tall. This should afford him a big physical advantage in both regulation time and overtime. As always, the squad will have to rely on skill and tactics to prevail. Unfortunately the matches are very short - just eight minutes - so there is no way to use time as a weapon to tire the bigger opponents in this tournament. However, both Mr Tonon and Mr Ryan have trained extremely well in preparation despite some physical problems and they are eager to put on a show against these very talented strongmen they face in this new competition venue. Submission underground is doing a fine job of working the interface between grappling and MMA and brings the showmanship of Mr Chael Sonnen along with the rule system of Mr Eddie Bravo to create an exciting venue for athletes from both sports to showcase their skills.

Smaller man vs bigger man part 1: This weekend at Submission underground grappling event run by former UFC superstar Chael Sonnen, Gordon Ryan will take on one of the most decorated ADDC world championship veterans of all time in an EBI style format. Jeff Monson is a two time ADCC gold medalist, two time silver medalist and one time bronze medalist. He has defeated many jiu jitsu icons in ADCC competition with a unique blend of wrestling, counter jiu jitsu and raw physical strength that is extremely difficult to overcome. Mr Ryan is coming off a fine victory this weekend in Florida at Sapeteiro 6 and is already back in the gym preparing for this titanic match up. He will have only eight minutes of regulation time to try to break though against his much larger and stronger rival who has survived the submission arsenals of past jiu jitsu greats for much longer periods and emerged victorious. This will be a fascinating match of a young master of submission offense and a vastly bigger and more experienced master of submission defense under very tight time constraint. Mr Ryan has been battling through a mysterious lower abdominal and hip pain for months now, but has shown real dedication and truly admiral fortitude in training and continuing to grow and develop throughout this adversity. This fascinating match up will provide a truly stern test of his contest preparation.

Shiai Intensity: Most athletes feel a very different intensity level when they enter competition (shiai) in comparison with daily sparring in the gym. This is perfectly natural and in some cases it has benefits. As a general rule however, I seek to reduce the overall difference between competition intensity and gym intensity as much as possible. I like to see athletes compete in a relaxed demeanor rather than an extremely intense one (there are exceptions obviously) so that the bridge between the gym and the stage is a narrow one to cross. Developing this relaxed shiai demeanor takes time - but when it comes, I find the common problem of lowered performance on stage is greatly reduced. There is however, one area of the sport where this general approach does not apply - the use of finishing holds/submissions. These must be applied with greater intensity in shiai than in the gym due to much greater levels of resistance found in competition than usual circumstances. This does not mean recklessness or unsporting behavior - it simply means that submissions have to be locked tighter than usual and with greater focus and power along with a stronger drive to completion than would be appropriate in a gym setting among friends and teammates. There simply has to be a stronger threat of potential damage if the opponent is to tap in submission - if that potential is not there,
competitive opponents will simply not surrender. Dealing with these two aspects of intensity, lowering overall shiai intensity closer to gym levels; whilst at the same time raising submission intensity levels is a big part of contest preparation for our athletes. Here kohai brown belt Matthew Tesla shows great competition submission intensity as he finishes one of 10th planets best black belts, Boogyman Martinez via heel hook during an outstanding run to the final of Sapeteiro 6 grappling invitational this weekend. His reconciliation of overall intensity levels and submission intensity levels was very impressive for a developing student.

The kohai shine in Texas: Fast rising squad kohai (little brothers) Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza took center stage at the Texas Jiu Jitsu Kumite professional grappling tournament yesterday. Both won their respective weight divisions all by submission under EBI rules. Both hail from Canada but train with the squad and have done a fine job of absorbing our methods and philosophy. They have a special place in my heart as they make the same trip from Montreal to train with us in NYC that Georges St-Pierre Made as a young man to become champion - I believe they will do likewise one day in grappling. They spend at least two weeks of every month in NYC and make real sacrifices to get to their goals. Mr Crelinsten has made astonishing progress in technical depth and his repertoire of submissions is already impressive. Mr Taza brings a quiet intensity to both training and competition and has an artistry to his dangerous submission game that is a pleasure to behold. Keep your eye on these youngsters - they have the ambition and the work ethic to go all the way to the top. 😊😊 Good to see them displaying their medals and counting their shekels as reward for their hard work! A fantastic first day for the squad in 2017 with Gordon Ryan winning Sapeteiro 6, Mathew Tesla taking second in a brilliant debut performance, Shy Ace winning his superfight at the same event by submission, Mr Taza and Mr Crelinsten wining In Texas and other kohai putting on great performances at the same event. Renzo and I are so proud of you and all the students at RGA who help you prepare 😊😊

Strong start: The squad entered the professional grappling competition circuit in fine form today. Gordon Ryan won the Sapitiero 6 Grappling Invitational and took $10,000 first prize. Up and coming kohai student Matthew Tesla put on a great display in his first big competition, submitting everyone on his side of the bracket including 10th planet stand out Boogyman Martinez to get to the finals against team mate Mr Ryan. Mr Tesla used his superb ashi garami based leg locking skills to finish everyone he faced - Mr Ryan used exclusively upper body attacks to showcase his submission versatility and take the big prize. We have other kohai students competing in Texas - will update as facts come in. I am especially proud of this result as it represents a real breakthrough for Mr Tesla to get into top level pro sub grappling and shine. Mr Ryan has battled heroically through a mystery illness that has plagued him for months and showed incredible discipline to train through it and prevail. Great to see a strong start to 2017 - big plans, big ambitions and the discipline to make them real.

Those who give, shall receive: Very often I see students fight for every inch of ground in a match. The moment contact is made there is a furious fight for grips and every part of the match is tightly contested. Often this is a sound approach - but it is important to understand that it is not the only way to engage your opponent. Too often this approach leads to a result where the two athletes never get to finishing positions because they never get past the battle for initial grips and positions. Very often you will get better results by giving something to your opponent. The key is TO CONTROL HOW MUCH YOU GIVE AND THE AFTERMATH. If you give an opening to a talented opponent without a plan, he will quickly take advantage and score on you. However, if you do so with a sound plan and the skills to enact it, your opponent will often be caught as he moves into what he perceived as an advantage. So for example, you can let an elbow drift surreptitiously away from your torso to draw your opponent into an underhook, all the while waiting for this occur so that your pre-planned attack off the overhook can come into play. Jiu jitsu is absolutely full of possibilities for this kind of approach. We all have a good idea of what is desirable for both athletes as we spar, so often the act of giving will provide the perfect set up on an over extended opponent as the trap is sprung. This approach requires subterfuge and subtlety along with the skills to recover if your gambit fails and to score if it succeeds - all this is good for your development. Ultimately our sport REQUIRES FREE MOVEMENT AND EXTENSION OF THE LIMBS IF FINISHES ARE TO OCCUR. If neither player will engage past initial grips this is unlikely to occur - hence the occasional need to offer INCENTIVES TO MOVEMENT AND EXTENSION THAT CAN CREATE THE CONDITIONS NEEDED FOR VICTORY. Here Garry Tonon offers both partial back exposure and a partial ashi garami entanglement as a means of getting into his opponents hips and legs and into a potentially winning position with the least effort and energy expenditure.

Last day of training: This weekend will see the sixth installment of the growing Sapateiro Invitational grappling event. They use a slightly modified EBI format to put on excellent submission only events. Sapateiro 6 is notable for the incredible amount of talent they have brought in - there are three EBI finalists, an ADCC champion, several ADCC competitors- it is probably fair to say it has a more stacked field than any single EBI event! Gordon Ryan has battled through a mystery illness this camp that has still not been resolved after nearly four months, but has trained without fail with the resolve and discipline of a true stoic. He will take with him his understudy, Matthew Tesla. Mr Tesla has been training at a very high level and gave a very strong performance at the recent ADCC trials. This will be his first big show - the first of many I am sure - for he has a wealth of talent to show off. Building athletes to a peak is always an exciting process - thanks goes to the organizers of Sapeteiro 6 for creating a venue and a thrilling line up for these talented athletes to showcase their individual skills and the appeal of the sport in general. 😊😊

Students and teachers: Some of my happiest coaching memories come from watching my students teach. I have always been insistent on the idea that my students have a deep understanding of the underlying principles and concepts that underly our approach to the game and that they be capable of explaining them well to others. As a result, my students can in almost every case, do a fine job of teaching our methods and philosophy to students of all levels and backgrounds. In particular Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan have a complete and deep knowledge of my approach to jiu jitsu. Indeed, I would go further and say that these three have developed an independence and originality of thought that has taken them beyond my teachings and into their own distinctive style. I have taught seminars with all three and am constantly amazed by the maturity and depths of their views and their skill at conveying it to others. All three take immense pride in their knowledge and constantly work to refine and improve it. It is no exaggeration to say they are light years ahead of where I was after a similar time spent in training. This bodes well for the future as they have so much more time to develop their skills and knowledge. All three teach seminars between competitions. I can attest to how much learning material they offer when they teach. This weekend in Florida, Mr Ryan will be teaching elements of our style - if you have the chance to go - don't miss it! Mr Cummings and Mr Tonon are also often available and can be reached easily through social media to arrange seminars etc so that you can learn more about their method and philosophy. Competition makes our sport thrilling in the present, but only teaching creates the framework for the health and growth of the sport into the future.

Ambition and patience: There are two great mental attributes that I see in most great jiu jitsu students, and indeed, in almost every enterprise that humans engage in (obviously there are many others, but I want to focus on these two today as they form a relation that is critical to our long term success or failure). These are AMBITION and PATIENCE. In order to achieve anything of consequence in the world, a person must have ambition, for it is ambition that provides the inner drive that initiates our physical actions over time. Seen in this light, ambition appears to be a fine thing - there is however, a problem. In our attempts to fulfill our ambition we constantly run into road blocks. Competition with other people who have similar ambitions, the sheer difficulty of the tasks we need to complete to realize those ambitions - factors like these lead to frustration as we so often fail in our ambitions. It is exactly then that we must make use of a second, complimentary mental attribute - patience. Patience is the recognition that achievement and the skills that bring achievement take time to develop. AMBITION STARTS EVERY ENTERPRISE - BUT ONLY ITS INTERACTION WITH PATIENCE SUSTAINS EVERY ENTERPRISE AND TAKES IT THROUGH TO COMPLETION. It is critical to understand that one without the other is of little value. Powerful ambition quickly leads to frustration and disappointment when it runs into the reality of competition. We see this all the time with the high attrition rate in jiu jitsu. Too much patience creates overly contented people with little drive who are happy enough with what they already and who don't push hard enough to create the changes need to improve in the time available. We see this all the time in jiu jitsu with people who train for long stretches of time but who make little technical progress. Somewhere in the middle is the solution. Where that point in the middle is, will depend upon your goals, your life situation, what you believe personal happiness to consist of etc. but find it you must if you are to gain the longevity and drive in a sport that requires both for excellence.

There's no place like Renzo's: Monday afternoon Martin Luthor King day in NYC. The squad is preparing for upcoming events. Submission Underground Event - run by MMA legend Chael Sonnen will feature Garry Tonon against MMA super star Hector Lombard, who has world championship level judo skills and a huge size and strength advantage over Mr Tonon. Gordon Ryan will take on Jeff Monson, the former ADCC grappling world champion, again at a big size and strength disadvantage. It will be a classic match up of strength vs mobility for both of our athletes. Filming the athletes in training and conducting interviews afterwards, the Submission Underground crew had a busy day at RGA. 😊 It's great to see MMA superstars promoting and competing in these events and using the star power of the MMA game to help grow the grappling game and give our athletes a venue to show our philosophy and methods in the sport. Thank you to Mr Sonnen and the SUG team from RGA and the squad. The rule set will feature shortened EBI matches of eight minutes and then into overtime. Our training has to reflect the higher work rate required by the time constraints - leading to some spectacular matches on the gym floor today! Some of the practice matches could easily have been used as pay per view material!! 😃🤕😜 With over seventy five people in the class it made for an exciting afternoons training...

The Artist's medium: Every art uses a medium through which the artist may achieve self expression. The degree to which he or she succeeds or fails is largely bound up with his or her depth of understanding of that medium. If a painter has only a poor knowledge of paint, color, tone, intensity, perspective, brushwork and canvas; it is unlikely that deep self expression will arise from shallow knowledge of the very medium that makes that expression possible. In the empty handed martial arts, the HUMAN BODY is the medium through which the artist must express himself. Like any other artist, the deeper the knowledge of the medium, the better will be the opportunity for impressive self expression. Not only is knowledge of the working of the human body important here, but so to is your ability to maximize your use of the human body. If you are limited in your ability to move your body, this will always make self expression through the body more difficult. Thus the constant need to maintain and improve the dexterity, strength and overall health of your body to the greatest degree possible. This the martial artist shares in common with all those artists who express themselves through the body - gymnasts, dancers, athletes of every type. With all other artists they share the need for a medium and for the deep study of that medium if their work is to be impressive. Their only difference from these other artists is the direction they choose to express themselves - but like all their brethren, the best among them study and cherish the medium with which they work.

Legs and learning: Probably the single most common question I am asked is this - how can I speed my progress in jiu jitsu? When this is asked as a general question (rather than as a question from a specific athlete) my answer is always the same - LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH YOUR LEGS. We humans do almost all of our complex motor tasks with our hands and arms, yet the strongest part of our bodies by far are our legs and hips. Those who try to grapple predominantly with their upper body will never defeat anyone larger than themselves and quickly fall to exhaustion. The beginning jiu jitsu student must make the transition to using his or her legs as dexterously as most people use their hands and arms if he is to excel. In every class I teach, THOSE WHO LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH THEIR FEET, LEGS AND HIPS, QUICKLY OVERTAKE AND DOMINATE THOSE WHO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH THEIR HANDS, ARMS AND SHOULDERS. An excellent example of a fast learner in BJJ is the great BJ Penn. He made a lightning quick ascent up the ranks to become the first American to win a world championship and then went on to a legendary career in MMA. A notable feature of Mr Penn's game was his extraordinary leg dexterity and control. He used this to great effect in every aspect of the game - guard work, back control and passing. He was one of the few athletes I have seen whose foot and leg dexterity closely matched that in most people's hands and arms. This made him much more than a quick learner. It also helped him greatly when fighting larger opponents, as a smaller mans legs are stronger than a bigger mans arms. His example is an excellent one to all aspiring to rise in the sport - TRAIN AND EMPHASIZE THE DEXTERITY AND CONTROL OF YOUR LEGS, HIPS AND FEET, FOR THIS IS A KEY ELEMENT IN YOUR RATE OF PROGRESSION.

Watching vs Observing: When we think of training in jiu jitsu, we typically think in physical terms - drilling, sparring, movement and strength training etc. These are undoubtedly the most important forms of training. Nonetheless I believe that real supplemental progress in your game can be made by observing jiu jitsu as a spectator- provided you approach it in the correct fashion. One of the most impressive examples of this occurred a few years ago when the great Mendes brothers visited our academy. They were in NYC as part of their seminar tour program and stopped by to teach some private classes. As they finished, the famous Monday afternoon class at RGA began. Rafa Mendes came on to the mats to observe the big class. He had to go on to teach afterwards, so he could not participate, but sat alongside me as I taught and coached. When the sparring began I noted his intense gaze as he followed the movements of the many advanced students grappling in front of him. He was not merely WATCHING the matches as most do - entertained by the action as a spectator and seeing nothing more than who wins and who loses. He was truly OBSERVING the class - he appeared to be considering second by second what he would be doing if he were in any of the matches that were unfolding in front of him. Unlike most, he was an ACTIVE OBSERVER rather than a PASSIVE OBSERVER. I was deeply impressed by his powers of focus and concentration as his eyes followed the action and looked into exactly the areas most relevant to deciding the outcome of each match as his mind raced for solutions and answers for whatever problems he saw. This was clearly a man who could learn and grow merely by observing and use observation as a useful supplement to his physical training. What for most people would be an hour of entertainment watching athletes battle each other, was for him a MENTAL WORKOUT that doubtless he could carry with profit into his next PHYSICAL workout. It was an impressive display of the kind of mental acuity and focus that champions carry in addition to their physical skills and attributes.

Words and flattery can make anyone believe they are certain to win a match; but only skill, tactics and preparation can make their opponent share that same belief - yet it is only when both you AND your opponent believe that you will win that the outcome is decided. No one cares if you believe you will win - almost every athlete goes into a match believing that - what counts is your capacity to make your opponent believe it also - and that comes not so much from the mind, but mostly from your skills and attributes.

Pioneers: As an instructor, my path was relatively easy. I started under one of the best known and most knowledgeable teachers in one of the biggest and best academy's in the world. A much tougher task is taken on by those instructors who have to go into territory where jiu jitsu is undeveloped and build a following and student base in an area where there is little or no background in jiu jitsu. My teacher Renzo Gracie was a pioneer. When he came to NYC in the mid 1990's there was virtually no jiu jitsu culture here at all. Students began at absolutely no understanding of ground grappling - a simple triangle was considered a very advanced move by us. In beginners class we had to have it explained to us that bottom guard position was not the same as bottom mount position. Poor Renzo had to go from Gracie Barra in Rio De Janeiro, training with the best black belts in the world, to teaching a bunch of stiff, uncoordinated, woefully ignorant klutzes who did not know the difference between an underhook and an overhook. The fact that Sensei was able to create so many champions from such poor raw material under such conditions is testimony not only to his teaching skill but also his patience! Nowadays there is no need for this pioneering work in America - the sport has matured here. However, in many parts of the world, the sport is still in its infancy. RGA has affiliates around the world who travel vast distances to learn the sport and our approach to it and carry this knowledge back to the jiu jitsu frontiers. Kurdt George, from Renzo Gracie Cape Town, South Africa has done incredible work building the sport in his nation and training with the squad to stay current with our developments. Today Sensei gave him a well deserved black belt for his achievements - one pioneer to another - both men doing a stellar job of growing our beloved sport and ensuring future growth. Well done Kurdt George! And a big hello to South African jiu jitsu from NYC, from Renzo and the squad in the blue basement! 🇧🇷🇿🇦🇿🇦🇺🇸

Insight and direction: I am a big believer in the value of having a primary coach in your developmental years - one person who creates a strong fundamental game and an overall approach to the sport with progress over time. I am also a big believer in the value of occasional alternative points of view to add new insight and perspective that can make you investigate new areas of the sport. As a beginning student I was very fortunate to have the best of both. My primary coach was of course, Renzo Gracie. As you know, he is a he is a jiu jitsu icon running one of the biggest academies in the world in one of the world's premier cities - so we had many extremely distinguished guests over the years. Many of these outstanding individuals had an impact upon me and my approach to the game. I would be doing you all a disservice if I did not talk about them in future posts so that you can learn from their insights as I did. Most importantly, we can look at different modes of teaching. Our daily teaching from our primary coaches is usually technical in nature. The value of visitors is not so much technical - they typically are not there long enough to make significant technical contributions to any more than small parts of your game - their real value is in the NEW PERSPECTIVE they offer and how this can make you think and progress in new directions - LONG AFTER THE VISITOR IS GONE. When I was a blue belt, the great Dean Lister visited our academy. If I remember correctly, he was a brown belt at the time, doing well at local tournaments, but not yet the 2X ADCC champion he would later become. Mr Lister had very powerful Achilles locks and knee bars at that time - he had not yet fully developed the heel hook game he later used so successfully. When speaking to us he spoke of the usefulness of leg attacks in his game. At that time this was VERY unorthodox. He said something like, "upper body or lower body- a tap is a tap and a tap is a win." That one sentence stuck with me and as I rode the NYC subway home that night - my mind was racing with possibilities. From that day I began the study of lower body submissions and a whole new door opened.

Reflections on my sensei: There was a blizzard of snow today in NYC. When I Made my way down to the academy I was wondering how many people would show up for training. When I arrived, Sensei was on the mat teaching a packed class 😊😊 He had driven in all the way from Holmdel NJ in the blizzard to make sure whoever came in got a memorable workout - and that they got! 😊😊 Mr Gracie taught a fascinating kimura variation often utilized by his student, Matt Serra, along with some modifications he had made. It was a beautiful demonstration of teaching skill. Anyone can teach their own game - BUT IT TAKES REAL INSIGHT AND KNOWLEDGE TO TEACH ANOTHER MANS GAME AND ILLUMINATE ITS SUBTLETIES AND NUANCES. Mr Gracie has a warmth and charisma that makes a class more than technical lesson, but also a joy to the soul. Afterwards he and judo superstar Travis Stevens stayed to help the squad through a days training for upcoming tournaments. I came down to the academy wondering if anyone would be there - it ended being one of the most enjoyable training days I can remember. 😊😊 As I make my home through the blizzard I cannot help but think of how fortunate I am to have had this man as my teacher more than twenty years ago and how the same knowledge and personality can lift and inspire a new generation of students today.

Recognize: It was great to see some of the achievements of the squad recognized at the flograppling 2016 grappling awards. They were nominated for five awards and won two. Gordon Ryan was voted best upset of the year for his win via submission over the great Keenan Cornelius. Garry Tonon won the award for no gi match of the year for his epic encounter with the great Leg locking maestro Rousimar Palhares. Interestingly, Mr Tonon was nominated twice for match of the year for two separate bouts - a real distinction. The two bouts were very different from one another due to their very different rule structure. Mr Tonon's was a blaze of action, featuring high lifts and slams, plenty of action both on the ground and standing, many submission attempts and quick positional work to back attacks. Mr Ryan's was a calm, measured chess match with long periods of calm interspersed with powerful positional attacks by Mr Cornelius and submission attacks by Mr Ryan. Both matches were thrilling to coach, by in very different ways. I love the purity of submission only with no time limit, but realize that they are unlikely to happen often for business reasons. The shorter matches with criteria for wins are much more spectator friendly for the average fan. Still, I was proud to see the squad put on such fine displays in varying formats against such dangerous opponents and get recognition for the hard work I see them put in day after day in the gym. Interestingly however, public recognition must always be preceded by private recognition. It is in the dojo that success is first experienced. It is the recognition by your training partners of your progress, a technique well performed, a sparring session showing improvements, an approving nod from your coach, which first tell you that your hard work is paying off and that which once seemed impossible for you is becoming normal. In this process of recognition is born the beginnings of confidence and self belief, and with time, discipline and with continued cycles of action, achievement and recognition can come something great and remarkable - recognition can go from friends and coaches to recognition from the sport itself

Basic and advanced: One of my favorite coaching memories of 2016 was Garry Tonon's spectacular submission win over world champion Gilbert "Durinho" Burns in England at Polaris grappling. Mr Burns was a formidable opponent, considerably heavier and stronger than Mr Tonon and with tremendous takedown and positional skills. After a sharp exchange of skills, Mr Tonon was able to utilize a rolling entry into one of our favorite ashi garami variations and secure a brilliant victory by way of heel hook. The video captures the action well. Most people are impressed by the fluidity and confidence with which Mr Tonon entered and completed this rarely seen and seemingly spectacular entry from standing position down to the floor. In truth however, the move is founded upon the most basic movement in the sport - a simple forward roll that we all learned on our first day as a means of falling safely to the mats. This says much about our sport. The most complex and advanced moves all rest upon the most basic as their foundation. That Mr Tonon is so proficient in these types of entry is no accident. He is truly a master of ukemi waza - rolling and falling technique. Every day he uses it as his warm up. I must have seen him perform it many thousands of times - yet to this day he impresses me with the ease and fluidity with which he performs these essential basic skills before class. It is this daily drilling and perfection of this simple skill that makes it so easy for him to perform much more advanced variations at the big shows. THE SKILLS OF JIU JITSU ARE STRONGLY SEQUENTIAL - THERE IS NO MASTERY OF ADVANCED MOVES WITHOUT PRIOR MASTERY OF BASIC ONES. So often I see students rush through ukemi rolling drills to get to what they think is interesting - yet the very thing they are rushing towards is impossible to do well without those basic skills they are brushing aside. Take pride in your basic skills and your mastery of them - they will make your journey to advanced skills far easier.

Reflections on my Sensei: The most important lesson Mr Gracie ever taught me: Anyone involved in the kingly art of jiu jitsu can understand that their Sensei delves out countless important and valuable lessons, especially in the early stages of development where every day of training seems to offer huge new insights and ways of looking at things. As time passes however, the value of the lessons changes from straightforward technical and tactical advice and starts to move into the strategic and life defining areas. When I was a white belt and training in Mr Gracie's dojo, the senior students were of a very high level. I developed a reputation as a white belt that was difficult to finish, so many of the seniors enjoyed training with me as a solid test of their finishing skills or a tough warm up before serious training with the other seniors. This kind of training gave me a solid defense, but not much else. I fell into a mindset of thinking that success consisted in holding out for a respectable time. That mindset is acceptable for a beginner, but it cannot sustain development over time. One night I was feeling rather proud of myself having lasted a long round with a senior when Mr Gracie sat next to me and, expressed strong disappointment in my game. He said, " John - the way you play you will never be anything more than an ANNOYANCE to your opponent. You must change and become a THREAT to your opponent. When you do this you will see a total change, not only in your game - but in the game that your opponent brings to you." A moments reflection revealed the truth of his words. From that day forward I changed my whole approach to the game. I began a detailed study of the main submissions of the sport and the necessary preconditions to make them possible. In a short time I started experiencing offensive success for the first time and the game became so much more rewarding and interesting. This seemingly simple lesson became the guiding direction for my jiu jitsu study and my teaching philosophy. Defense will always be the basis of jiu jitsu, but it must be supplemented by a positive attacking spirit to prevent it degenerating into a negative game.

First class at Renzo Gracie Academy 2017: So good to get 2017 off to a strong start at our Monday 12pm class as the squad gets back into competition mode. Sensei Renzo came to say hello 😊😊 Over 80 people in an afternoon class? Where else but Renzo's? 😜😜 It was wonderful to see Sensei so proud of the improvements he made to his school - the new fuji mats are superb and proving very popular with our students, especially Eddie Cummings, grinning like a maniac as he works some elements of our back control/submission system on the comfort of Fuji smooth series tatame 😂😂 Whoever new that ushiro sankaku (rear triangle)!could be so photogenic? 😂😜 So great seeing all our dedicated and hard working students back in the dojo - looking forward to many more great workouts together through the year and taking the skills out into top level competition for another year of success 😊😊

Reflections on the nature of our sport: We work in a sport where if a single submission hold is applied perfectly - the match is over. Yet if that same submission is applied 99% perfectly but the opponent escapes, it counts for nothing. A failed submission hold, no matter how close, is no more effective than a missed punch in a boxing match (this point does not apply to a well applied submission hold that is effective, but the opponent opts not to tap and is damaged but continues to fight - in these cases, it had a positive effect insofar as the opponent will be damaged and easier to defeat with subsequent attacks). This creates a demand upon us to have a very deep knowledge of a few match winning moves where we have total confidence in our ability to pull them off against even the strongest resistance, rather than superficial knowledge of many moves. As we saw, superficial knowledge of a move only allows us to INITIATE a move, but only deep knowledge allows us to COMPLETE a move - AND IT IS ONLY COMPLETED MOVES THAT WIN MATCHES. You will succeed or fail based not upon how many moves you can initiate, BUT HOW MANY YOU CAN COMPLETE AGAINST RESISTANCE. The surest way to be able to overcome resistance is to have deeper knowledge around a complex of moves and counters in a specific domain than your opponent does. Your training should reflect this fundamental fact about our sport. Here, Eddie Cummings shows his extraordinarily deep knowledge of the ashi garami position as he locks in a terrifyingly tight heel hook variation during his outstanding run to the finals of EBI 10. Note that these reflections pertain to the specific case of submissions - in other areas of the sport broad knowledge- even superficial knowledge- is necessary for success. Photo by Michael Plaster

Happy New Year from the squad! Thank you all so much for your support and interest in our approach to jiu jitsu 😊😊 Its been a great year of achievement and learning for the team. Looking forward to new projects and challenges in the new year 😊😊 We hope you work hard towards your jiu jitsu goals and through your patience, discipline, planning, work, creativity and self belief; get to those goals and most importantly, grow along the way - don't forget to have fun! Tonight and all the other days 😊😊😊 Wishing you all the best from NYC! 😊😜😉😈☃🍰🍢🍺🍻🍷🍾🍾🍾🍾🎸⌛️⏰😊

Speed vs relative speed: Are you faster than Usain Bolt? This is a question that every single human on earth would currently have to give a negative answer to - provided we qualified the question with the usual unspoken assumptions - the race will be a fair one, on a standard athletic track, over 100-200 meters etc etc. what if we started adding some seemingly strange conditions to the race? Perhaps Mr Bolt has to run with a fifty pound weight vest strapped to his torso - that would definitely allow many good athletes to defeat him. What if he had a two foot rope tying his legs together? Then many people could defeat him. What if the rope were shortened so that his ankles were locked together? Then almost any healthy young person could probably defeat him. What if his left foot was handcuffed to his right hand? In that case I believe even I, with a crippled leg and a hip replacement, could probably defeat him (on a good day at least 😉😜). The point is that EVEN THE BEST ATHLETICISM IN THE WORLD CAN BE OVERCOME IF WE SUFFICIENTLY HANDICAP OUR OPPONENT. Jiu jitsu is essentially a means of doing exactly that. JIU JITSU IS AN ELABORATE MEANS OF HANDICAPPING AN OPPONENT IN WAYS THAT STRONGLY UNDERMINE AND DEGRADE THEIR ATHLETIC POTENTIAL RESULTING IN AN UNFAIR ADVANTAGE IN OUR FAVOR WHICH CAN BE EXPLOITED TO GAIN VICTORY. In this way, bigger, stronger, faster people can, if the discrepancy in grappling technique is sufficiently In our favor, be controlled and defeated. Skills that don't seem overly impressive to beginners- subtle skills of control and positioning that prevent your opponent from freely utilizing his or her strength, Speed etc are in fact, the very heart of the sport. The detailed study of WHAT CAN A MAKE STRONG MAN WEAK, A FAST MAN SLOW AND A HEAVY MAN LIGHT, is the basis of our sport and can make for a lifetime of study.

Foundationalism: When I taught philosophy courses at Columbia university, we often talked about the doctrine of Foundationalism as it applies to human knowledge. When it comes to a sophisticated theory of human knowledge, I am not a foundationalist; but when it comes to jiu jitsu, I am. Just as no builder would ever think of beginning the construction of a new house by working on the roof and attic, but instead digs deep in the earth to lay down secure and strong foundations upon which he sequentially builds the house from the bottom up, with each layer providing a strong support for the layer above it - so too, we must build our jiu jitsu in a similar vein. Just as any failure in the foundations of a house will immediately imply weakness in every other part of the house, so too, weakness in the foundational aspects of our jiu jitsu can never be covered up by fancy flourishes in the other areas of our game. Often students come to me asking to learn aspects of our style that they see in competition. I always tell them the same thing. It is far easier for me to teach my leg lock system (or any other part of our approach to the game) to a person well versed in the traditional foundations of the sport than it is to someone who wants to skip steps and jump straight into it. There is a lot to be said for a sequential approach to learning jiu jitsu where the foundational skills of CONTROLLING MOVEMENT - both my own and my opponent's -comes first and the more esoteric elements come second. Here, the squads youngest member, ten year old Mikey Wilson, learns the foundational elements of control to Kuzushi through the x guard/ashi garami complex as a precursor to the submissions game from the same positions.

Big plans for new year at Renzo Gracie Academy: Sensei Renzo Gracie has done an incredible job of bringing in the expertise of Judo superstar Jimmy Pedro and Fuji mat company to install new mats at RGA NYC!! Over the Christmas break our staff and team Fuji have been hard at work installing the mats and painting to give the academy what must be the best footing for grappling I have ever seen! The new mats look and feel incredible! I had the honor of teaching the first class on the new surface in our small room - it felt like I was teaching in a new gym! 😊😊 The squad came in full force and were joined by child prodigy Mikey Wilson and MMA superstar Jake Shields - who fights this Saturday in WSOF. He looked great on the mats today doing his submission work with squad members. The professionalism and production of team Fuji is impressive to behold. The blue basement has been transformed to a very eye pleasing blue and grey 😊😊 Sensei once told me that the best investment a man can make is in himself. That is exactly what he is doing now - he is investing in his dojo in a way that is transforming it daily 😊😊 Looking forward to a new year of training, goal setting and achievements at our "new" headquarters 😊😊🇺🇸🇧🇷😊😊Huge thanks to Sensei, Mr Jimmy Pedro, Team Fuji, RGA staff and our loyal students who come in every day to train around the temporary inconvenience of construction and change 😉 to come in an improve their skills 😊 The academy has never looked better!

The story of the sniper: Part of the pleasure of teaching at a major academy in NYC is the breadth of people who pass through for instruction in the kingly art of jiu jitsu They come from all walks of life and every corner of the globe. One who left an impression upon me that struck me as useful to students of jiu jitsu was an American sniper who had returned home from active duty. After training we talked about his work. I have always had an interest in weaponry and we talked about his craft and compared it with his interest in jiu jitsu. At one point he turned to me and said, " John, my world is a world of uncertainty. I can't guarantee that I will get into a good position to hit my target. I might get seen before I get there. My target may not be in the place I anticipated. The course of battle might interrupt my plans in some way I never even foresaw. But I do have one certainty. IF YOU GET ME TO A SECURE HIDEOUT WITHIN ONE THOUSAND METERS OF MY TARGET, it does not matter whether it's day or night, rain or sunshine, warm or snow - THAT MAN IS A DEAD MAN - THAT MUCH IS CERTAIN. We were silent for a moment as we reflected upon his words - then we both smiled as we recognized at the same time THAT EXACTLY THE SAME SENTIMENT IS TRUE IN JIU JITSU. Fights are uncertain affairs, we can't guarantee that we will get into a good position to lock in a good submission hold, we might get knocked out before we get there, we may struggle to get the opponent to the ground and keep him there. But IF we get him in a well locked breaking or strangulation position - OUR MECHANICS OUGHT TO BE SO WELL TRAINED AND REHEARSED, that like the sniper, we do not see failure as a a possibility. All jiu jitsu athletes can benefit from this mindset. Research and rehearse your finishing mechanics to a point where you know that if the opportunity to lock in a tight submission should arise in the whirling chaos of a fight- the fight is yours. We can't be confident about everything in combat - but that is something that every jiu jitsu fighter worth his salt must know and believe

Knowledge and wisdom: From an early age I have always been impressed by the classics of Asian literature. None impresses me more than the work of Lao Tsu, in particular "To attain knowledge, add things every day; to attain wisdom, remove things every day." There is so much in this that pertains to our improvement in jiu jitsu. It begins with his crucial distinction between knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge is a RESOURCE. It concerns facts and ideas that we seek to accumulate through study, research and investigation. Wisdom is very different. It is an ABILITY. The ability to discern the RELATIVE VALUE of these various items of knowledge and judge which ones are more important and are necessary and applicable to my goals. Initially students in jiu jitsu are in a rush to accumulate knowledge. This is good, as they are starting from naivety and need something firm to stand upon just to get a start. As they progress they get more and more facts as they get deeper and deeper into the sport. At some stage however, the student must, if he or she is to rise to the next level of development, make a critical switch in direction away from the basic ACCUMULATION of facts and ideas, to the DISCERNMENT of which ideas and facts are most important to their goals and focus upon them. There must be a progression away from wasteful accumulation in favor of trimming the knowledge base down to the essentials that take you to your goals. A replacement of new facts for conceptual ideas. I would rather have knowledge of one fact that I use profitably every day than a thousand facts that I use once a decade. This shift from acquiring knowledge to acquiring wisdom is critical to high level jiu jitsu. It allows you to look at a complex problem and quickly see it's essential element so that a simple and workable solution can be implemented immediately.

Merry Christmas from the squad and NYC!! 😊😊☃🍰🍧😊😊 Today was a relaxed day of training for the squad - focus was more on technical development and sparring in a relaxed manner. This idea of variable intensity is critical to long term training. Not every session can be a war. Big holidays give a great opportunity to reinforce this idea to the athletes. I love to see athletes train every day, but not to see them train as hard as possible every day - that quickly leads to breakdowns. Improvement is measured in months and years, not days and weeks, so it is critical to be able train effectively over long periods. A huge part of this involves variation in intensity levels of daily training so that every day can represent a step forward and as few days as possible are lost to attrition and injury. Now that work is done - it's time to eat - something the squad does very well 😜😜 Merry Christmas to you all from NYC!!

The greatest skill of them all - learning: Every jiu jitsu athlete is in a constant quest to improve current skills and learn new ones as a means to performance improvement. However, there is one skill that stands above all other skills that one might acquire on the long road towards mastery - the skill of learning. Every day we have people telling us how to learn a given skill, a new move, a new concept. Yet it is rare to have someone tell us how to learn. Learning how to learn is absolutely one of the keys to success in life in general and jiu jitsu in particular. Most people take a very passive approach to learning. They learn from their teacher and practice when told to practice what they are told to practice. This is fine at recreational level, but if you wish to go further you must take a proactive approach to learning. This is a huge topic, but let us talk today about three key methods of learning that we can use to improve our understanding of the learning process so that we can make better progress. The foundation of my coaching program is always THE TRIAL AND ERROR METHOD. This simple method of taking ideas and subjecting them to rigorous tests to determine their value. We spend countless hours on the mat testing our theories and ideas through sparring and competition until we put provisional faith in them. The second is the GREAT PERSON METHOD. I am a big believer in the idea of using great athletes in the sport to inspire and enlighten. If a given athlete is having tremendous success with a given move, that's a very clear sign that he is doing something right and important. By studying this, you are very likely to improve some aspect of your own game - even if your own method ends up being significantly different from the athlete you studied. The third is THE ORGANIC NATURE OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT. Skills are like life forms - they are born weak, naive and vulnerable; but if nurtured and cared for, can grow eventually into something strong and confident and capable. When you learn a skill, give it a chance to grow. Don't start using it on world champions. Start small and work your way up with it. In time these three principles can transform your game

Forcing progress: We all want to maximize our rates of progress in the sport . Most people work on the assumption that if they just show up for class, progress rates will be satisfactory. In the early stages, this is usually correct, since the learning curve at introductory levels is very steep. At some point however, you are going to run into your first experience with growth plateaus. This can be very frustrating for a student who has grown used to easy progress. As a coach, a big part of my job is to make plateaus less likely to occur and also to get students over them when they do occur. I have fond memories of my own first experience with growth plateaus and my sensei, Renzo Gracie's method of dealing with it. When I first began jiu jitsu as a white belt I was physically bigger and stronger than most of my class mates. In addition, this was at a time when jiu jitsu was very young in the United States and the skill level among the average student was much lower than it is today. As a result, when grappling the other white belts I usually had an easy time of it and only got into trouble with the few blue and purple belts we had in class in those days. In my mind I thought I was doing extremely well with my peers. You can imagine my surprise when sensei pulled me aside one day and told me how poor my overall game was and how my training needed to change! Mr Gracie told me that henceforth I was only allowed to start matches in inferior bottom positions and was not allowed any top position at all until told otherwise. This change had an immediate effect - those same smaller white belts who I had been dominating were now crushing me. Every match became an exhausting, frustrating battle for survival. It was immediately apparent that what I had thought was good training previously was anything but. I was forced to learn a whole new range of skills, tactics - even mindset - and grew greatly as a result. This example shows two important elements of good coaching. The first is obvious - by forcing a student into new areas you can create progress. The second is not obvious. Athletes often are not aware that they are in a plateau and sometimes need outside intervention

Positive and negative - the two faces of jiu jitsu: it is of the first importance to understand that in every aspect of jiu jitsu, there are two directions my game must push. One the one hand, I must do everything in my power to facilitate my ability to move freely in the directions I desire (presumably in the direction of control and submission). On the other hand, I must do everything in my power TO UNDERMINE MY OPPONENTS ABILITY TO DO THE SAME. Let us illustrate this point through the example of speed. Obviously physical speed is a desirable trait in almost all sports, especially combat sports. When we first think of speed, typically we think of our ability to move at speed, and compare this to the speed of others. In jiu jitsu however, our speed potential is not nearly as important as OUR ABILITY TO UNDERMINE OUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE QUICKLY. To put it simply - I don't HAVE to move quickly if I have first immobilized you. My need for speed is proportional to my ability to tie up and immobilize my opponent. The better my skill at undermining my opponents ability to move, the less I will require physical attributes to succeed in sparring. THIS ABILITY TO INTERFERE WITH MY OPPONENTS PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES (the "negative" side of the game) IS IN MY OPINION, MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES. This is NOT to say that physical training is unimportant- only a fool would claim that traits such as speed and strength are unimportant in combat. What I am saying is that more of your training time and thought should go into the skill of interfering with your opponents attributes than the development of your own. Here, kohai student Oliver Taza does a fine job of tying up a struggling opponent with some more advanced elements of our back attack system - he has created a situation where it will be extremely difficult for his opponent to use physical attributes with effect. Having negated those attributes, there is no need for speed now - he can move at his pace and in the directions he wants to advance towards submission.

New environment - new perspective: I have always loved to teach in a new venue to strangers. I spend the vast majority of my teaching time in the basement of RGA with my long suffering students. It is always a fascinating change of pace for me to go to a new venue and teach strangers (and doubtless a relief to my poor students back home 😉😜). When I go to a new room to teach, my intention is not merely to show a set of techniques, but always to show a new mental framework within which those techniques are housed and arranged. In truth, the most influential visiting teachers when I was a beginner were not those who showed me techniques- techniques come and go as your game changes and evolves - it was those who made me look at the sport in a new way that inspired me to look into and research some part of it in a way that created positive change and growth. It was CHANGE IN PERSPECTIVE , rather than learning new tricks, that had the greatest benefit for me. I always try to reflect this when traveling and teaching. As a stranger it is unlikely that I can, in the time available, create substantial and lasting improvements to your technique- I have no doubt that I can improve them, perhaps even substantially improve them, but in a single session I cannot give you the heel hooking skill of my best students. One thing I can do however, is change your perspective and introduce new modes of thinking that can in time, with sufficient dedication on your part, point you in directions that can create real improvement and lasting change. I try to use the techniques to show a way of thinking about development which will create improvements not for a single day, but for as long as those ideas interest you. Here I teach at my good friend and former class mate at RGA, Shawn Williams, at his school in LA. Because Mr Williams and I share a common history and philosophy, it's not so different as other schools I visit, but still, the notion of using techniques, not as an end in themselves, but rather as a vehicle for a new perspective on a given part of the sport, is the same. Just sixteen hours after this photo was taken in LA I was back in the blue basement in NYC teaching class 😊

Great day of Grappling at Studio 540 San Diego: The squad went into a tough day of grappling under extended time limit EBI rules today in San Diego with mixed results but all positive experiences. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan lost in over time to the very talented 19 year old Kennedy Maciel in a great match of two super talented youngsters with a world of grappling ahead of them. Mr Maciel showed great positional skill with excellent passing and pinning control along with a superb transition from back to triangle (sankaku) in overtime to get a great win and show his potential. In the adult matches, Garry Tonon took on a very impressive Kim Terra, who came out looking to play a positive attacking game - very praiseworthy given that he is a weight division below Mr Tonon. Within regulation time however, Mr Tonon was able to make a very nice transition from back crucifix to high elbow guillotine and follow Mr Terra' defensive maneuvers through to a beautiful submission victory. In the final match It was Gordon Ryan's turn to match a larger opponent. He did a fine job of dominating the submission attacks, whilst his world champion opponent, the very talented Felipe Pena, dominated the positional attacks. At the 42 minute mark however, Mr Pena capitalized brilliantly on a mistaken entry to ashi garami, took the back and sank an excellent strangle to take a great victory. There was much for the squad to take away and learn from, much to be happy about and much to be improved upon. Tomorrow I shall teach a seminar in LA and then it's back to the basement of wisdom in NYC Monday to start making the changes necessary to improve and win. 😊😊😊 Thank you to Studio 540 and flograppling for putting on a great event. Thanks also to Eddie Bravo for another great job of impartial and skillful referee work. Most of all - thank you to my athletes who give their all and who have come so far in such a short time - I am immensely proud of all you have done and extremely confident of even greater future success

Meanwhile....As I wait for a plane to California, Eddie Cummings waits for a plane to Costa Rica! Mr Cummings will teach the first squad seminar at the dojo of my friend and student Arturo Wesson, who regularly comes all the way to NYC to train in our method and bring that knowledge back to his students at home. I am delighted to see Mr Cummings heading south to spread our message of control leading to submission. Of all my competitive students, Mr Cummings has spent the most time with me in private classes and has the deepest knowledge of my leg attack system. He is much more than that however. Like all my students he is an independent and innovative thinker and has developed his own specialized methods that have made him arguably the finest ashi garami exponent in the world. There is a sense in which Mr Cummings is the victim of his own success - his leg attacks are so successful that few besides those he trains among have seen his other great skills. He has outstanding back attacks, superb attacks from front head lock and truly excellent armlock and triangle (juji gatame and sankaku) attacks, among others. He is a very fine teacher and I am delighted that our Costa Rican friends will get the chance to see such high level technique explained by such a fine practitioner who can really express the depth of his knowledge. If you are there - don't miss it! Just don't let him anywhere near the ice cream or pineapple juice stand or he will gain one hundred pounds of blubber in a day! 😂😂😂😂 Mr Cummings will be training hard with the squad when he returns - big plans for the new year 😊😊Stay tuned! A big hello to Costa Rican jiu jitsu in general and Mr Arturo Wesson in particular - have fun!

JFK - California bound: Waiting at JFK after another missed flight 😂😂 Looking forward to meeting up with squad members as they prepare for action on Saturday. Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan and Garry Tonon will match up with three extremely talented Brazilian Grapplers - all three with an outstanding pedigree and competition record. As always with the squad, it's been a rough last week with minor mishaps, illnesses, miscalculations and general tom foolery 😜😜 but come Saturday we will be ready for action and ready to put on a show at studio 540 in San Diego. I leave a frigid NYC for the sunshine and smiles of Southern California 😊😊 Always a good feeling! The squad continues to impress me with their continual technical development - so many new moves and tactics added to their always expanding repertoire. They face a very tough test on Saturday however. Young Nicky, just 15 years old will take on 19 year Kennedy Maciel, current world champion at purple belt and son of Ruben Charles - "Cobrinha" Mr Maciel exhibits the same superb sense of movement and transition as his illustrious father and clearly has a big future ahead of him. Kim Terra, brother of jiu jitsu icon Caio Terra, has carved out a fine competition record of his own. These two brothers are known for the depth of their technical knowledge and this will be a fascinating stylistic contrast to be sure. Felipe Pena will square off with Gordon Ryan in the main event. Mr Pena is at the top of the jiu jitsu world both gi and no gi. I well remember his outstanding performance at the last ADCC. He is a mix of physical power with very refined technique that enabled him to go toe to toe with the heavyweight icon Rodolphe Viera - in a titanic struggle he showed he can go for extended periods of time against the world's best. He is a tremendous opponent. Sitting on plastic chairs at the airport, listening to the muzak, eating the lousy food, watching people scuttle by is usually pretty damn boring, but the thought of getting the squad ready for this epic challenge makes it much more exciting! 😊😊

Improvising: Most of our training drills and principles involve learning precise algorithms of movement that take our opponent in predictable directions so that we can follow his defensive options all the way through to submission. As such, there is a lot of rote learning, memorization, repetition etc. it is an undeniable fact however, that in sparring and competition, situations commonly arise that are outside our normally drilling and training experience and we are forced to improvise as the situation unfolds. It is also undeniable that some people seem to improvise better than others. The question thus becomes - HOW DO THEY DO SUCH A GOOD JOB OF IMPROVISATION? I believe that the most important reason for disparity in ability to improvise is the mental process that different athletes carry into the bout. Most people focus on the details of their algorithms. As long as the action stays within the boundaries of those algorithms, they do very well. This mindset however, does not cope well with unforeseen circumstances, as it does not have a precise, well learned algorithm to cover it. Other athletes focus more on the big picture of WHAT THEY ARE TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH at any given moment, rather than THE PRE-LEARNED DETAILS OF EXACTLY HOW THEY ARE GOING TO ACCOMPLISH IT. As such, they can take situation that is unfolding in ways they did not foresee or want, identify the end result they want and find an improvised path toward it. A fine example of this occurred when Garry Tonon won the EBI 9 event. Mr Tonon was by far the smallest competitor and entered with only three days notice. He battled to the final where he met world champion Vinny Magalhaes, a man far larger than himself. Our usual back control protocols were severely challenged by the size difference. Mr Tonon immediately switched his mindset from the usual routines to the overall desiderata- maintaining spinal alignment long enough to create time pressure that would hopefully set up submission opportunity. He switched between a cluster of unorthodox grips and movement that saw him win a thrilling victory on riding time against his great rival.

Gaining and retaining: Imagine you met a man who told you that his annual income was one million dollars a year. Would you not be impressed by his wealth? I believe that most of us certainly would. What if that man then revealed that his annual expenses were $975,000 a year? Would you still be impressed by his wealth? Probably much less so. When it comes to accruing wealth, the amount of money coming in is not nearly as important as the amount you retain. EXACTLY THE SAME IS TRUE OF KNOWLEDGE. so often I see students chasing after knowledge. This is a good and desirable trait. Never forget however, that important issue is not how much knowledge you learn - BUT HOW MUCH YOU RETAIN - for it is only the knowledge you can access and remember that will prove useful to you in future action. It is critical therefore, THAT YOUR ATTEMPTS AT GAINING KNOWLEDGE FOCUS AS MUCH ON KNOWLEDGE RETENTION AS THEY DO ON KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION. You must have a program set out that solidifies the knowledge you have gained in a way that enables you to access it on demand in a way that leads to effective action on the mat. In the case of a group of professional athletes like the squad, this is relatively easy, as we spend large amounts of time together and begin and end each training session with discussion of the central concepts and problems we work on - along with vast amounts of repetition to cement knowledge in place. In your case this may not be possible, as most people have busy lives, professional and family commitments etc. in these cases I always recommend the same methods we used successfully(well, partially successful 😉😜) in school and college - note taking, periodic reviews, occasional informal tests etc etc. By shifting focus from acquisition to retention of knowledge you will quickly find the knowledge you have translating into more effective action. Here, squad members discuss technique and strategy before stepping out onto the mat in competition (shiai). This helps to ensure the themes we want to express in the match are at the forefront of the athletes mind as steps out to face his opponent.

Setting tough goals for progress: I believe that whatever progress you make in your chosen field will be determined by the goals you set. If your goals are modest - so too your progress will be modest. If you set difficult and challenging goals - the greater work required to make an honest attempt at them will ensure greater progress - even in cases where the goals are not fully met. I often create very difficult short term challenges for developing students. Their hard work and study in trying to overcome that challenge almost always creates progress. For example, Oliver Taza is a rapidly improving kohai student who is making all the kinds of commitment necessary for championship grappling in the future. He was looking for a tough assignment to gauge his progress. He entered a tournament this weekend - a 10th planet brown belt invitational at 205 pounds. This was a very strong test, as Oliver normally competes at around 165-70 pounds. To make it more interesting - we placed the goal of victory by submission in all matches - not easy given the rank of the event and the level of competition. Mr Taza trained with his usual great commitment and attention to the critical details that spell the difference between success and near success. In a superb display of skill he did exactly what he planned to do - won every match by submission (a mix of leg locks and triangle (sankaku) strangles) and each in a dynamic and impressive style upon much larger opponents. These kinds of difficult short term goals, interspersed among your long term goals, are one of the best ways to main progress over time and maintain a bridge between long term and short term ideals. Of course it's great when the goals are attained, as was the case with Mr Taza, but the deeper point is that even if they are not - you will be closer to your long term goal of excellence in jiu jitsu.

Reflections on my sensei: Cross training When I first began jiu jitsu in the early to mid 1990's, the overall ethos of the martial arts scene was very different. This was a time of style versus style in MMA (as opposed to the modern spirit of well rounded athlete vs well rounded athlete). This was a time of proving a new martial art BJJ, among the more established traditional martial arts and sports. As such, most jiu jitsu practitioners took on an "us vs them" mentality that was necessary at the time if jiu jitsu was to show it was a viable art that could stand on its own merits and be counted among the foremost fighting arts. One of the great insights of my sensei Renzo Gracie, was that this attitude, whilst necessary in the beginning, was limiting in the long term. Accordingly he strongly encouraged all his students to engage in the study of other arts, especially those with a competition sports aspect, such as boxing, Muay Thai, wrestling, judo, sambo etc. I can say of my sensei that HE WAS INTENSELY PROUD OF JIU JITSU AND HIS LINEAGE WITHIN IT, BUT AT THE SAME TIME, ENDLESSLY CURIOUS ABOUT OTHER COMBAT SPORTS AND HOW THEY COULD BE DRAWN UPON TO IMPROVE PERFORMANCE IN JIUJITSU. This insistence upon some degree of cross training was I believe, one of the many reasons why Mr Gracie was able to keep a very modern and cutting edge vibe to his school and his teachings after more than twenty years here in the USA. I have seen so many students profit from some degree of cross training, some more, some less - but I have NEVER seen a student get worse from it. Nowadays cross training is the norm, with most jiu jitsu athletes happy to work wrestling and judo and other arts into their program. Whenever you find yourself stagnating or in some form of jiu jitsu plateau - take heed of my sensei's example and find inspiration and new directions in another art - it will only make your jiu jitsu stronger.

Chasing after the wind: There is an old cliche in the sport of boxing: Don't try to force a knock out - those that do almost always end up disappointed and quite often the victim of the very end they sought after. Exactly the same is true in jiu jitsu. Chasing directly after submissions feels like chasing after the wind ; those who do so usually fail to get what they so badly wanted. Rather than chase directly after submissions - CHASE THE PRECONDITIONS THAT MAKE SUBMISSIONS MORE LIKELY TO OCCUR. Once those preconditions are attained - THE SUBMISSIONS WILL COME. So often I see students take to heart our program of emphasizing submissions, but falter badly when they race directly for submissions. Their game takes on a scrappy and forced look that garners meager results. A much better approach is to always to ask yourself - WHAT ARE THE PREREQUISITES OF SUBMISSION? And FOCUS ON ATTAINING THOSE. Traditionally, jiu jitsu has always posited that POSITION is the prerequisite of submission. There is much truth to this. Our approach to jiu jitsu however, adds to this by emphasizing other prerequisites in addition to the traditional understanding of position. A deep study of this area will be of immeasurable value to your submissions percentages. Here kohai student Oliver Taza shows excellent preparatory skills in preparation to submitting an opponent in a recent tournament.

The great problem of endurance: When I watch beginners train together the single most common method of defeat is fatigue. Beginners typically lack the skills required to gain a victory through the purity of their technique and thus usually one of them is worn down to a state where they cannot maintain resistance and they succumb. The problem usually gets better with time, but remains to some degree throughout our jiu jitsu lives. Everyone has to confront and overcome this problem if they wish to remain in the sport. The problem is, most people attack the problem in the wrong way. The overwhelming majority of students deal with the problem by trying to bring about changes in their bodies - they make efforts to make themselves stronger and fitter. This is good and desirable and yes - it definitely helps to some degree. However, WHATEVER ENDURANCE IMPROVEMENTS YOU MAKE FROM STRENGTH AND FITNESS INCREASES ARE MINUSCULE COMPARED WITH THOSE THAT COME FROM INCREASED MECHANICAL EFFICIENCY IN TECHNIQUE AND PACE CONTROL DURING A MATCH. It will take a lot of time and training to increase your maximum bench press by just 10% - but that increase will be barely perceptible to your opponent in sparring. However, small improvements in the placement of lever and fulcrum as you apply technique throughout a match will be immediately felt by an opponent as increased force and by you as energy saving - if this is combined with pace control you will find dramatic improvements in grappling endurance without any significant changes in your physiology. Please be clear: I am not trying to argue that strength and fitness are irrelevant and unimportant - they definitely are (were they not the shameful proliferation of steroid use in our sport would never have arisen). What I am saying is that the more important element of grappling endurance by far is technical efficiency and pace control. If you want dramatic improvements - don't look to change your body, rather, look to change your technical insight and pace control. Here, Gordon Ryan shows superb pace control and technical efficiency in a marathon victory against the great Keenan Cornelius.

Shared vision: Teaching technique is one thing, teaching an overall vision of the sport is another. When I work with my advanced students we constantly talk about our own approach to the sport. Any technique we learn is done so in the broader context of that vision. One day I will get the time to outline exactly what that vision is to a wider audience - but I am sure the more astute observers can look at the work of my students and make a good guess already. When there is a general vision that a team follows I find the optimal training environment develops - students can express their individuality in technique while showing their allegiance through conformity to that broad vision and its principles. My role as coach thus has two main areas. The first is technical - the refinement of existing technique and development of new systems to maximize their effectiveness. The second is directional - to give those techniques and systems a guiding philosophy that creates a group of students who have their individual differences, but also a recognizable similarity that's suggests a lineage and a particular approach to the game that stands out for the norm. Here, Eddie Cummings and myself make observations of the next opponent at EBI 10 as Mr Cummings gets ready for another match. When he goes onstage he will be ready to express more than technique- he will be trying to express a philosophy that we all share.

The human body: To be a student of jiu jitsu is perhaps more than anything else; TO BE A STUDENT OF THE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE HUMAN BODY. The more knowledge you accumulate in this regard, the more precise your attacks upon your opponent's body and the defense of your own shall be. Our bodies are remarkable insofar as they exhibit both remarkable weakness and surprising strength at the same time. What makes the difference is knowledge and training. Think of two twins separated at birth. One of the twins is out in an Olympic gymnastics program and rigorously trained for decades in elite gymnastic skills. The other is allowed to relax and enjoy himself on the couch and feast and watch movies. When they meet thirty years later, the difference between the two in physical performance capabilities will be massive - EVEN THOUGH THE GENETIC DIFFERENCES WILL BE MINIMAL. One will have a deep knowledge of how his body can be utilized to maximize physical performance, whilst the other, despite having virtually the same body, will lack the knowledge of body mechanics to perform anything more than the most rudimentary physical tasks. In jiu jitsu we must learn how make our own body strong, but even more important - HOW TO MAKE THE OPPONENTS BODY SLOW AND WEAK. This requires a deep knowledge of our physical structure and how to hold it in positions that prevent it from moving efficiently and how to manipulate it in ways that cause it damage. In the long term, we also need knowledge of dietary and lifestyle habits that extend the lifetime of our body, since our goal is to train for the longest possible time to accumulate the most skill possible. This is wisdom with regards the human body the beginning and end of wisdom with regards jiu jitsu. The latter cannot be understood without the former. Here, rapidly developing kohai student, Oliver Taza shows excellent knowledge of the structure of the upper body as he ties up an opponent with juji gatame (armlock) at a recent tournament. Look how immobilization skills allow him to maintain a very relaxed demeanor to begin solving the problems his opponent is creating and go in to overcome them and take victory.

Back in the saddle: Monday morning in the basement of suffering - the squad and all cohorts back in training for future events - the most important of which will take place on December 17 in San Diego where three squad members take on three extremely talented Brazilian grapplers in what should be a fascinating contrast in styles. It was great to see Eddie Cummings and the others working on problem solving issues in our last outing and formulating solutions for our next. We always believe that consistently losing suggests something is deeply wrong with your training program and it must be revised from the ground up; but occasional losses are both expected and healthy - THERE IS NO SURER ANTIDOTE TO COMPLACENCY AND HUBRIS THAN OCCASIONAL DEFEAT - two elements that will undermine the success of a training program very quickly. Here the full compliment of Senpai and kohai get the camp off to a great start on a NYC Monday morning 😊😊

Back in NYC: Great to be back in NYC - first stop - the blue basement of learning where the Ryan brothers are preparing for their big challenges on Dec 17 in San Diego against an extremely talented set of Brazilian athletes. Young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years old, will take on world champion purple belt Kennedy Maciel, son of one of this generations greatest jiu jitsu practitioners, Ruben "Cobrinha" Charles. Mr Maciel is considerably older (19), bigger and more experienced than Mr Ryan, but Mr Ryan is training exceptionally well and is anxious to step up to the next level of competition. Normally I am very much against matching very young athletes against older athletes, but in this case I am willing to make an exception. Mr Maciel has a game of dynamic movement combined with isometric strength allied to superb technique - a combination that made his father one of the most successful competitors of all time. This will be a truly formidable opponent for Nicky Ryan. Mr Ryan is too young to have an adult belt in jiu jitsu and the youth belts don't really seem to apply to him - so I never gave him a belt, but he does very well against experienced older belt levels in training and competition. Both Ryan boys are entering a phase of grappling maturity where they are starting to develop their own moves and tactics in ways that are truly exciting for me as a coach to observe - I am confident that that excitement will be seen in this match up of the two rising stars. The true camp begins tomorrow, so today we spent time setting directions and goals and light rolling. The squad will all return tomorrow and then it's on and forward!!

A great night for submission grappling and jiu jitsu tonight in Mexico City at EBI 10. Geo Martinez successfully defended his 135 pound title against Eddie Cummings in a thrilling final match. We are all immensely proud of Mr Cummings - he showed his amazing skills in leg attacks again tonight, scoring quick submissions on the path to the final. In the final he was able to dominate the attacks in regulation time but Mr Martinez did a fine job of getting through to overtime where he was able to take a fine victory. Hats off to the EBI staff who put on an amazing event in Mexico City and Geo Martinez and team 10th planet for an exceptional performance. The squad will do as we always do -
Back to the basement to work on our skills to emerge stronger, smarter and ready to compete again when the opportunity presents itself. Thank you to all our social media supporters for your support in the lead up to the big show. Tonight we rest, but tomorrow we train. Messrs Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan must now prepare for the next big show - the year finale - in San Diego against very strong opposition. Can't wait to get back to the blue basement and get the squad together watch the action unfold 😊😊 Special thanks to Mr Eddie Bravo and Mr Victor Davila and his son Tory who put on a such a great event - tonight was their night - congratulations

Ashi garami in Mexico City: I had the pleasure of teaching our leg lock system at my old friend, Mario Delgado's school here in Mexico City. Great to see students quickly understanding and appreciating the core principles and techniques in a new venue. Now it's on to the arena for EBI 10, where Eddie Cummings will showcase many of those principles and techniques as he and the other squad members have done so often before. Going from the classroom to the stage is always a thrill - even more so tonight in new territory and new atmosphere 😊😊

Sacrifice: Eddie Cummings living the life of the dedicated professional athlete. Making weight for EBI 10 the bantamweight tournament. Nothing comes easy at world championship level and Mr Cummings shows his usual dedication to his craft here with meticulous preparation that began weeks ago and peaks tonight here in Mexico City. This ability to get the details right and stick to a disciplined and well thought out routine that trades current discomfort for future pleasure is the essential feature of every championship program. Here you can see the strain of a harsh weight cut. Mostly done now 😊 Tomorrow will be recovery followed by our contest preparation drills and then on stage. Looking forward to the change in venue and putting on a show for our Mexican audience. 😊😊

First workout of the day - New York City: Second workout of the day - Mexico City: At the airport now, waiting for flight to Mexico in prep for EBI 10, Just finishing working with Messrs Gordon and Nicky Ryan who are training brilliantly. Looking forward to seeing Mr Cummings and crew and getting in some more prep work for the big show. Mr Cummings always greatly impresses me in training, but never more than in his training for this show. Looking forward to the change in venue and hats off to Mr Bravo and his great crew for helping to grow this great sport in new directions with such an exciting line up of talent for this lightweight event. Looks like the thin air of Mexico City has had some strange effects on Ottavia Bourdain and Mr Garry Tonon...😂😂😂

Growing together: As Kano so wisely insisted; the best form of benefit is mutual benefit. When two people work together and each brings something good to the table, great things can happen from their shared efforts. In my daily coaching, nowhere do I see this more clearly than in the development of the Ryan brothers - Gordon and Nicky. Their symbiotic relationship is an inspiration to the other athletes around them. As one rises, the other must rise to stay in the game - and the one who helps him rise the most is his own brother. Mutual growth is the healthiest state for the training room and there is no better example than these two. Both are deep in preparation for tough matches at studio 540 in San Diego on December 17 in a variation of EBI rules (much longer regulation time before over time begins). When the squad returns from Mexico City this weekend, camp begins in earnest for Both Ryan boys and Garry Tonon in what should be an incredible event.

Georges St-Pierre works out with the squad...meanwhile...in Mexico City...One of my principal aims as a coach is to develop a sense of independence in the senior students (Senpai). When we all talk technique and strategy, we talk as equals. Indeed, the senior students often shock me with the depth of their insight and originality. The greatest thing a teacher can give students is not technique or strategy or any of the usual things people judge the worth of teachers by, but rather THE ABILITY TO RESEARCH AND PROGRESS INDEPENDENTLY. instilling this sense of creative independence in the senior students has several great consequences. One of them is on display in this photo collage. Eddie Cummings is currently in Mexico City preparing for EBI 10 on Friday night. He is working with Local jiu jitsu players in the same system that the other squad members used today to train in NYC with Georges St-Pierre; who will himself go back to Montreal tonight to train independently what he learned today. If all these seniors could only blindly follow orders, this kind of activity would be impossible. It is their capacity to grow independently within themselves that ensures the growth of ideas that keeps our overall program growing and improving. Looking forward to the squad getting together with Mr Cummings Wednesday night in Mexico City for the big show 😊

Founding member of the squad: Mr Georges St-Pierre returned to the basement of wisdom through pain for some some fine training sessions with the youngsters. The majority of my time training with Mr St-Pierre was in developing grapple boxing skills for professional MMA fighting - very different from pure submission grappling. When he retired, he was able to have fun working on submission grappling skills and has made impressive progress 😊😊 Here the squad watches as he works his ashi garami drills with partner Garry Tonon. We use these drills to develop deeper mechanical knowledge of the position so that we increase the chances of success under the pressure of live combat, whether in the gym or in competition (shiai). Often I have the students teach the move back to the class to ensure they have a solid understanding of the core concepts and principles that underly its use. A huge part of Mr St-Pierre's success came from his willingness to always keep training and learning over his entire career and beyond with specialists in a given domain, so that he could add those skills and use them in the broader domain of MMA. Even in pure submission grappling he is one of the toughest training partners for the squad when they prepare for shiai - remarkable, given that this is not his primary focus.

From the basement to the bright lights: Eddie Cummings completed the NYC section of his camp for EBI 10 in the basement of suffering today. As always the senior and junior members of the squad were on hand throughout to assist the preparation. Taking the skills created and refined in the gym and getting them to work under the bright lights of the big show is one of the toughest tests the athletes face. The squad is lucky to have a tight camaraderie that helps this. There is only so much replication of what is expected that is possible in the training room. At some point the athlete must find it within himself to make the shift to the big stage against people he has never faced before, under new circumstances and all under the critical eye of the fans. I have always been deeply impressed by the squads ability to do this. More than any other phase of match preparation, this is where the athlete must go beyond whatever assistance his team and coaches can offer and find within him or herself the will and the ability to reach their goals. Next time the squad meets as a whole will be in Mexico City, where once again the gulf between gym and stage must be bridged.

"Coach, how's my submissions game coming along?" "Feeble. You could not leg lock a man with no arms, nor arm lock a man with no legs; furthermore, you are wholly incapable of strangling a man who has neither arms or legs."

Happy Thanksgiving from the squad 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸😊😊😊! Nothing earns thanks from the squad like a mat crowded with dedicated and ambitious athletes working on their skills in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. Early tomorrow that's exactly what you will find in the basement of despair and hope at RGA as the squad helps Eddie Cummings in his preparation for a third EBI belt in the new 135 pound weight class in Mexico City next week. Skill development does not recognize holidays. Mr Cummings and his squad cronies are acutely aware of this and so we plan on a good session tomorrow. Afterwards however, our national holiday gives us an opportunity to reflect upon our dual nature as individuals with private ambitions and as citizens, with civic duties and awareness to our nation, without which, no individual ambition or achievement would even be possible. We hope you find happiness tomorrow both as individuals and, perhaps more importantly, as members of family and nation in ways that illuminate our nature as individuals housed the framework of a group, for it is only by understanding both aspects of our nature that greatness is possible.

Perspective: In recent days and weeks the jiu jitsu scene has seen a marked increase in provocative talk between camps and much of it has been centered around my own students and those of Marcelo Garcia. This is odd, as Mr Garcia and I are good friends. As is so often the case, what begins as banter and play can lead to consequences one does not want. Both Mr Garcia and myself are committed to the idea of a strong distinction between the spirit of MMA, where a certain amount of talk and showmanship is good for business, and jiu jitsu, where a more elevated sense of behavior is appropriate. I am all for jiu jitsu athletes being paid more for their hard work, but I am concerned that this may be achieved at the expense of the soul of the sport. Moreover, our schools are real neighbors, just blocks apart, and neither of us wants an "us vs them" attitude here in the NYC jiu jitsu scene. I met with Mr Garcia tonight at his school and we discussed the situation. He is so much more than just one of the sports greatest champions, he is an icon and a role model- in my experience the kindest and gentlest soul in the sport. Accordingly, we have agreed that the mood of the last few days is one that is not good for the sport and even worse for the NYC jiu jitsu scene. As such, both teams will stop the negative social media talk and direct challenge matches (athletes will still participate in regular tournaments with each other, but for now, no internet challenge matches). I have met most of Mr Garcia's team, and they are all great fellows. Our squad may be a little rough around the edges at times, but they all have hearts of gold - I don't teach people whose character I don't like - I just don't interact with them. I believe this is a case of fundamentally good people letting words and escalation put them in a situation that does not benefit the sport as a whole. Mr Garcia is among the most sincere and well meaning men I ever met - I think his concern about the sport and about the relationship of NYC jiu jitsu teams is correct. We all love competition and friendly rivalry, but a sense of perspective is needed to keep it appropriate and the sport we all love healthy.

Beastie Boy: Nicky Ryan, at just 15 years old, entered one of the toughest grappling tournaments in North America yesterday - the ADCC world championships trials. Mr Ryan won his first two matches by submission (heel hook variations) before losing via armbar to take 3rd place, an incredible achievement for such a young man. Mr Ryan has always greatly impressed me with his determination and maturity. Normally I have grave misgivings about very young competitors entering adult competitions as the risk of injury is definitely higher than usual and I've always felt there is something undesirable about pushing young people into tournaments, I prefer to let time pass and wait until they are a little older and enter themselves, rather than be entered by someone else. In Mr Ryan's case however, I made an exception. His older brother trains with him daily and would coach him, and Mr Ryan is extraordinarily mentally mature for his age ( far more mature than all other members of the squad I must say!). As always, Mr Ryan put on a great showing, working hard to get the submission, as is our style. This young man has so much potential and it is an honor to be a small part of his progress. There will be many more ADCC trials for him and as his body matures to match his mind, you will all see the same potential that I see in him now.

Mr Eddie Cummings: With EBI 10 fast approaching, Eddie Cummings will step up to a new challenge - his first EBI at 135 pounds. His record at previous EBI events has been nothing short of outstanding, with a 100% record of submission within regulation time, and the vast majority of those matches in far less than regulation time. This time however, he faces three new elements. The athletes in this event are among the best ever assembled in an EBI, with the man we consider the best of the 10th planet athletes, Geo Martinez, along with a very strong Brazilian contingent, including the outstanding Samir Chantre and Rafael Freitas. This may be the strongest overall EBI card since EBI 6. The second new element will be the weight cut. Even though Mr Cummings has a small frame, he has always operated above his weight category and has this never had to actually lose weight to compete before, so this should be interesting. A third factor will be of interest to all the athletes - altitude. Mexico City is a difficult venue for those unused to the thinner air. This will effect everyone except the locals equally and is definitely a source of concern as we have no experience with this whatsoever. Mr Cummings will, as always, have to rely on his great depth of knowledge around submissions to get around these three problems. Of my students, he has spent the most time with me in private classes and has a truly superb knowledge of the mechanical details of our favorite attacks. Here we work both offensive and defensive measures in irimi ashi garami, a position that Mr Cummings truly excels in and has developed a very fine reputation for very effective use in competition (shiai). A strange result of Mr Cummings excellence in ashi garami based attacks is that he has had few opportunities to show his other submission strengths - he has many - I suspect it is only a matter of time until the world sees what we see every day in the gym.

Attacking the whole body: A common misunderstanding of my approach to jiu jitsu is that I emphasize leg attacks over others. This is probably due to the fact that I teach a very advanced system of leg attacks to my students who compete in an atmosphere where most of their opponents have a relatively primitive understanding of leg attacks - so a disproportionate number of their victories come via that method. In fact, I always preach to my students the theme of attacking the whole body in order to succeed with favorite moves (tokui waza). When it comes to submissions, we have three choices. Strangles, upper body joint locks and lower body joint locks (there are a few others, but they are of much less importance). Any attempt to over emphasize any one of those three options will always create strong defensive reactions which ironically, will make it harder to break through at that intended target. A much better idea is to spread your attacks over the whole body with equal skill. The confusion and distraction created by this whole body attack will open an opponent up far more successfully than predictable localized attacks. Thus if I want a leg submission, I would be well served to vociferously attack the neck and upper body and allow the resultant distraction and reaction to open the door to the legs. Here, kohai student Ethan Crelinsten shows excellent dispersal of attacks in a recent local tournament. He attacks with great determination with armlocks (juji gatame) and strangles (triangle/sankaku) and legs (ashi garami). The barrage of attacks leaves a confused opponent open to a finish via sankaku/juji combination - a fine example of dispersed attacks creating openings for a favorite technique (tokui waza)

An observation: When I go to write my daily Instagram/Facebook posts, I make use of the photographs that my students and friends send me. Usually I like to post a visually arresting image of a competition victory or dramatic training footage or some image that captures an important principle or theme. Today when I went through my cache of photos I made the observation that for every dramatic or eye catching photo Stored in my phone, I have fifty mundane photos of daily training that suggest fatigue, frustration,
Repetition and pain. A moments reflection reveals that this is how we experience jiu jitsu on a daily basis. We carry in our mind an image of the sport that is like a highlight reel - we remember the big victories and defeats, the big breakthroughs and challenges, the revelations, the drama etc. Yet on a day to day basis it is a repetitious slog towards distant goals. It is critical that you find ways to make that daily grind fun and rewarding or you will not last. Everyone has their own way of doing it, but humor, camaraderie and goal setting are probably the most effective. This is another way that jiu jitsu mirrors life. Just as life is a daily grind interspersed with occasional peaks of joy and sadness, so to in jiu jitsu, where daily training usually is characterized by long periods of discomfort and frustration, but which is the engine that propels us towards our memorable moments and justify the hardships we went through. Here, the strain of high level contest (shiai) preparation shows on the face of Eddie Cummings as he takes a breather after a tough morning class and now must focus of weight loss and then on to an afternoon class as EBI 10 in Mexico City approaches. Whilst our memory will usually focus on the peaks and valleys of our lives, we must remember that it is only the multitude of forgotten days of grinding and struggling towards our goals that make those wonderful peaks possible.

A word of support for Mr Bravo: One of the costs of being an innovator is criticism. In general, people resist change, especially if they have invested a lot of time in the status quo. One of Eddie Bravo's most important innovations was the rule set for his competition which involves the use of over times to force a decisive result to a match within a reasonable time frame. An important innovation in his overtime was the use of classical jiu jitsu submission positions, the rear mount and juji gatame armlock (he calls it spider web) positions. He was widely criticized for this. Most of the criticism centered around the idea that athletes should never be GIVEN those positions, but should have to EARN them. My own belief is that jiu jitsu needs around five different rule sets to make sure sure all the skills of the sport are kept strong and growing in healthy directions. I want to say, however, that I really believe Mr Bravo's over time innovation is a healthy and good thing for the sport. First off, in EBI, the athletes have ten uninterrupted minutes to earn whatever positions they want - the same time they have in IBJJ rules. Once in overtime, they must choose between the two most classical finishing positions of the sport - back strangles and armlocks. This is where things get interesting. In truth, the overwhelming majority of jiu jitsu athletes spend 95% of their jiu jitsu defensive awareness on NOT GETTING INTO bad positions - and only a fraction of that in actually training the skills and awareness of how to ACTUALLY GET OUT OF THESE POSITIONS ONCE THEY ARE IN THEM. EBI overtime rules FORCE ATHLETES TO REDRESS THIS IMBALANCE. For the first time, they have to devote serious training time to defending and escaping the main finishing positions of the sport. They can't simply train themselves to avoid the attack at the onset, BUT MUST LEARN TO WORK THEIR WAY OUT FROM THE COMPLETED POSITION. This takes real skill. As a coach I can personally attest that these overtime rules forced both me and my athletes to learn a LOT more about defensive strategy and technique in two of the classical submissions of our sport and this is a healthy thing for our athletes.

Formality and informality: As a general rule I prefer a rather informal class setting. I believe formality can be a good thing in children's and beginner class, but I don't emphasize it at all in advanced classes. I don't really like being called professor, I work with first names and students do the same to me. We laugh a lot and say horribly inappropriate but (usually) funny things to each other all day 😉😂. I have always found the deepest and most profound forms of respect are unspoken in daily life and only get uttered on special occasions. The ceremonial aspects of respect, belts, saying "osu" to everything you hear, calling everyone above you in rank professor- we only do on a few special occasions. I always liked the informal atmosphere that my master, Renzo Gracie fostered. There was no endless talk about respect - but there was a stronger unspoken sense of respect for him and the project we engaged in than any ceremonially lavish atmosphere I saw. Real respect manifests itself in significant actions, not words or trivialities. When I see athletes who study under me getting up every day at 5am to get to morning class and then work out between then and the afternoon class and then go home to an evening workout, study and practice the moves and concepts we expound, push through pain, fatigue and injury to finish a workout, make an extra effort to help a team mate prepare for competition - how can I not respect them? And what words can capture the respect I feel I my heart for these men and women who do this, not for weeks and months, but for years, until they break though to their goals. Better to leave it unsaid. I focus on performance improvement and let respect come about naturally. Here the squad relaxes after another tough workout getting Eddie Cummings ready for EBI 10. Judging by the looks on our faces there is a 99% chance we are talking about women or some other fun subject - anything except jiu jitsu performance 😂😂😂

EBI 10 coming soon: Eddie Cummings has been training very hard for EBI 10 at a new weight of 135 pounds. He has been adding new attacks to his already extremely dangerous repertoire and is looking to put on a another great performance under the lights. This time the event will be in Mexico City. As part of the trip I shall teach a seminar on some of the elements that have allowed our team to do so well at previous shows. It will be hosted by my old team mate Mario Delgado Davila, who has a very successful school in Mexico City. I will be my first trip to Mexico, so I am very much looking forward to seeing the land, the city and the jiu jitsu of this great country. I hope to be able to help in some small way the development of the game in the ways that the squad is known for 😊😊😊

Drilling without sparring is unrealistic: sparring without drilling limits growth: Students often ask me about the structure of their training. The most obvious element of structure is the relationship between sparring and drilling - there are many other training methods between these two that have their place, but they form the most fundamental and important means of training. Nothing will ever beat live sparring for giving the student the opportunity to practice his or her skills in a realistic fashion under the same kind of pressure they can expect in match conditions. Sparring in all its variations and intensity levels is the king of contest preparation. Sparring alone however, is not enough. The great problem of sparring, especially when it is intense, is that it often forces us to use our most trusted moves to achieve victory. If I really want to win against a very tough opponent, I will inevitably fall back on my favorite moves (tokui waza) to get the win. This is fine for the further development of that tokui waza, but in the long term it can limit the influx of new moves into your Arsenal and create a lack of growth within your game that makes you predictable and leaves you in a plateau that you find disappointing. This is where drilling comes in. Drilling allows you to practice a move without resistance or against very low resistance and thus gain confidence as you learn about the mechanics and principles of the move. As your expertise increases, the move can be brought into sparring until in time it becomes a natural part of your full sparring repertoire. This ensures constant growth in your game over time. Thus the essential role of both sparring and drilling in performance improvements sparring improves your ability to apply moves in realistic situations, drilling expands the repertoire of techniques that you are willing to use in sparring, which in time will lead to performance improvements. Thus our training mantra: DRILLING WITHOUT SPARRING IS UNREALISTIC: SPARRING WITHOUT DRILLING LIMITS GROWTH. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan go through leg locking drills in England prior to Polaris 4, where those same skills won Mr Tonon victory via leg lock

A truly remarkable performance: UFC 205 had many outstanding performances, but main event star, Conor McGregor saved the best until last with a stunning victory against the title holder and immensely talented Eddie Alvarez. Much of what guides our intuitions as to an athletes ability is not just who he beat, but how he beat them. In truth it was shocking to watch the degree to which Mr McGregor used superb control of distance, pace, timing and placement to dismantle such a talented and tough opponent. In doing so he did what he said he would - hold two belts at the same time. Whatever ones opinion of Mr McGregor's public antics outside of fighting, one cannot deny that he has backed up what many see as overly brash talk with brilliant and successful action. Moreover, he has made huge waves in the sport in relatively little time - it was not long ago that people where discussing him as a talented new comer and whether he was really worthy of a title shot at all - now he has two belts around his waist - both won against extremely good opponents via very impressive knockouts. In addition, he has shown a true champions ability to come back from a bad loss in short order and not just rectify the loss, but greatly surpass where he was prior to that loss. Whilst his style seems almost entirely built around the ability to get his dangerous left hand to bear upon his opponent, and there are open questions about his ability to prevail when he can't: no one can deny the incredible achievements he has made with his relatively narrow skill set in a sport where we typically believe a very wide skill set is essential just to survival, let alone world beating success. His lifestyle, his demeanor, his fighting style and his goals all make him the biggest risk taker in the sport - so impressive to see a man stand on the cusp of disaster and ridicule on the basis of those risks - yet through the power of his personality, self belief and skill, turn it all into a bigger triumph. Hats off to a truly great fighter and personality who took the biggest event in MMA history and made it his.

Heavy artillery: The UFC has gone all out to bring in the big guns for UFC 205 tonight in NYC. For the first time, the UFC is on stage at Madison Square Garden tonight. This is the stage that in another era hosted Ali vs Frazier to decide the world's most eminent fighter. Now in the modern era it hosts a slew of great fighters in the best combat sport to launch operations in New York. Has there ever been so much talent in one event? I remember in the 90's going to small sports bars in NYC trying to find a place that would show the sport - it was banned on cable and could only be seen on satellite TV. Now it is in the premier venue in America in shining lights. Thank you to all the remarkable men and women who have made this transition possible - this is a special night for the fans, but also for the sport itself 😊😊😊😊

All American Brian Stann trains with the squad: It is always a pleasure to meet the many visitors who come to the fine city of New York and make the journey down to the basement of learning. None were a greater pleasure to meet than former UFC standout, Brian Stann, who is in town for UFC 205 where he will provide color commentary in his field of expertise. This man is so much more than just another athlete. He is a former Marine in our armed forces and today runs a charity dedicated to helping former servicemen and women find employment after national service. Talking to him you get a strong insight into his sense of civic duty. He is truly a gentleman warrior who finds that balance of the true martial artist between strength and kindness. It is a humbling experience to meet such a gentleman. We taught him submissions, but I think he taught us something much greater. Of course grappling for MMA is very different from pure submission grappling, but Mr Stann fearlessly went in and got his hands dirty with some of the latest techniques and strategies of submission grappling - a real mensch of the sport. The squad is hard at work preparing for the ADCC trials, refining old skills and adding new ones. Look for Eddie Cummings to come roaring back into the spotlight as he prepares for both ADCC and EBI 10 in rapid succession- he is training in an outstanding fashion for both rule sets 😊😊

Assembling the troops: The biggest show of them all - UFC 205 has rolled into town. Chris Weidman came to RGA to hone his highly developed skills in preparation for his fight with the uber talented Yoel Romero. It was a joy to see all the premier fighters and trainers around Madison Square Garden for this historical event. MSG was a fight center I would see on television when I was a child growing up in New Zealand when the greats of boxing in the 1970's and 80's fought their epic battles. To be among it all at the very first event at MSG in the modern era of MMA is such a special feeling. All the troops got together for a special night of training that went past midnight and created a memorable atmosphere among the many coaches and athletes. My beloved master, Renzo Gracie was on the mats delving out his priceless wisdom , experience and wit. My senpai (big brother) Ricardo Almeida was there. He is one of the few men I know who has been incredibly successful as a jiu jiu jitsu athlete, mma athlete, coach of both sports, ambassador of the sport and as a businessman growing the sport through schools - he has done it all and done it exceedingly well. The immortal Ray Longo and tactician extraordinaire, Mark Henry were working hard. UFC Champions and standouts Fabricio Werdum, Eddie Alvarez, Stephen Thompson, Khabib Nurmagomedov showing a skill set that would make the entire Marvel and DC superhero line up look like wimps. What a room to be in!! As I went home at 1am on the subway I felt so privileged to be a tiny part of such a special city, at a special time, among so many special people 😊😊😊

Competition intensity: Very often I am asked how I am able to reconcile safe training in the gym with the breaking intensity required for top level competition (shiai). The squads safety record in training is very good despite being a group whose philosophy of jiu jitsu is based around ruthlessly seeking submissions over the whole body. People ask how they are able to train in a relatively mild way with each other every day, yet when the time comes in shiai, to be able to take a lock or strangle through to completion with maximum torque. The key is to focus skill development around CONTROL rather than power. When your ability to control an opponent's movement is well developed, you can apply whatever degree of power you choose at the time you wish to use it. When control is insufficient, you will be forced to apply full power in the hope that maybe you will get a break before your partner can effect an escape. This creates a very unsafe training environment and a hit or miss competition record. Most of the major joint locks and strangles offer great amounts of control as well as breaking leverage - learn to exploit that so that you can break and strangle at your discretion rather than in a flurry of movement where you are racing against time to get the job done. The great cliche of our sport is "position before submission," but the squad operates with a different mantra - CONTROL BEFORE SUBMISSION. In this way the gulf between the training room and the big shows can be spanned much more easily. Here Garry Tonon takes his skills honed in the gym on to the big stage with devastating results as he applies severe pressure to his opponents leg via heel hook at EBI 9. The big size difference is easily overcome as excellent positioning and precise positioning of lever and fulcrum create crushing power with excellent control.

Reflections on my senior students: I am often asked about how different body types influence the way I coach students. I have talked about this in the past. A question I am asked much less often, but which is in my opinion more important, is that of TACTICAL STYLE and how that influences my coaching. When you look at my three senior competing students, it is obvious that they are physically very different, but more importantly, they are tactically very different as well. Gordon Ryan has a PRESSURE based game where that pressure elicits defensive reactions that create opportunity. Garry Tonon has a SCRAMBLE based game centered around using movement where he controls the direction and pace of that movement to create advantage. Eddie Cummings has a KUZUSHI based game where he works from bottom position to off balance people in ways that create advantage (Interestingly Mr Cummings game is the most similar to my own of the three). The great theme that I push to my students is this - WHATEVER DIFFERENCES THERE ARE IN TACTICAL STYLE, THE FINISHING POSITIONS ARE THE SAME FOR ALL. Thus my students may employ very different overall approaches to the game, yet all have very similar finishing holds. In this way I approach the great problem of SIMILARITY AND DIFFERENCE in jiu jitsu. How to reconcile the need to promote individualism and spontaneity whilst remaining true to the mechanical nature of the sport which is based around lever and fulcrum and whose strictures dictate the same way to all, regardless of difference. In this way jiu jitsu can function both as a means of self expression and as a humbling lesson in the primacy of physics over our wants and desires.

It's a celebration bitches! NYC style: Actually no, the squad never celebrates victories. Tomorrow it's back to the basement of suffering to refine and develop skills for the squad. The ADCC trials are around the corner, Eddie Cummings must step up to face the challenge of EBI 10 at a new weight of 135 pounds - against the man we consider the best of Eddie Bravo's students - Geo Martinez. He is very interesting as an opponent because he is one of the few remaining 10th planet athletes who is really skilled in the true 10th planet system based around rubber guard/ lockdown half guard/twister rather than the modern 10th planet athletes style which is basically cloned after our own style. Mr Cummings preparation so far has been superb, but his aspirations are even higher. Then Gordon and Nicky Ryan face big superfight challenges in San Diego - so it's back to training and development for the squad - time to turn off the disco lights and crank up the ashi garamis 😂😂😂 Awesome photo by Jeff Chu

Reflections on EBI 9 and rule sets: The remarkable victory of welterweight Garry Tonon over a distinguished field of light heavyweights has impressed many, but underneath that victory are some interesting reflections upon the notion of rule sets and promoting desirable behavior among the competitors and directions of growth in the sport. The fundamental problem the sport faces is this: on the one hand we want to make the sport progress in directions that express our ideals of the sport; on the other, athletes want to win, by whatever means the rule sets allow. In practice this often means that athletes will utilize the rule set to achieve victory in ways that fulfill the letter of the rules, but not the spirit of the rules. Thus they exploit the rule set by acting in ways that increase the likelihood of their victory, but which go against our ideals of the sport. At EBI 9 it was obvious that some athletes were looking to stall to get to the overtime and then exploit the overtime rules to secure victory. Whilst this is perfectly legal and even understandable (every athletes wants to win after all) it results in a situation where the ideal of the sport - that we must look to secure control that leads to submission at all times, is lost. The usual response is to change the rules to prohibit undesired behavior. My point is this - you can never really legislate away the natural tendency of athletes to exploit a given rule set in ways that raise the likelihood of them winning - that's just what athletes do. GOOD ATTACKING, POSITIVE JIU JITSU COMES FROM A MINDSET, NOT A RULE SET. Ultimately, negative stalling behavior is a coaching problem, not a legislative problem. Athletes must be coached towards the ideal of the sport so that they express that ideal regardless of the rule set. Most of the great players of the last decade, Roger Gracie, Braulio Estima, Marcelo Garcia etc, applied an approach of attacking to submission regardless of the rule set they operated under and this is a big part of what made them great. Here Garry Tonon takes gold at EBI 9 where he embodied once again the ideal of constant attempts at control to submission regardless of time and rules.

The spirit of attack: Garry Tonon showed that a smaller man can carry a proactive attack strategy even against larger opponents tonight as he won EBI 9. Even when he failed to get a submission in regulation time, it was not for want of trying. Here he jumps into a flying sankaku (triangle) attack, showing the kind of calculated risk taking, backed by skills, required to make this approach work. Once again Mr Eddie Bravo put on a great show and format for the athletes and once again the squad showed up looking not just to win, but to do so in a way that shows the best aspects of the sport and helps it growth. I am in an airplane now at LAX, preparing to take the redeye back to NYC to teach tomorrow morning. Normally the redeye flight back from LA is horrid - but when you have a student like Garry Tonon performing the way he does - it's a lot easier to enjoy the flight home 😉😉 Looking forward to seeing all my students tomorrow - thank you all so much for your help in getting the squad ready for the big shows - we could not do this without all of you. Photo by Bane

Mission impossible-Accomplished: Garry Tonon celebrates his third title after winning EBI 9 in dramatic fashion via overtime riding advantage. He fought his way to the finals where he fought the great Vinny Magalhaes, former ADCC champion. It was the toughest EBI yet for Mr Tonon, as he was a last minute replacement for injured team mate, Gordon Ryan. He had just fought under a different rule set a week ago in England and then suffered a small but deep cut that interfered with the little preparation time he had in a weight division far above his own. Yet with characteristic professionalism, skill and gung ho spirit, he battled through to a win over the big men and showed that the true spirit of jiu jitsu - built around the ideal of lesser size and strength controlling and defeating greater size and strength, is not empty talk, but with training and strategy, came to reality on the stage of the Orpheum theater in LA at EBI 9.

Weigh ins for EBI 9: Normally weigh ins are a juggling act of training preparation and weight cutting. This time however, Garry Tonon is massively underweight for the weight class so there is no thought of weight cutting. As always we have to sign paperwork for the show - Mr Tonon's response to the various media questions on his fact sheet were interesting to say the least. Other sports? Gymnastics, professional bull riding and nude chess...um...right. Previous accomplishments? 5X Chilean Sambo champion?...ok...Why do you compete? The three C's...cash, chicks and championships...um...right...This boy has his priorities straight 😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂

The three deadliest leg lockers in the world heading to EBI for grappling showdown: This photo will definitely bring fear to the hearts of the squads opponents as they prepare for submission show down in LA. These three deadly warriors are at the forefront of martial arts - looking to show their lethal skills in the city of angels 😉😂😂😂😉

What exactly are you waiting for? A common problem when I am coaching jiu jitsu athletes is that of students second guessing themselves when opportunity presents itself during a match. Too often students are looking for a perfect situation from which to launch an attack. Whilst I would never advocate sloppy set ups or random attacks; I do caution students on waiting for perfect set ups and moments for the simple reason that they rarely happen and are fleeting in nature. As a general rule, once an opportunity arises, it rarely gets better by waiting - usually an intelligent opponent will become cognizant of his vulnerability and recover. Thus the skill of SEEING OPPORTUNITY AND ACTING UPON IT IMMEDIATELY is crucial to success. The great American General Patton said it well - "A good plan enacted now is better than a perfect plan enacted ten minutes from now." Once you see an opening, follow it with action and be prepared to follow the action through to your goal. This almost always garners better results than waiting for a better and better opportunity that may never arise and then force you to take greater risks as time runs out. Here, kohai student Eric Sherman shows fine recognition of opportunity followed by decisive action in the opening moments of a bout at a local show in NYC.

Smallest competitor - biggest skill set and heart: Garry Tonon walks around at 167 pounds and could easily make the EBI 145 pound division (he does not, as we like to see Eddie Cummings rule that domain). This Sunday he will take on athletes coming down from up to 230-240 pounds to weigh in at 205 for EBI 9. This might seem like a suicide mission - and for most, it would be. Mr Tonon however, has a long history of going up to fight bigger men. When he was a brown belt he took on Buchecha and Cyborg at ADCC and only lost narrowly by points. He dominated most of the action against Rousimar Palhares is a thrilling draw, despite a colossal size and strength disadvantage. He lost by negative guard pull to Vinny Magalhaes after pushing hard for submissions the whole match. He has beaten by submission, Ralek Gracie and Gilbert Burns despite a big size and strength disadvantage. In all my coaching experience I have not seen a grappling athlete with bigger heart and a stronger desire to go out and compete against anyone, any time, any place. Rest assured, the squad may have had a setback today, but come Sunday we shall come out all guns blazing 😊😊 Tomorrow the senpai and kohai will train and drill and get ready for this new challenge - one which represents the best spirit of jiu jitsu - the belief that with superior technique and strategy, greater size and strength can be controlled and overwhelmed by lesser.

Sad news: Gordon Ryan suffered a nasty cut on the eyelid today during his last day of hard sparring in preparation for EBI 9. It has been tightly stitched and dressed but there is no way he will be able to compete on Sunday. He will be replaced by Garry Tonon. Gordon was already the smallest man on the card and Garry is a weight division below Mr Ryan, so this will be a tough assignment indeed. Mr Tonon was himself cut during training in England, but his cut is much less severe and in a much less sensitive area than Mr Ryan's. He will be ready to go by Sunday. Both cuts were the result of training with people outside of our gym - there is always a catch here - it's good to train with unfamiliar partners as this is something you will experience in competition; however, sometimes these strangers bring a spastic and clumsy movement that is hazardous in terms of small and unnecessary injuries like these. Thankfully Gordon Ryan has other big upcoming projects to prepare for as soon as this problem passes, but still, the disappointment is strong. Mr Tonon will commence training as soon as his own cut allows and the show will go on

Tomorrow I will chat with team mate Matt Serra on his UFC Unfiltered podcast. Mr Serra is Renzo Gracie's first American black belt and of course, BJJ world champion and former UFC welterweight champion. When I was a beginning student Mr Serra was one of Mr Gracie's senior students (Ricardo Almeida and Rodrigo Gracie were the others. As such he was my senpai (big brother/senior) and, as anyone who trained at RGA at that time will attest, an inspiration to all of us. Much of my desire to improve in the sport came from daily training sessions with Mr Serra whose skills and abilities left us all in awe - wishing that one day we could attain such a level. Outside of jiu jitsu and professional fighting, Matt is absolutely one of the funniest characters in the sport - he truly can light up a room when he enters. Best of all is when he has a target upon whom to aim that sense of humor. Usually it is the long suffering Ray Longo, with whom he combines to create so many talented fighters in Long Island NY. Tomorrow however, it will be me!! 😊😊 Mr Serra and I shall talk about old times in training along with a host of random topics. If you feel like listening in, you will see what a character Mr Serra is and perhaps learn a little about the approach to training that enabled Mr Gracie to create such a large number of outstanding students in those early days of jiu jitsu in the USA. 😊😊

Next assignment: After a great weekend in England, where Garry Tonon defeated two time world champion Gilbert Burns via heel hook, it's back to NYC for four days of training getting Gordon Ryan ready for EBI 9 in Los Angeles California. Mr Ryan has been training diligently in the shadow of Mr Tonon's big show at Polaris, but now takes center stage on the training mats for this heavyweight event where he will be by far the smallest competitor. We are headed to Heathrow airport now then back to the mats in NYC 😊😊 Great to see the burgeoning BJJ scene in The UK and the rising success of a professional grappling league - Polaris - this bodes well for the future of British and European grappling.

One step forward - one step back: Live training at the seminar today finished with a disappointment. Garry Tonon took a small but deep cut to the forehead during sparring - we are off to local hospital now 😞 Hoping to get some stitches in quickly but it's going to be a while until Garry can train again, so Worlds competition is in jeopardy at this point 😞 We will have a better idea of situation after we spoke to local doctors - off to Birmingham hospital now

Going over ashi garami at Braulio Estima's school in Birmingham England. The British lad and ladies are doing a good job following some complex material from myself, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. Mr Tonon is doing a superb job of showing the tactics he used last night to defeat Gilbert Burns. Though I am very proud of all the squads competition (shiai) achievements, nothing makes me more proud of their ability to teach - that way I feel very positive about the future growth of the sport - so much more important than mere individual achievement 😊😊 Gordon Ryan even agreed to take off his crown to teach - amazing! 😂😂😂 Thanks to @braulioestima and Garry and Gordon and most of all, British BJJ which appears healthy and full of enthusiasm 😊😊

Breakthrough!! Garry Tonon wins via his tokui waza, inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami - defeating two time world champion and ADCC bronze medalist Gilbert Burns despite a major size and strength disadvantage at Polaris 4 in England tonight. It was an interesting match, with Mr Burns scoring some nice takedowns and positional scrambles to pins whilst Mr Tonon employed an interesting strategy of recovery into standing position to set up submissions. About two thirds of the way through the match, the strategy worked as Mr Tonon locked out a very tight cross ashi garami and controlled it through to the finish against the very explosive and strong Mr Burns. It was a good show overall. There was a fine match between 10th planet standout Nathan Orchard who countered the dangerous leg lock game of Japanese wizard Imanari with a solid traditional BJJ positional game through to a strangle. Dillon Danis put on a superb performance, two fine looking arm in guillotines, one of which was unlucky not to get a finish; then a very well applied inverted heel hook for a very nice win indeed against highly decorated and larger opponent, Jackson Sousa. It was nice to see three such well engineered submissions at such a high level against such talented opponents. Now we head back to NYC to prepare Gordon Ryan for EBI 9 where he will once again be then smallest man in the field - depending upon his technique and tactics as his lifeline to victory.

Size difference: I always urge my students to see the main attribute of jiu jitsu training as the ability to control and defeat greater size and aggression with less. Often the squad struggles to find opponents their own size to compete against. Very often they have to fight opponents significantly larger than themselves as a result. Today at the weigh ins for Polaris 4, Garry Tonon weighed in at his actual bodyweight of 167.5 - after eating a steak lunch. His opponent - Gilbert Burns was supposed to weigh in at 170 but failed to make weight by almost 10 pounds. He was so far over that he will not even try to make the weight and once again the squad will face a much larger opponent and rely on technique to prevail. Nothing shows belief in our technique better than taking on much heavier opponents.

Structured training: So often I see people engage in training with no plan as to what they are trying to accomplish. This will always limit your ability to improve over time - the whole reason why we engage in practice. It is critical that someone in the room have a clear idea as to what we are trying to improve and how we are going to do it. In a beginners class or a general class, it is enough for the coach to know what the plan is and run the class accordingly. At elite levels however, I like to make the athletes part of the discussion as to what we are trying to achieve - they have the knowledge and insight to add to the discussion and we can make adjustments based on their input. Here Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan and myself outline want we want to go over at a local gym in Poole England just prior to Polaris 4 - once the plan is set, words get replaced by action and the room heats up accordingly.

An American werewolf in London: After-training dinner with Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon is always an adventure. On the way back to the hotel Gordon Ryan saw a pair of poles in the street and immediately went to street ninja mode and began climbing them, screaming something about the memory of Harambe!! I always dread seeing things like this before a match, fearing accidental injury - maybe I am getting too old! Anyway - after paying tribute to Harambe,
Mr Ryan climbed down safely in front of an admiring (?) crowd of curious English people and not so admiring police officers and went to sleep - ready for another day of training 😂😂😰🤕😜😳😅🤒😷😂😊😊🙄💀😄😄😃😉😂😂😂

Shiai preparation: Garry Tonon and Gordon prepare for their upcoming respective competitions (shiai) in a local gym in England. the high humidity and cold create a steam room effect that made for an eerie but enjoyable mist - appropriate for England - the misty Isle that has given so much to world history. At this stage the training takes on the same character as the final stages of sharpening a knife - the hard work has been done - now it's a matter of gently polishing the edge without removing any more metal - body movement and mental programming are the emphasis now, not physical conditioning or skill development. Mr Ryan's training is still physical as he still has a week before his event. Building the athlete to a peak over time is key here.

Newark airport: Heading to England for Polaris 4 where Garry Tonon takes on the outstanding and physically very powerful Gilbert Burns in fifteen minutes of submission grappling action. Mr Tonon has trained extremely well. Fellow squad member Gordon Ryan is traveling with us also as he prepares for EBI 9, the heavyweight competition where he will be by far the smallest competitor - a situation that is becoming normal for the squad now. After we return Monday its a quick turn around to California for Mr Ryan's show. It's a privilege to be able to go to so many shows to exhibit our approach to grappling against such distinguished competition

Realistic combinations: In the past I have talked about the critical need for students to learn to combine submission attacks into short sequences to overcome resistance and break through to victory by submission. Just as no good boxer would expect to defeat a worthy opponent with single punches, so too, no jiu jitsu player would expect to defeat a worthy opponent first time everything time with the first submission he tries. One problem I often see however, is people selecting inappropriate combinations. Sometimes these look good when drilling on a non resisting training partner, but fail in live sparring. The key is to select combinations that allow us to transition in a way that MINIMIZES THE DISTANCE WE HAVE TO TRAVEL TO GET TO THE NEXT ATTACK WHILST MAXIMIZING OUR CONTROL OVER OUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT AS HE TRIES TO ESCAPE THE FIRST ATTACK. This creates very effective submission combinations that are difficult to avoid even when resisting as hard as possible. Here, talented kohai student Matthew Tesla shows fine form at a recent local tournament with a well selected combination leg attack that offers his opponent little opportunity to avoid or counter the second attack - resulting in a nice submission win. Creating rationally ordered, short submission combinations based on the criteria I just outlined will greatly increase your chance of success with the various submission holds we work with with.

Staying relaxed: Probably the single greatest obstacle to efficiency in human movement in general, and jiu jitsu in particular, is EXCESS TENSION. We all have a natural tendency to equate maximum effort with maximum muscular tension. In jiu jitsu this usually leads to poor movement and an inability to mold our body into the complex postures required to complete the various moves of the sport. Don't get me wrong - there are times we need tension in the body as we grapple - finishing a submission is an obvious example - and certainly we don't want to be so relaxed that we cannot form a tight connection to our opponents body when we need it. Nonetheless, as a general rule we must train ourselves to avoid unnecessary tension that inhibits efficient movement. Much of jiu jitsu requires us to fold, roll and tumble our body, all of which is best done whilst in a fairly relaxed state. In any given match there will be long periods where you can be very physically relaxed, along with many short periods where you can be fairly relaxed and a few moments where you will need to be very tense and tight. Finding the right proportions of relaxation vs tension is a big part of the journey towards expertise. Here, kohai student Emmanuel Vera shows a excellent degree of relaxed body allowing fluid motion into cross ashi garami and a fine heel hook finish - where maximal tension is applied for a brief time. Very impressive for a blue belt - on his way to winning gold all via submission in the expert no gi division at a recent tournament

The link between standing technique and ground technique: A theme that I always push upon my students is that of balancing standing technique (tachi waza) and ground technique (ne waza). The most high percentage submission holds are all best performed on the ground, where control over an opponent's movement is usually much easier than standing positions. Nonetheless, considerable time must be invested in bringing the fight down to the mat in ways that make submission possible if the art is to have serious combative value (and of course, the opposite - getting back up to your feet from the ground if the situation should demand it). This ability to move naturally and easily from standing positions to ground and back and forth at will is a fine thing to behold and has immense combat value. Of course in submission grappling most of our attention is devoted to the means of getting to, and finishing, submission holds - so we cant realistically expect the kind of level of technique in specialized standing grappling styles like Olympic wrestling and Judo. What I often say to my students is this: I EXPECT YOU TO BE KILLERS ON THE GROUND AND COMPETENT ON THE FEET. This a fair view that reflects the priorities of the sport whilst paying respect to the realities of combat. What we must avoid is situations where students get to a high level on the floor but are straightforwardly incompetent on their feet. Here kohai student Matthew Tesla shows a nice link between standing work and ground work utilizing de ashi harai, a form of footsweep that our team greatly favors for its efficiency (you may remember it being used to good effect by Gordon Ryan against Keenan Cornelius) in a recent local tournament. It is a very nicely performed sequence and reflects very well on Mr Tesla's rapidly growing skill set.

I see much to admire in the Japanese model of classroom structure. It is based around the distinction between senpai (senior students) and kohai (junior students). The seniors take the biggest challenges and represent the school in the big shows. They provide the inspiration through their skills and deeds to the juniors and assist in the dissemination of knowledge through the training room. Equally important and far greater in number are the kohai. These students are a tier down in experience and skill level, but working their way up. They are absolutely critical in the contest preparation of the senpai and in building a strong training program which can build them into future senpai. The kohai often work in obscurity as they must first prove themselves in small local shows and work their way through merit into the ranks of the senpai. In every tough gym you will see this division occur naturally and organically, even when no one is trying to make it happen. This weekend several of our kohai emerged from the gym and put on stellar displays that show how their hard work and time with the senpai has hardened them and refined their skills. Ethan Crelinsten won first place at Sapeteiro 5 featherweight winning all matches by submission in regulation time (EBI rules). Eric Sherman and Frankie Adam Rosenthal shared first place at Grappling Industries show in NYC yesterday - winning all via heel hook. At the same show Emmanuelle Vera won first place in expert division, every match via heel hook - he is only a blue belt! Watching them train so hard with the senpai every day is a privilege for me, a benefit for them, and a necessity for the senpai. As always, THE BEST KIND OF BENEFIT IS MUTUAL BENEFIT. The relationship between senpai and kohai is the perfect example of this. It was great to see the kohai have their time in the sun yesterday and show the fruit of their labor.

The value of rematches: A very natural question to ask as you engage in the study of jiu jitsu is whether or not you are really improving over time. The problem is that as you train and improve, so do the people you are training with. As a result, it often feels as though no progress is being made. A very good test to gauge the amount of progress you are making over time is to rematch an opponent you have not come up against in some time - of course they too must have been training as per normal, otherwise the test will be rendered inaccurate. Exactly this situation occurred earlier today when Gordon Ryan rematched Todd Mueckenheim, a talented and athletic opponent who had narrowly defeated Mr Ryan by points six months ago. Today they met again in Florida. It was a short match, with Mr Ryan dominating the entire chain of events through to a submission win. It was gratifying to see in such a clear way the improvements in Mr Ryan's performance and the effects of a progressive training program that constantly assesses and improves the sports performance of those following it. Mr Ryan put on a dazzling combination of ashi garami, back control and kimura systems and perhaps most interestingly, the manner in which these different systems can be linked in a bout to make them extremely difficult to defend against. Mr Muckenheim showed admirable confidence in his abilities in taking a bet of $10,000 dollars of his own money against Mr Ryan, who also bet his money - though in the opposite way. However, he was not facing the same man he matched before and the gamble was lost. Here you can see Mr Ryan using some of the more advanced elements of our back control system. Unfortunately the first component of the system has proved so successful in competition that the other five components have not been necessary to use, it was nice to see some elements of the second component being shown in public today.

High percentage submission holds: Our approach to jiu jitsu is centered around the idea of CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. Accordingly, a large part of our training time is invested in perfecting the mechanical details of the most high percentage submission holds. People are often surprised to learn that I only teach around 15-20 families of submission holds. These are the most successful types of hold in high level competition in all weight categories and across all belt levels. There are only so many ways the human body can be broken and strangled by another body. Among those we find around fifteen to twenty types of hold are truly effective in competition. There are innumerable other holds, but I don't believe the meager results gained from them justify the amount of training time it would require to perfect their use - instead we focus all our attention of those with a high probability of success. You will notice that I said "families" of submission holds - thus the American lock (ude garame) is one such family. Within that single family there are many, many variations and still more set ups etc etc. thus fifteen to twenty families of submissions represents an enormous amount of study. Among them you will find all those families that one sees in every grappling event, juji gatame armlocks, kimura, knee bar, figure four toe hold etc etc. A big part of my job as the coach of this program is to deepen my students knowledge of the essential families of submission hold and and then embed them in coherent systems that enable a student to apply them against strong resistance; then let their knowledge of the mechanics of the move create the kind of pressure that will force a submission against even a very determined foe. Here fifteen year old Nicky Ryan gives Eddie Bravo, maestro of his own system - the rubber guard - a nice view of one of his favorite high percentage submissions, the heel hook, as he uses our ashi garami system to work into a variation of the move to secure victory in a recent super fight.

Classroom role models: An impression many people have is that the social dynamic in the gym is one of teacher teaching and students learning. This certainly may be the case in a small local class, but in a big and well established classroom it is an over simplification. A critical role is played by the senior students (senpai). They often have a more direct contact with the junior students than the sensei does and often are an essential part of getting the teachers vision into the hands of the practicing students. One of my most important roles as a teacher is to establish a strong cadre of senior students who assist in the learning process of the entire training room. That way one can create a room where there are many guiding hands to help those who need it and yet all are united by a common vision of the sport. That is one of the reasons why I always teach to the level of the most talented people in the room. It builds that upper echelon who can then assist me in getting the knowledge to everyone in time. I was myself a product of this system. When I was a white belt we had Renzo as our sensei, but also Ricardo Almeida, Rodrigo Gracie and Matt Serra as our senior students. They were incredible role models and inspirational to us juniors. I never forgot how crucial they were to my development and worked hard to build a similar structure when I began teaching. Here I am with one of my favorite senior students, Garry St Ledger, whose world championship level judo skills (in addition to his BJJ black belt) make him a truly valuable addition to the room as he helps immensely in the standing skills that are such a big part of my vision for the future of the sport.

Friends from afar: One of the great things about being based in NYC is the frequent opportunity to have visitors come in to learn the kingly art of jiu jitsu at the academy. As the greatest of the great, Jigoro Kano emphasized - the best kind of benefit is mutual benefit. It is a pleasure when talented and enthusiastic visitors come in. They bring new skills and perspectives and challenges to our squad, whilst gaining the same for themselves. Best of all is when they come regularly through the year. Then they get great feedback on their progress and the effectiveness of their training program - and of course - we get the same. The critical ability to apply your skills on an unfamiliar partner is also worked - that is important for contest (shiai) preparation. It also creates a strong and important link between jiu jitsu and our overall happiness, as travel and friendship are two of the very best means of bringing joy into human life - when combined with a passion for jiu jitsu - it's smiles all around 😊😊 Here talented visitors and friends Asim Zaidi and Assane Diop bring French flair and je ne sais quoi, their lovely girlfriends bring the looks and charm, the squad brings the submission skills and me...um...I guess I bring the sunblock and hairstyling skills 😖😜😂😂🤕😅

It's a long way to the top: Very often people ask me how my students progress so quickly to headline major professional grappling tournaments after a relatively short period of time in the sport. My answer always runs along these lines - people only take notice of athletes once they get to the big shows - what they don't realize is that all these athletes started small and did their time in local shows that no one pays attention to, developing their skills, their ability to control performance anxiety, their capacity to take their game and apply it upon someone they have never grappled previously etc. This developmental phase is crucial to anyone with big aspirations in the sport. Great athletes are not created fully grown and mature - their athletic life mirrors their actual life - they start off weak and totally dependent on others for help and sustenance, but in time grow in capability and confidence to become independent and strong. Nobody remembers the innumerable small local tournaments that Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan trekked to on their own volition and dollar, gaining critical experience that would prove invaluable later at the big shows. Don't rush this phase - once it's gone, it does not come back. Learn and grow here, always with your mind on your distant goals, but learning here and now to build the foundation upon which something great can be built. Here, Frank Adam Rosenthal takes his rapidly developing gym game to the local tournament scene and controls a variation of the juji gatame armlock position very nicely on route to the winners podium in one of many small, but very significant steps that must be made and profited from before the big leaps are made.

Body type and advantage: observe the three men in the photo. It is immediately apparent that all three differ markedly in body type. They share something in common however - all three were Olympic champions in Judo and rose to be the absolute best in the world in their generation and arguably of all time. The same game can be played in jiu jitsu. There are many distinguished figures in contemporary jiu jitsu, too many to list here, but six names that nobody will argue against being described as among the foremost in success and influence in their time in the sport would be Roger Gracie, Braulio Estima, Marcelo Garcia, Rafael Mendes, Cobrinha and Leandro Lo. Yet it is clear that these champions have very different bodies and even look very different in the way they move their bodies. The lesson is simple - WE CANNOT USE BODY TYPE AS AN EXCUSE FOR SUCCESS OR FAILURE IN ANY FORM OF GRAPPLING SPORT. There is no link between championship success and body type. So often I am asked whether an athlete I coach is more successful with a given move or position due to his body type. For example, people will often tell me that the long rangy body of Gordon Ryan is the key to his strong back control. Yet they overlook the readily observable fact that Eddie Cummings, with an entirely different body type, also exhibits very strong back control - he just uses different methods. The same can be said of Roger Gracie and Marcelo Garcia - both were superb in attacking the back, but they have very different bodies and very different methodologies. In truth, THERE ARE SO MANY DIFFERENT WAYS TO ACHIEVE VICTORY IN OUR SPORT THAT NO ONE BODY TYPE CAN MONOPOLIZE GOLD MEDALS. There are sports where body types and attributes confer advantage - basketball is an obvious example - there are only so many ways to get a ball in a net high above the average persons reach; but jiu jitsu is not like this. None of the major submission holds require any exceptional physical gifts and the means of getting to them are limitless - so success is equal opportunity in jiu jitsu and the winners podium at the best known competitions reflect this heartening fact.

Expertise: When we think of expertise in jiu jitsu we typically equate it with skill level on the mat - how good are you at performing the various moves and tactics of the sport and applying them against skilled opponents? It is important to realize however, that expertise is a concept with many faces. One of the most important elements of expertise and one which makes it easy to distinguish beginner from expert, is the ability of an expert to make significant distinctions between events and situations that the beginner simply does not see. Most people are familiar with the often used example of Alaskan natives (Inuit or Eskimo) and their vocabulary for "snow." Most people typically use the word "snow" to apply to any situation where white powdery condensation falls from the sky in winter. For our purposes, one word, "snow" conveys enough information to get the job done. The Alaskan natives however, live most of their lives in snow. They must be able to travel, hunt, fish, derive water, build shelter etc in snowy conditions. As such, they need to be able to make fine grained distinctions between different kinds of snowfall, as this can have very important consequences for their actions. Accordingly they have a vast number of different words for "snow" each describing subtle, but very important, types of snow that I simply do not see or make. As such, they have an experts view of snow, whilst I have a naive beginners view and our respective vocabularies reveal that. So too in jiu jitsu. When the squad talks about a given move like "ashi garami" together in training, we have a complex vocabulary to match each of the many subtle but important distinctions that will make the difference between success and failure when applying the move on a skilled opponent. Thus we will talk about irimi ashi garami, outside ashi garami, ushiro ashi garami etc etc so that we can easily coach each other and indeed ourselves, to make those subtle but important distinctions that demarcate success and failure. So much of what we call expertise is exactly this - the ability to make fine grained, but relevant distinctions, that others do not. Here the squad works on irimi ashi garami

Information overload: When I first began coaching I was anxious to pass as much detailed information as possible to students when demonstrating moves; in the belief that the more details they had, the more perfect their performance of the move would be. I soon found the opposite effect took place. The students did not have the experience to know which details ought to be given priority and so tended to emphasize the least important details over the most important. In addition, many simply lost track of vast amounts of detail and ended up remembering nothing. Worst of all, I often saw students in live sparring desperately trying to recall information and hesitating when speed of action was required much more than some additional detail. As I gained in experience I came to believe that it is quite counter-productive to throw vast amounts of detail at students, even advanced students, at one time. The real value of a coach is to make good assessments as to what are the CRITICAL details a student needs to get the job done, not ALL the details underlying any given move. Further details can always be added at another time. The determining factor in whether the student will be successful in applying his or her knowledge is not how much he or she knows, BUT HOW MUCH THEY CAN RECALL UNDER STRESS. The truth is that none of us can recall very much under sufficiently stressful conditions. My job then, is not dumping information - IT IS ABBREVIATING AND PRIORITIZING INFORMATION. Once I feel it is absorbed in ways that a student can utilize it under stress, I can add more. As soon as I made this adjustment, I noted increases in my students actual mat performance - which of course, is the most important element in my work. Coaches share much in common with editors - our most important role is to organize and arrange information in a way that the reader will benefit the most ( of course there is considerable irony in me, a man infamous for writing the most long winded and poorly edited posts in the history of Facebook and Instagram, try to tell you these things 😉) Here I have clearly gone into information overload with poor Gordon Ryan -
Perhaps I should read my own posts! 😉

The transfer of knowledge: One of the greatest attributes we humans have is the ability to transfer knowledge from one person to another and one generation to another. It is this feature of our species that makes progress from one generation to another possible. If each generation had to start at the beginning of knowledge acquisition every time, there would be no progress - just repetition from one generation to the next. Only the fact that each generation can build upon the prior work of the previous generations by learning their lessons through language is progress over time possible. This applies in jiu jitsu also. However outstanding the current crop of jiu jitsu athletes may be, I am very confident that the following generations will be better, as they are the beneficiaries of the knowledge given to them by the current generation and can build upon and improve upon that. Indeed - I would say that MY CAREER AS A COACH WOULD BE AN UTTER FAILURE IF I COULD NOT RAISE A CLASS OF STUDENTS WHOSE SKILL LEVEL WAS CONSIDERABLY HIGHER THAN MY OWN. Anything less would mean I had failed to convey all that I knew and created students who had absorbed it all and had the individualism and initiative to improve upon it. Here I work with Gordon and Nicky Ryan on the mechanical tightness of their Achilles lock. When they go home for the evening they will work again with each other, experimenting and researching and then testing it in live sparring over the next few weeks, making small modifications for their own bodies along with their own insights. When I look at this photo I smile as I can see the intergenerational growth of the sport in a very clear and positive way.

Guard passing in submission grappling: Quite often I am asked whether I emphasize the skill of guard passing among my students. After all, in most of the tournaments in which my students take part, no points are awarded for passing an opponent's guard. Given that guard passing on a talented opponent can be very hard work and that it scores nothing, and that my students are strong in leg attacks - many people ask the question - do you people even bother passing guard? The answer is absolutely yes. Indeed, visitors to the academy are often shocked at how much time we invest in guard passing skills - EVEN WHEN WE ARE ARE PREPARING FOR TOURNAMENTS WHERE WE KNOW IT WILL SCORE ZERO POINTS. Even in this context, guard passing has great value - for it allows you to ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY. The moment you start limiting your attacks to one part of your opponents body, you become predictable and defense for your opponent becomes easier. Our ideal is to attack our opponents whole body - legs, arms and neck. Guard passing makes upper body attacks possible. Without it you would be limited to leg attacks - only 50% of your opponents body. So in training, we often look quite traditional in our constant practice of passing work. The only difference is our MOTIVATION. We are not motivated to pass guard by points, but by the ability to attack the upper body with submissions. Thus we value guard passing as highly as anyone, just for slightly different reasons. Here Eddie Cummings does a good job of nullifying my guard attacks to work to a stronger passing position in training before an EBI event, where ironically, he knows guard passing will bring no points reward.

A theory of pinning: Most people think of pinning (osaekomi) as the act of displaying control by immobilizing an opponent. This certainly demonstrates control and is a very useful skill in combat. However, when one make SUBMISSION his primary goal, total immobilization of an opponent is not necessarily desirable. The act of totally immobilizing an opponent usually results in totally immobilizing ourselves as well. As a result, we are unable to make the transition to submission holds. The goal of the submission hunter is thus not static pins, but DIRECTIONAL PINS. These are pins which control the opponent in a way where he can only move in predictable ways that we control and determine. Thus we can anticipate his movement and take advantage of the inevitable extension of his body as he moves to shift from a pin controlling the torso to a submission hold attacking a limb. Static situations rarely give opportunities for submission. As a general rule - WHERE THERE IS MOVEMENT, THERE IS OPPORTUNITY FOR SUBMISSION. Thus directional pinning, rather than static pinning, is the focus of those who favor submission over all else. Here I work the theory of directional pinning with the immensely talented Mikey Wilson, youngest member of the squad, who at age ten displays a maturity and talent that astounds me.

Pre-contact: Due to the very nature of grappling, which requires us to have some form of grip upon our opponent in order to be able work the moves, most people have a tendency to underestimate the importance of skills utilized prior to establishing our grips. It is very important to understand that the game begins BEFORE EITHER ATHLETE HAS LAID A FINGER UPON THE OTHER. As the two athletes approach each other, they should be working to gain advantage before a grip has even been taken. This can be done through stance, movement, angle, level and limb positioning. Subtle use of these factors as we approach an opponent prior to making grips can result in advantage that will give us the initiative as we enter the grappling engagement. Good athletes don't wait until they establish contact to begin the fight for advantage - they begin as soon as they approach an opponent so that by the time contact has made, they already are a step ahead - then it's a battle to keep moving from advantage to advantage until victory. As in most areas of life, he who begins with advantage generally has an easier time in a competitive setting, jiu jitsu is no exception to this general rule. Here, Nicky Ryan has begun maneuvering to advantage with hands feet and stance before contact has even been made in his superfight in Canada yesterday. The small advantages he was able able to gain prior to contact translated into bigger advantage as the match progressed until he got his victory via heel hook.

Winners podium: Young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years of age, went all the way to Canada after a solid camp with the squad and competed today in a super fight against local adult (31 years old) grappling stand out Danny An Khoi Vu. Nicky won via submission with a heel hook variation in around two minutes. At the same tournament, Oliver Taza entered a tournament format and defeated multiple opponents all via heel hook to win gold. Here are the two junior squad squad members enjoying victory at the Submission Series Pro event - looking forward to seeing them back in the gym as they help the squad prepare for more upcoming challenges in the near future 😊😊

Proposed changes: Mr Eddie Bravo, founder and chairman of EBI, one of the most successful and fastest growing grappling competition organizations, is proposing some radical changes to the shows format that will essential take it out of the grappling competition business and put it somewhere between grappling and MMA. The idea is to allow limited striking on the ground via palm strikes as a means of taking the grappling a step closer to MMA. This is certainly interesting. It may be a solution to a commonly voiced criticism of submission only formats - that they allow athletes to take positions and make moves that would get them severely hurt in a real fight. Also it may encourage athletes to play a more traditional positional game as they will be rewarded with the opportunity to set up submissions with flurries of palm strikes from dominant position. I spent much of the first part of my coaching career developing grapple boxing systems for MMA fighters, but striking with the palm only is a very different game, so from a coaching perspective, this should be interesting. The main danger of the proposal is that it will scare off high level grapplers who don't want to be part of what they may perceive as a crazy slap grappling event that will be quite different from their usual competition training. Also there is a danger that it may end up looking like a mix of weak striking and weak grappling and thus please neither the MMA crowd or the grappling crowd. Obviously there will practical difficulties also, how to deal with cuts, broken noses etc in a tournament where athletes may have to fight four times in an evening. How it will work out is anybodies guess, but as they say, there is only one way to find out. The only certainty is that, as always, training, adaptation and strategy will determine the winners.

Changes over time: Ideally you should look at jiu jitsu as a lifetime activity. Of course there will be times you have to train less, or perhaps not at all, life is complicated and uncertain, sometimes our jiu jitsu training will reflect that - but you can always return and resume. An interesting facet of life time training is the changes that occur naturally to our game over time. Sometimes these changes occur rapidly, other times they are barely perceptible even to ourselves. Sometimes they are due to changes in priority. When my sensei Renzo Gracie first came to NYC and began teaching, his bottom game was based around tomoe-nage sweeps from open guard and lapel and Ezekiel (sode guruma) strangles. When he began professional fighting and no gi ADCC grappling, he had to change his bottom game drastically towards hook sweeps (Sumi gaeshi) and guillotine strangles. Other times the changes are due to changes in our bodies (usually due to age and damage). Whatever the reason, I always see change over time as a healthy thing. There is more to jiu jitsu than victory over an opponent. Much of its value comes from self expression, self knowledge and enjoyment. All of these are enhanced by variation and change in our game. If we just stuck to the moves most likely to generate a win the game would soon lose its appeal. It would become monotonous and boring and we would experience no growth over time. When we experiment and move in new directions we may initially lose some combat effectiveness (though I am confident that in most cases you will eventually increase it by having a wider repertoire to attack with) but we gain so much more. One of my favorite examples of change over time is that of my friend and coach, Matt Serra. When he first began as a standout grappler at the Renzo Gracie Academy his game was based around open guard work combine with lightning fast heists to guillotine strangles or rear strangles. After a long mma career and half a lifetime of change his game now is totally different, almost unrecognizable, based around top pressure passing and kimura attacks. Yet it is every bit as effective as the game that first made him a world and adcc champion.

The importance of tokui-waza: So often the Japanese grappling tradition expresses great wisdom. A core concept in the Japanese tradition is that of tokui-waza or "favorite technique." Every athlete will naturally develop certain techniques that he or she becomes particularly adept in. Usually it is our personality and body type that determines our favorite moves, though there can be other reasons as well. Tokui waza are extremely important for our technical growth in the sport. As soon as a beginning student develops their first tokui waza, I know they are on the right track. In our jiu jitsu life, the first tokui waza plays a similar role to our first car, first job, first apartment and first girlfriend does in our adult daily life - it is a critical first step in the path towards grappling maturity. As soon as you have a favorite move, you can add variations and combinations to it. You can develop counters to your opponents counters - IT FUNCTIONS AS MUCH MORE THAN A FAVORED MEANS OF WINNING MATCHES - IT IS A CATALYST TO FURTHER TECHNICAL GROWTH AMD PROGRESS. The acquisition of just one tokui waza will often bring about more technical growth in a given time period than any number of generalized lessons. As time passes you must develop more tokui waza. The number need not be great - I have met many fine champions who had a surprisingly small set of tokui waza. The importance is not so much the BREADTH of your tokui waza, but rather the DEPTH. The idea of tokui waza is to develop such depth of knowledge and skill around a small set of moves, that once you enter that tokui waza, your opponents cannot match your knowledge and skill in that specific domain and you can overwhelm them there to take victory. I am sure you can guess what Mr Eddie Cummings tokui-waza is 😊 Interestingly, when I first met him it was the guillotine. He is a good example of someone whose first tokui waza is not necessarily his mature tokui waza. Photo Tiago Molinos

Combination attacks: In an ideal world, all of our submission attempts would succeed on first try. Unfortunately the world rarely cooperates with our desires. Most of the time our opponents anticipation and resistance,
Combined with imperfections in our technique, result in a failure of the first attempt to get to a submission. This is where combination attacks come in. Combinations allow us to break through resistance and defense via a second, third or fourth attack which compliments the initial attack in some way that hopefully will take advantage of those defensive reactions and get the break though. The notion of combination attacks become more and more important as you climb in skill level, as your opponents ability to read and foresee the set ups to attacks increases. I find that students quickly learn to appreciate the value of combination attacks and work hard to incorporate them into their game - but then a new problem emerges - the problem of COMPLACENT ATTACKS. Students start thinking that since the real attack will be the third or fourth attack, they might as well put little or no effort into the initial submission attack that begins the combination. This is a crucial failure. A good opponent will simply not feel threatened by the initial attack and either not react in the way needed to set up the subsequent attacks, or worse, launch into his own counter attack off your weak attacks. It is critical that the first move be A GENUINE THREAT. Only then will you get the kind of reactions needed to drive the combination forward to success on the second, third or fourth move. That is why it is good for students to have several very strong and threatening moves that opponents know and fear. Faking these moves will always elicit strong and predictable defensive reactions that can be exploited via combination attacks. If there is no plausible threat at the onset, the subsequent moves are unlikely to be any more threatening. Here I work on leg attack drill combinations with Ms Ottavia Bourdain, looking to create predictable reactions off an initial attack that has to be taken seriously and thus set up a chain of events that will get to a submission.

Connection and body geometry: A critical part of grappling is the ability to create a solid sense of connection of our body to that of our opponent. Separation is the death of effective application of nearly all grappling technique. Most beginners use strength as the primary means of building that tight connection and as a result, quickly fatigue and become ineffective. A much better approach is to consciously SEEK TO FIT THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR OPPONENTS BODY. There must be a precise fit of your body into that of your opponent throughout the relevant areas that are in contact. This immediately creates a connection that can be maintained against strong resistance with minimal strength. The only way this fitting in of your body to his can be achieved is if your body is sufficiently relaxed and supple that you can fill the spaces in the same way liquid can fill the inside of any vessel into which it is poured, regardless of shape. Only when that precise fit-in has been achieved is tension applied and the submission attempted. The feeling here is one of a key precisely fitting into a lock - only then can the doorway to submission be entered. Developing this sense of relaxed fitting-in of your body's geometry into that of your opponent, followed by the isometric tension required for breaking, is a huge part of the development from beginner to expert. Here my student Shy Ace shows fine form as his ashi garami fits precisely into the geometry of his much larger and heavier opponents legs and hips to create a powerful submission win in a recent local tournament

The principle of localized force: The central feature of jiu jitsu is to use mechanical advantage to control greater strength and aggression with less. How is this possible? It is done largely through the principle of localized force. Let's say we have an opponent who can apply an average of one hundred units of strength in standard strength tests while we can only generate 50 units of strength. As a whole, he is roughly twice as strong as us overall. How is victory through grappling possible in such a case? The key is to understand that it is possible to use a very high percentage of our overall strength to attack a small percentage of my opponents overall strength at a point of his body which, if attacked successfully, will end his ability to continue the fight. If I can use the various movements of jiu jitsu to maneuver into a position where I can create a temporary LOCAL strength advantage at a critical point of my opponents body (neck or joints), I can overcome an OVERALL strength disadvantage. The whole basis of our sport is precisely to develop the skill of maneuvering into these local advantages as efficiently as possible and using that to create a threat to a critical but vulnerable body part in a way that leads to submission. A good example would be ashi garami, where a very high percentage of our overall strength - both legs, both hips, back and both arms are used to restrain an opponent's single leg and hip in a way that allows us to threaten severe damage. If a good ashi garami allows us to use 90% of our 50 units of strength against an opponent's single leg, 33% of his 100 units of strength, then we shall have a considerable local strength advantage on an opponent twice as strong as ourselves overall. This is one of the core principles of our sport and one which we must constantly keep in mind as we train and develop. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a high percentage of his total strength on the isolated leg of his opponent through a variation of ashi garami, creating a local advantage long enough to threaten a break and get a submission on his way to victory at EBI 8

Banning moves: Jiu jitsu is a contact sport based around the skills of breaking joints and strangulation - as such injury is inevitable at some point. Nonetheless I believe there are certain movements in our sport that are unacceptably dangerous and which do very little to enhance the desired skills of the sport. In my experience, the most hazardous movements in jiu jitsu are not the joint locks and strangles, these usually cause no injury among responsible athletes and even when used recklessly, rarely do catastrophic damage. Far more dangerous is UNCONTROLLED FALLING BODYWEIGHT. This is often the result of throws from standing position where people try to resist the throw and land poorly. Sometimes it is the result of a poor throwing attempt that results in one athlete sitting on the outstretched leg of his opponent and crushing the knee or ankle. The worst offender however, is the most common and the most preventable - the common practice of people jumping to closed guard and landing on the opponents hips, knees or ankles with their entire weight and momentum. Thankfully this dreadful practice has been banned at white belt belt level after years of unnecessary injury. It is time to extend the ban to all belt levels and training. I banned the practice entirely in all my classes many years ago after witnessing many terrible injuries. It is a worthless practice that teaches no worthwhile combat skills and has only (very) bad consequences with no redeeming features (unlike flying submissions which do teach valuable skills). We should enforce a rule that if an athlete wishes to pull guard they must make contact with their buttocks or back on the mat rather than their opponent. It is comical to see a sport where knee reaping is illegal, but the act of jumping guard, which has ruined more careers than all the joint locks and knee reaps put together, is perfectly legal for upper belts. A good closed guard should be feared as Roger Gracie's was - for its fine tactics and technique - not the injurious clumsiness of it jumping entry. The sport needs to ban this dangerous movement that does nothing to promote the skills of the sport and does much to reduce its safety

The indirect path: We work in a sport where we are actively trying to defeat someone who is actively trying to defeat us. This almost always creates a mindset in both athletes to go as fast and directly as possible to their respective goals. The problem is that both athletes usually have a good idea of what the goals of the other are. As a result, we run into a wall of defense and get shut out. Often you will get much better results if you employ an indirect path to your objectives - here is a general rule which I work hard to instill in all my students, the law of direction - the more sophisticated and knowledgeable your opponent, the more you will be required to choose the indirect route to your real objectives - The less sophisticated and knowledgeable your opponent, the simpler and more direct your attacks should be. Only when your real intent is masked behind fakery and deception will you pass through the defenses of an astute opponent. Now reading and saying this is easy; but performing in this manner whilst being vigorously attacked by a dangerous opponent is quite another. Very few people ever achieve the nerve, subtlety and patience to carry it out in a combative situation. If you can however, the rewards can be tremendous, as creating confusion and misdirection will make it far easier to execute your favorite moves in the heat of competition. Of all my students, none surpassed the subtlety, patience and indirectness of Georges St-Pierre in the set ups to his favorite move - the double leg takedown. People usually remember and admire his strong driving finish to the double leg. Very few ever comprehended the subtle indirect set ups that enabled him to get to that move on all comers for over over a decade. Here, Mr St-Pierre gives one of his strongest rivals, Josh Koscheck, multi time NCAA wrestling champion, some serious air time in the second match in Montreal.

All or nothing: An interesting element of jiu jitsu and of submission holds in particular, is their all or nothing character. They either work 100% and end the match, or they don't work at all. If you show me a man who knows 95% of what is required to complete a juji gatame arm lock, I will show you a man who has never submitted anyone with that move. As such, there is, perhaps to a greater degree than any other aspect of our sport, a need for exactitude and precision. There is nothing more heartbreaking than getting very close to a submission and then losing it in the last stage. Not only is it psychologically damaging, it is usually physically exhausting, as most submission holds require considerable amounts of isometric strength in execution. Students have to learn through experience to walk a fine line between working hard to successfully finish a submission versus abandoning one to save energy and switch to another option. We are engaged in a sport where a failed submission has no more worth than a punch that missed. As such our execution must be perfect down to the smallest details or, if not, it must be followed by another movement that justifies the energy expenditure of the first submission attempt. Nowhere else in our sport is greater knowledge and precision required in the placement of fulcrum and lever - small mistakes can have deep consequences here. At the ADCC world champions, Garry Tonon took the attack to his much larger rival, Vinny Margalhaes, an extremely talented ADCC champion, in the open weight division. The expression on Mr Magalhaes face shows that he is close, but despite several determined attempts, was ultimately unsuccessful. It takes great self belief to choose the path of submission - failure almost guarantees losing in points based tournaments - but success brings the deepest feelings of satisfaction our sport offers. Photo by Tiago Molinos

The basis of confidence: Often I am asked how it is that my students play such a confident attacking game. They appear to attack without regard for the risks of failure. Many people voice to me a commonly felt fear that if they attempt submissions and fail, they will lose positional control and be defeated. This is a sensible fear. All offense, especially submission offense, carries inherent risk within it. If it should fail, there is often a price to be paid, as it can lead to positional loss or even being strongly countered by submissions. This is why I always teach escape as the foundation of a strong offense. If a student truly believes in the effectiveness of his escapes, both from pins and submissions, he will have no fear of failure in his offense. On the other hand, if a student knows his escape skills are weak, he will always hold back on his offense in a high pressure situation, no matter how technically proficient his offense may be, his inner doubts will stop him from pulling the trigger, even when he has all the physical tools and tactical opportunity in his favor. Escape work is thus a huge part of our training - ironic for a squad known primarily for submission offense. Let this be one of your training principles: confidence in your offense rests upon an unshakeable belief in your defense. The skills of jiu jitsu are evenly divided into offense and defense. They are not opposite ends of the game, but rather work in unison, as yin and yang, to create a confident proactive game that is a pleasure to behold and a terror to face. Here I put Gordon Ryan through his defensive drills with Garry Tonon shortly before his superfight with the great Keenan Cornelius - where his defensive skills would be strongly tested before his eventual victory.

Everything begins with grip: In all the grappling arts, every engagement, whether in training or competition, begins with grip. When I first grapple a stranger I can tell in the first few seconds all I need to know about his skill level by the manner in which he grips me. Sadly, gripping is usually taught as an attribute rather than a skill. It is usually understood in terms of strength and so usually trained in the same way. Most people think that increasing the strength of their grip will improve their gripping. Whilst this may have some small benefit, it will be insignificant compared with the gains possible by training it as a skill. Precise placement allied with a tactical sense of what you wish to achieve with the grip you are fighting for is the backbone of gripping skill. Often visitors to the academy are shocked at the gripping skills of my best students and claim they are extraordinarily strong, then when they see those same students do strength training they are shocked to see they have very modest strength. They failed to see the technical precision which creates the illusion of great strength. Here Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon go over gripping drills in standing position just prior to EBI 8

Getting the squad back together: I have been running away from crocodiles and snakes in Australia, Mr Cummings has been living grappling samurai fantasy in Japan, Gordon And Nicky Ryan have been California cruising and Mr Tonon has been trying to push people in some grappling matches with crazy rules in Florida. Now it's time to get serious about training again in good old NYC! 😊😊 Can't wait to get back to Old Glory! Does our great country have problems? Yep. Are we perfect? Hell no. But still would not live anywhere else 😊🇺🇸😊 "The greatest" does not imply perfection.
America is a work in progress. Our founding fathers gave us a tremendous starting vision, but there is still so much to be done. Can't wait to get back and be a part of it 🇺🇸

Teaching the teachers: One of the more interesting facets of my job is the division between my usual task - improving sports performance of students; versus another, very different task - teaching coaches to improve the performance of their own students. The central concern of an athlete/student is his or her own skill enhancement. The central concern of a coach is the skill enhancement of others. As such, they are very different enterprises. Often I see people who are very strong in one area, struggle in the the other. Once the distinction is made we can begin to explain the often seen phenomenon of people who never excelled as athletes do well as coaches and vice versa. Some of the most admirable people in sports are those who conquered both realms. My own teacher, Renzo Gracie, had an outstanding career both as athlete and coach. In Judo, Jimmy Pedro is doing an outstanding job of transitioning from stellar athlete to coach. In wrestling Dan Gable, John Smith and Cael Sanderson are obvious examples of men who made the transition with enormous success. Here I work with the teaching staff of VT1 gym in Sydney Australia as they work hard to create a strong instructional program in the rapidly growing Australian jiu jitsu scene.

Elvis sighting: Teaching leg locks at the Sydney Australia school of early MMA era standout, Elvis Sinosic. So much fun to teach at the school of an athlete I used to watch in UFC shows when the game was young and wild! It was an interesting chance to reflect upon the many changes in our beloved sport and the different directions it has taken since those early days. It was also fascinating to watch how easy it is for someone well trained in classic BJJ to learn and incorporate our leg lock system into their game when its main structure is explained to them.

Working against skilled resistance: The true measure of competence in the application of any given jiu jitsu move is not whether you know how to perform it per se; but whether you can perform it against skilled and knowledgeable resistance and counters. At this stage, everyone knows my students have strong leg locks. When they go out to compete, their opponents have done much research and deeply practiced countering the expected leg attacks. Yet in the vast majority of cases, my students break through the resistance and get to their submission hold. So many times I meet people who think it is enough to know how to perform the move in basic drill form, and from this erroneously believe they have a working knowledge of the move. The rubric we work with cannot be "I can perform the move," but rather, "I can perform this move against skilled and knowledgeable resistance." The former will gain you victory only against beginners and the incompetent; the latter will take you to championship level. Here, Gordon Ryan follows the movements of his rival Matt Arroyo through multiple defensive twists and turns and hand fighting to get a fine submission victory against strong resistance in EBI 8 on the path to gold.

From the gym to the big show: Here is an interesting photograph - it was taken one day before EBI 8 at Shawn Williams academy in LA. I taught a seminar on our back control system. Afterwards Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon did some light sparring both to help Mr Ryan finalize his EBI preparation and get a workout for Mr Tonon before his bout in Florida the following week. Can you identify the move Mr Ryan is using here on Mr Tonon? It is the exact Kimura sequence that he would use the next day to defeat Mr Hillebrand in his second match of the evening. This ability to take moves from the gym to the big show is critical to success at the highest levels. So often athletes have all the skills they need to perform, but lack the confidence to pull the trigger when the opportunity arises on the big stage. Note the calm reaction of young Nicky Ryan as he watches this action unfold. He has seen the sequence so many times he barely reacts - interestingly his reaction the next night at the big show was identical - he calmly called out the steps in the sequence as we have all seen and done thousands of times. Breaking down the psychological barriers between gym rolling and big league competition is a huge part of our contest preparation- it is interesting to see such a clear example of it in operation here.

Calm during the storm: Gordon Ryan displays his submission versatility with a beautiful transition from our kimura system to back control system during his run to gold at EBI 8. Interestingly I encouraged him two weeks prior to the bout to work more on kimura as a means of broadening his Arsenal for this show - he did not let me down. His opponent shows admirable poise and calm in a tough situation, but it does not matter, the end is near now as a heavily practiced transition kicks into operation that will make resistance very difficult indeed. This constant need to keep diversifying our attacks without losing our previous ones is critical to maintaining progress over time in a sport where opponents learn and adapt quickly to known threats. Photo by Bane

Teaching in Australia: Going over elements of back control with the gi (whilst not wearing a gi myself 🙄) at VT1 gym in Sydney Australia. So much fun - the Aussies are a true bunch of characters and very enthusiastic about the sport 😊I am certain they will become a jiu jitsu powerhouse one day.

A democracy of ideas: A part of my teaching style which is very important to me is that I always strive to create students who can think independently about the sport and draw their own conclusions based on observation and experience. There comes a point with the senior students where I trust their judgment as much as my own. At this level I become very libertarian with my coaching. As we discuss technique we bounce ideas and concepts off each other in a democracy of ideas that often creates exciting new ways of looking at problems we face during preparation for competition. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan discuss some technical nuances just prior to EBI 8, some of which were used successfully by Mr Ryan to win his second EBI title.

An interesting point: an interesting point from last nights EBI 8 tournament is the relative size of the competitors. The weight limit was 185 pounds. The winner, Gordon Ryan walks around in daily life at 187-8 pounds and often competes at 160 pounds. As such he was one of the smallest competitors on the night. Most of the athletes dropped considerable weight to make the limit (it appears Joe Baize was the only other athlete who did not have to lose weight though I can't be sure of this). The squad has a good history of fighting much larger opponents and prevailing. I believe this is due to our strong emphasis of ashi garami. In this position there is no chest to chest top pressure - which is where weight discrepancy has its most effect. The most important determinant of success in this position is knowledge, rather than size as there is relatively little body contact. Mr Ryan will next compete at EBI at 205 pounds where he will be very small compared with his opponents indeed. Still, our team is getting used to this and are proud of our ability to use our tactics and techniques to control and submit larger opponents - a test that we consider the fundamental desiderata of jiu jitsu

The day after: Immediately after winning EBI 8 Gordon Ryan completes a tough training session with team mates Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan at my good friend Shawn Williams gym in LA. We worked in preparation for Mr Tonon's match in Florida this weekend. It is impressive to see an athlete coming back to train hard the day after victory to help his team mate and it gives a good sense of why these great friends have experienced so much success. Unfortunately I won't be there for the last few days of training as I shall be headed to Australia tonight 😞 but we got a clear sense of direction worked out in the last two weeks and we will communicate across the pacific to finalize plans. Mr Ryan will be there to corner and support Mr Tonon 😊 Always sad to leave LA - it is a city I have always been fascinated by and always enjoyed my time - sometimes I think about teaching here, I am sure it would be fun 😊@shawnwilliamsbjj

Shared vision: When you dedicate your every thought and action to a single sentence - jiu jitsu is the art and science of control that leads to submission- you will have the necessary focus to change the jiu jitsu world photo by Scott Hirano

When knowledge, skill, discipline and tactics come together and are given direction through a guiding vision - great things happen. Gordon Ryan shows near perfect form last night in the finals of EBI 8 with a heel hook variation that won him gold over the very tough and talented Kyle Griffen ( who was himself involved in some truly epic bouts before this one). His training leading up to the event was superb and it was a thrill for his great mentor and friend, Garry Tonon, younger brother, Nicky Ryan and myself to watch his work from the corner. Now the four of us will train today to get Garry Tonon ready for his bouts in Florida this weekend! I hope you all enjoyed the show and another look at the philosophy, tactics and techniques of our approach to jiu jitsu

The return of the King: Expectations were high when Gordon Ryan returned to EBI 8 tonight. Mr Ryan did not disappoint - he submitted all four of his opponents, one in overtime to take the gold. It was a fascinating tournament for him as several people who had defeated him when he was younger were present. However, there was no stopping him tonight as he showed many excellent entries and finishes to submission holds. It was a superb demonstration of our vision of jiu jitsu - control that leads to submission. Mr Eddie Bravo continues to put on a strong and exciting show that promotes a new vision of the sport.

Heavyweights: Very often people ask me whether they should train differently based upon their size. In truth, I train my heavyweights exactly the same way I train my lightweights. I find that they adapt very well in time and often surprise their opponents in the heavyweight division with their agility and transitions. Here one one Georges St-Pierre's best friends, who we call "Big Will" (I have no idea why 😉) shows how a heavyweight can easily adapt our ashi garami leg lock system at a recent grappling event in Canada. It always pleases me when people confound people's expectations. Big Will enters and rolls around the leg like a man half his size to secure a very nice heel hook indeed 😊 Unfortunately his understanding of the rules was not as good as his leg locking skills and he was immediately disqualified as heel hooks were illegal in this tournament! Oops! 😉😉 Still, the physical lesson of size being less relevant to movement than most people think is there to be seen 😊😊

Assembling the troops: The day before EBI 8 in Los Angeles I had the pleasure of teaching a seminar on back attack systems at my good friend Shawn Williams school.
We turned the technical lesson into a great final workout for Gordon Ryan prior to the big show. My good friends Romulo Barral and Kenny Florian came in - it is always such a pleasure to see them and work new moves and concepts. Here the LA squad relaxes after a great seminar and workout. Now for a relaxing night and final elements of weight cut and then it's on to the big show tomorrow.

Getting ready for the big show: Last workout complete. The squad relaxes after the last hard workout in NYC. Now it's travel time and some light work before the big show in Sunday night. Garry Tonon looks to have fallen still further into insanity, whilst Oliver Taza appears to have regressed back into a lost childhood. Thankfully Gordon Ryan appears somewhat normal - hope he can pull it off long enough to get on a plane and get to LA 😊😊

Last NYC training sessions: Gordon Ryan trains with brother Nicky and Garry Tonon works with Oliver Taza during the final build up to EBI 8 this weekend in LA. Here we work positional pressure drills, critical for creating the conditions where submissions will become available. They provide a great deal of intensity to simulate matches, but with greater safety for the athletes as the competition gets close and injury can be a real problem. EBI 8 will showcase many very talented athletes - some of whom have given Mr Ryan real trouble in the past. As such they will provide an excellent measure of his relative progress since the time they last met and also of the training program overall.

Welcome to Australia: Immediately after EBI 8 where Gordon Ryan squares off against a very talented array of potential opponents in a new weight class of 185 pounds, I shall head down to Australia to catch up with family for the first time since my hip replacement 😊😊 Whilst down there I shall observe the friendly local wildlife 😰😳🤕😖😱💀😉 So far the main topics for seminars in Sydney and Melbourne are "No gi butterfly guard vs saltwater crocodile attack," "Spider guard vs great white shark" and "half guard sweeps vs combined taipan snake and box jellyfish attack." Should be interesting...

Getting the gang back together: Big projects coming up with the challenges of multiple EBI's, special rule sets (for Garry Tonon in Florida in two weeks) and high profile superfight for Eddie Cummings (vs Geo Martinez) and Gordon Ryan who has just been matched against the great Claudio Callasans, current ADCC world champion and a very dangerous and skilled adversary. With all these great challenges, training is getting very interesting indeed. Here, the squad relaxes after another structured session designed to build the skills needed to prevail in the face of these big challenges.

Give me a lever long enough and I shall move the world: Chris Weidman and Gordon Ryan experiment with lever and fulcrum together. We work in a sport that is largely mechanical in nature. Learning to impose mechanical advantage on to a resisting opponent is our obsession. Ultimately you do not defeat your opponent - the laws of physics do it through your body. Look at jiu jitsu through the prism of physics and mechanics and a whole new world will emerge before your eyes and you will never the see the game in the same fashion again.

When the match is over: Most people only analyze their defeats - that is why so many athletes say they learn the most from their losses rather than their victories. It is very important that you analyze even your victories. Any truthful analysis of a match will show that in most cases the outcome could have gone the other way if just a few things were changed. This is good news when you lose, but worrying when you win. In order to make victory a habit rather than an enjoyable accident, you must investigate thoroughly what was good and bad about your performance and what concrete steps you will take to improve your faults and maintain your strengths. In this way you ensure progress over time - the fundamental goal of every training program- and create conditions where one victory can lead to others. Here, young Nicky Ryan talks frankly to me about what he could have done better whilst holding the gold medal in his hand - a great attitude that explains much of his current success and points to a bright future

Contingency plans: One of the few certainties of combat is this: at some point things will go wrong. When they do go wrong, they tend to do so quickly and in ways you had not anticipated. It is crucial then, that you have contingency plans worked out in advance to deal with bad situations. Half of the story of victory is not losing - you must be able to work out of potential means of losing and back into means of winning. Having clear and well defined plans for defense and escape ironically helps your offense, as it gives you the confidence to take risks on offense, knowing that if you should find yourself on the defense after failed offense, you will have the means to get out and resume your offense. If you don't believe in your defensive skills, you will avoid any kind risk that may expose that weakness. Here Gordon Ryan begins his warm up with our defensive contingency plans prior to a bout. People talked a lot about his winning offense in this match, but often overlook that it was built on the foundation of belief in his defense.

Walking away from the scene of another leg lock crime: I am always impressed by composure in athletes. A huge part of excellence in jiu jitsu is excellence in problem solving. Unwarranted emotion, excitement or distraction is the opposite of what we need when solving problems. Our best problem solving moments are in our states of focused calm - this ought to be reflected in our jiu jitsu practice. No matter how stressful the situation you find yourself in may be, realize that success will come in the form of technical solutions to problems, not appeals to our emotional side. Here, young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years of age, shows the match maturity of a much older man as he walks away from victory at the recent Gracie Nationals event where he won a super fight against a tough opponent.

Getting the little things right: We are all involved in a sport where the smallest errors can have the deepest ramifications. So many times I see tiny errors that resulted in failure at critical times - failures that meant an athlete can let victory slip from his grasp and then a short time later suffer defeat in its place. It is so easy to gloss over details that are easy to ignore until the day you really need them. Rest assured that when you think you know a given move, you don't. You have merely achieved a level of competence that you currently find satisfactory. One day in the future you will find yourself in a situation where that level of competence proves inadequate - so keep learning those additional details and nuances. Discipline in this regard is a big part of what separates champions from the crowd. Here, Georges St-Pierre works on his ashi garami attacks with my friend Carl Massaro as I add some ideas. The look on Mr Massaro's face suggests a level of competency has been achieved, but like a true champion, Mr St-Pierre keeps looking deeper into the lock.

This man is extremely pissed off: I have just informed him that all training today will be limited to IBJJF rules...no heel hooks, no leg reaping...if you let your partner pass your guard you lose the match...it was just a joke...please don't kill me sir 😜 Still, his reaction was not as extreme as Eddie Cummings - he tried to stab me with a plastic fork!

Controlled aggression: Ultimately the goal of all combat is victory. This requires at some point the notion of defeating an opponent through physical harm or the threat of physical harm. At some point we have to take the fight to the opponent in a way that gives us victory, thus there must be some degree of aggression involved, sometimes more, sometimes less, depending upon our character and the context of the situation we find ourselves in. The problem we confront as beginners is that nature teaches very naive forms of aggression. Watch any street fight between untrained and inexperienced protagonists and you will see a comedic array of missteps, lost opportunities and unforced errors as the fearless combatants try to express their aggression with what little knowledge they have. The various martial arts require us to direct our aggression through thick layers of technique and strategy. This requires of us all a large measure of self control - in the mental and physical turmoil of combat, we have to insist upon precise mechanical details and refined movement; all set in the context of an overall plan that directs our technique. Building this mindset of a disciplined, methodical, detail oriented inner state whilst engaged in extreme physical turmoil is one of the most import aspects of our training. This is why live sparring must always be the foundation of an effective training program and why those who engage in live sparring have a huge advantage over those that do not. Here, young Nicky Ryan shows the kind of inner mental composure that allows him to focus on all the required mechanical details required for successful application of a heel hook variation he favors - all set during a tough match against a talented, knowledgeable opponent. There is no emotion here - just cold calculation - there will be time for emotion later

Chris Weidman shows his dangerous positional and strangulation skills in training today. He has a sense for opportunity that is a hallmark of champions - once he makes his decision there is no hesitation - that, combined with refined technical skills, makes him a formidable opponent both in training and competition

Training vs fighting: one of my favorite aspects of UFC champions Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman is that when they come to train in my classes they always pull guard at the onset of sparring and work bottom position - this despite the fact they they could easily take down everyone in the room if they chose to. They recognize that the value of training here is in submission grappling, so they expose themselves to that as much as possible in the time they have. They work on their submission grappling skills, even though that will make their work much harder - they will work their takedown training with specialists in that area at another location better suited to that skill. This willingness to come into a room and trade skills with specialists is what keeps them learning and improving over time - and yes - both of them give our submission specialists hell even in our specialized domain! 😉 They recognize the need for an MMA athlete to see the big picture of skill enhancement for their sport overall as far more important than winning anonymous battles in training rooms by avoiding the skills utilized there and stalling away the training time. They come to gain skills rather than to learn to avoid them. Here Georges St-Pierre works bottom position with Robson Gracie during a tough afternoon training session with the squad.

Nicky Ryan - Locked out! Young Nicky Ryan, just 15 years old, was matched with older 10th Planet prodigy Derek Rayfield today at Gracie Nationals. Originally he was to compete in the adult tournament but was apparently pulled into a superfight by Mr Bravo himself under EBI rules. Nicky Ryan attacked with submissions and positional pressure before locking in a very tight heel hook variation to get the submission victory and reward for all his hard training. It is very exciting to see what this young man can do out on the mats - lots more to come 😊😊😊

Carrying the flag: In modern MMA, most people see an individual art like jiu jitsu as a component of the total fight game. For some, that component is more than for others, but regardless, it is never more than a component. Demian Maia is one of a handful of elite MMA fighters who use only a very pure form of jiu jitsu as his whole game, not a component. His fights look like a perfect statement of the traditional approach to BJJ - takedown, positional advance, working through a hierarchy of pins culminating in submission. In bottom position - recover guard, sweep, submit or stand back up and look for takedowns. That he is able to get such a traditional approach to work at such a high level is remarkable. Even more remarkable is the fact that Mr Maia appears to be getting better at this approach with every fight - remarkable for a man of 38 in a young mans sport. One of the most interesting coaching assignments of my career was helping Chris Weidman fight Demian Maia. Mr Weidman had outstanding jiu jitsu skills, so I was not worried going into the fight - even though he took it on only 17 days notice. In truth however, Mr Maia has greatly improved since then. When he fought Mr Weidman, he was trying to add kickboxing to his skill set. In my opinion this actually reduced his effectiveness and made him an easier opponent to beat. When he went down a weight division he went back to his jiu jitsu and refined it in a way that has made him far better now than he was earlier. His traditional jiu jitsu style has not proven popular with many MMA fans, but he will always be one of my favorites. In a world of trash talking, brawling entertainers, he stands out as a man who has dedicated his life to control - both of himself and his opponents - so that he can achieve the martial ideal of bloodless victories in a violent sport. All MMA fighters use some jiu jitsu, but I cherish watching the fights of this man who uses nothing but jiu jitsu. He has a tough fight ahead with Carlos Condit, but win or lose, I will always appreciate the exceptional work of this lone flag bearer of our sport.

Grapple Boxing: My average day is mostly concerned with teaching jiu jitsu, but sometimes my students compete in MMA and then I teach a very different curriculum which I call grapple boxing. This is the merging of grappling and striking technique on the floor - very different from pure jiu jitsu. I always hated the usual term for this skill "ground and pound" as it implies that only the athlete on top who has performed the takedown does the striking - which is not true at all. Moreover, the term "pound" implies a brutish, clumsy activity rather than a highly refined skill, which it certainly is at the higher levels. My students Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman were both masters of this critical element of MMA and both could inflict severe damage in seconds. Developing a system of grapple boxing was one of the most interesting and rewarding elements of my coaching career - it was done during the change over of MMA from its beginnings as a single discipline activity to the modern era. It created new skills not seen in twentieth century arts (I suspect they have not been seen in such detail since the Ancient Greek Pankration) and it was thrilling to be a small part of that movement in the sport. I had the privilege of working with students who learned and used it extremely well. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows great poise as he unleashes grapple boxing technique on Carlos Condit - himself a fine grapple boxer during their titanic championship match in Montreal

All limbs working in unity: When beginners come to jiu jitsu, they grapple primarily with their arms. As they gain in skill, they learn to grapple with their legs. Mastery however, will only come when they come to use their arms and legs in unison. Your legs provide the horsepower to your bottom game, your arms (through grips) provide the ability to apply that horse in meaningful ways to your opponent. Think of your legs as the engine, your arms as the transmission that allows you to apply that power to your opponents body. Here Eddie Cummings shows fine unity of purpose between upper and lower body work - legs and arms working in unison to destabilize his opponent in directs that will set up his attacks Photo by Tiago Molinos

Misunderstandings: Quite often I get questions that make me believe there is a misunderstanding as to what my vision of good jiu jitsu is. Many people appear to believe that I favor leg lock attacks over other forms of submissions. This is a natural mistake to make, as the most distinctive and obvious feature of my students work in grappling competition, and that which most obviously makes them stand apart from other competitors, is the use of a new approach to leg locking. In fact this is not the case. One of my major goals as a coach was to correct what I saw as a long standing weakness in traditional jiu jitsu, a lack of effective submissions systems to the lower body. Correcting this weakness has been a major part of my work - however, this correctional work and coaching goals must be distinguished from my notion of what constitutes the ideal of jiu jitsu. My ideal is simple to state - I believe that jiu jitsu players should be able to attack the whole body with submissions with equal efficacy. This (mostly) means legs, arms and neck. If I show any bias in submissions, it is in favor of strangleholds (shime waza) over joint locks (kansetsu waza). But my ideal is a player who can attack the whole body with great and equal effect. Visitors to our training sessions are often surprised to be caught in volleys of leg locks arm locks and strangles. Afterwards they say they expected the leg locks, but were surprised by the arm locks and strangles. This is the ideal we must strive for. If you limit your attacks to one part of the body, they become easy to defend, but defending the whole body against determined and skillful attacks is a difficult task indeed. Here Garry Tonon shows his attacking versatility with a strong strangle attempt on Ralek Gracie, progressing towards an armlock, and ultimately finishing his opponent with a leg lock - a fine expression of our style in action photo by Jeff Chu

Intensity levels: I am often asked "what level of intensity ought I to train in my daily jiu jitsu sessions?" A basic demand of the sport is that we can control bigger stronger opponents doing their best to defeat us - that is, an opponent operating at maximum intensity. Clearly then, we cannot completely avoid hard training sessions where we spar at maximum power. The problem is however, that training at maximum intensity usually has two effects. First, it tends to increase the severity and frequency of physical injuries which can often harm progress. Second, when we operate at maximum intensity, most athletes will limit themselves to their favorite moves (tokui waza) as these work best in tough situations. The result is that if we always train in this manner, our skill set does not expand as we limit ourselves to our current tokui waza. The opposite extreme is where we never spar or only spar in a very soft fashion. This means we never get to use our technique at full power and thus never develop the fine interplay between our physical body and our knowledge set. This usually results in failure to be able to apply the techniques in a harsh competitive situation and the lack of necessary physicality to apply theoretical knowledge. Finding a happy medium between these two extremes is the goal of a good progressive program. Different athletes will find a different balance, but each must monitor his or her progress over time to see if they are in the right track. Here Jake Shields gets some hard work in against Gordon Ryan. Mr Shields often visits before a match, so typically training sessions with him are very physical. However, when he vacations I always make a point of having him spar with the blue belts to work new techniques and make technical progress

Uchi Mata! One of the most versatile and high percentage upper body throws will always be uchi mata - the inner thigh throw. It has so many applications both with and without the gi. It is equally useful as a proactive attacking throw and as a reactive counter to takedowns. Some of the moves of our sport are so fundamental that it is difficult to succeed in the sport without having them in your Arsenal -
Uchi mata is a good example. All jiu jitsu students should be familiar with it and be able to apply it. Students must be able to discern the truly essential movements of the sport and use these as the foundation of their game. On top of that foundation they can add their own favorites to give their game individuality and personality, but the essentials can not be passed over. Here Garry Tonon launches grappling stand out Dillon Danis with a well applied uchi mata at the ADCC world grappling championships photo by Tiago Molinos

The big show: There is nothing like a big prize fight to get people's attention. All of the world's great sports have their appeal - but none of them have such a primal appeal as fighting. Other sports are ritualized, sublimated combat, but a prize fight is combat itself - so much more basic and direct. Love it or hate it - no one will ignore it when it unfolds in front of them. It is like a look back at our common ancestral past and as such, we are all involved at some level. The appeal seems to treble when the two protagonists appear to genuinely dislike each other. I believe this is because most people enter and understand violence on an emotional level. Most people only get into confrontation when their emotions are aroused. A professional fighter must be able to fight cold, even against someone they like. For him or her it is a contest of skills. Most people have a hard time relating to this as they lack the technical knowledge of fighting to understand what is going on - but emotions everyone can understand - hence the appeal. The fighters themselves must be very careful in these circumstances. Managing the emotions prior to and during the fight is absolutely vital to success - many a fighter has drowned in the exhaustion of nervous energy in an overly emotional fight. Tonight's match between Mr Diaz and Mr McGregor will be a fascinating example of an emotionally charged fight where emotion and professionalism must be reconciled.

Structured training: The overwhelming majority of work that I observe when watching people train is unstructured. It is simply two people or a group of people coming together and sparring for a time, perhaps some random practice of a move or set of moves. This is unfortunate, as it limits the amount of progress that can be made in the time available. I much prefer a strongly structured practice where there is a clear goal as to what the athletes are trying to accomplish and a plan as to how that goal will be reached. I usually find this garners better long term results than random practice. We work in a sport where it is quite possible to put in considerable amounts of effort to make relatively little progress. Hard work is of little value of it is not going in a direction that favors forward progress. If students put as much effort into formulating a structure for their training as they did for the actual physical training, I am certain their progress would be better. People are often surprised at the skill level of some of the students I train, given the time they have been training. For example, when Eddie Cummings fought Augusto Tanquinho Mendes, Mr Cummings total time of jiu jitsu training was less than half the time Mr Mendes had been a black belt competing at world championship level (bear in mind Mr Mendes has defeated Rafa Mendes and Cobrinha in competition and is thus clearly at the very top of the game). Even more surprising given that Mr Cummings did not even start jiu jitsu until his late twenties. Yet a well structured training regimen allied with very hard work allowed him to match Mr Mendes positionally whilst dominating the submission exchanges. Paying attention to structure worked for him - it can for you too. Here I work with young Mikey Wilson and Nicky Ryan, we start by outlining our goals for the class and put them in the context of our training overall and then into concrete means of achieving them - then let the workout begin 😊😊

Reasonable expectations: Going into a bout of any kind there will always be huge amounts of uncertainty as to what will transpire. Nonetheless, No matter how uncertain the ultimate outcome and the action leading up to it may be, there are always going to be reasonable expectations that we can make about the upcoming match, based on the evidence we have prior to the bout. These reasonable expectations will determine the nature of our fight camp and even the final drills and warm ups just before the action starts. We begin with a detailed analysis of the opponent and match the strong and weak points we observe with what we believe are our own strong and weak points and start to devise a training program based around that preliminary analysis. Feedback from daily training sessions gives us an idea as to whether our program is going in directions we want and we make any necessary adjustments as time passes. Here you can see Gordon Ryan drilling with variations of heel hooks that we believed would be an effective part of the match based on what we observed and which would ultimately win his match with the great Keenan Cornelius. So strange to see this photo now and see the very move that would bring victory being rehearsed in front of Mr Cornelius immediately prior to the match. Photo by Luciana Marcos @to_fight_

Pre-bout tension: I remember once talking to the great Mike Tyson during the filming of The Ultimate Fighter TV show. He was impressed by the fact that our locker room pre fight was very relaxed with jokes and laughter between each warm up. He told us this was in stark contrast to his fights, where he said the atmosphere was like a funeral. I think every athlete has their own ideal mental state pre-bout (and that can change per opponent). Two of the most interesting are Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon, who seemingly run a full scale comedy routine prior to a match that always makes preparation fun. Here is Garry Tonon in mid story telling form about escapades from the night before as Gordon Ryan (out of picture) goes through solo drills. Photo by Luciana Marcos @to_fight_

Pre-match Talk: A fascinating part of the match between Gordon Ryan and Keenan Cornelius was not observed by most people. Shortly prior to the match, the referee came by the warm up mat to confirm the rules to the athletes. Mr Cornelius suggested a change to the prior rules. Initially it was deemed that if the athletes went out of bounds, they would be re-started in neutral standing position at the center of the mat. This was due to the difficulty of accurate re-starts in grappling positions. Mr Cornelius suggested this was not desirable, as it could lead to fleeing the mat as a response any submission threat and make the chance of successful submission much less likely, undesirable in a match where submission was the only means of victory. I was impressed by his suggestion. It conveyed a spirit of hunting for the submission and confidence in his ability to get to it and successfully follow through. Not to be outdone, Mr Ryan immediately agreed, even when the possibility of athletes going off the mat and onto the hardwood floors was mentioned as a possibility. It was a delight to see both athletes express a keen desire to get to a submission and prevent weak tactical escapes such as fleeing the mat and instead demand that any escape be a genuine technical escape. It set the tone for a great match in the tradition of the old school approach of whatever time it took to get the truest measure of victory- submission; with as little outside intervention as possible (Helio Gracie once fought an MMA fight that was over three hours long! And many of the early grappling matches went over an hour). It was deeply impressive to see the same spirit in both athletes and their confidence in their ability. Once the match began, both men were true to their word- there was almost no outside intervention in what was a very pure match where submission was the only possible result. A match of this style is not seen often these days, but it was a pleasure to be a small part of one as epic as this.

Pre-match drills and warm ups: Running Gordon Ryan through some pre-match grip fighting drills and warm ups minutes before his match with the great Keenan Cornelius. Interestingly, Mr Cornelius was just five feet away from us as we warmed up! Usually competitors warm up in separate areas, but this time we had a small common mat which was fun 😊 At this stage the work has been done and the drills serve mostly to prepare the athlete for physical activity and remind him or her of the main themes we have focused on in training, whilst keeping the athlete active enough to prevent negative thoughts emerging without unduly tiring him. The nature of the warm up will be greatly influenced by the rule set of the match and the style of the opponent. Here you can see a much more laid back approach than normal due to the anticipation of a long match against a very experienced and relaxed opponent.

Champion attitude: Gordon Ryan and brother Nicky Ryan, fresh off a weekend of victory and tough training camps leading up to it, back in the gym on Monday for morning and afternoon workouts 😊 Mr Gordon Ryan must now prepare for a very different challenge - EBI 8 - an entirely different rule set and thus a different training regimen. So inspiring to see them make the early start back to training.

Gold shines brightest: Chris Sodbinow, Nicky Ryan and Frank Rosenthal enjoy the fruits of hard work with first place medals - winning almost all matches by submission yesterday at grappling industries event and showcasing their rapidly growing skill sets. Always a pleasure to watch them tussle everyday in the gym, but even more so in open competition

New tricks: I always like a coaching challenge. When Jake Shields came to NYC prior to his fight with Rousimar Palhares- the most feared lock locker in MMA - he asked if I could help him defend the leg lock game. It seemed like a difficult assignment, as Mr Shields struggled in his initial sessions to defend moves that he had no training in. I told Mr Shields the only way to defend them is to learn the entire leg lock game. In a surprisingly short period of time he began making real progress. After a little training he went on to fight Mr Palhares in a controversial match where he successfully avoided the leg submissions of the Brazilian leg expert, only to get caught in an upper body submission. It did not matter - he saw the value in what he had seen. Soon he became a regular training partner with the squad. Mr Shields is a no-nonsense hard working sort of fellow who fit right in with the team. Very soon he started telling me of success in training rooms around the country with his new skills. Last night, Mr Shields fought a professional grappling bout against MMA legend Lyoto Machida at an event run by Musclepharm. Mr Machida has always shown fine grappling skills in MMA and has a win against grappling champion Rafael Lavato in submission grappling. Mr Shields was able to show his great improvements in lower body submissions by locking in a very finely applied heel hook to force a submission and show that new skills can indeed be built on to an established game and that change is always possible if a commitment is made. It was a great result for Mr Shields and a testament to his dedication to come such a long way to learn and in his confidence to use new weapons in a battle against such a skilled foe. Here you can clearly see the great pressure he imparts upon Mr Machida that forces a submission on a very tough opponent.

Victory: Gordon Ryan relaxes after a titanic no time limit match against the great Keenan Cornelius. After an epic one and a half hour struggle of tactics and endurance, Mr Ryan prevailed via heel hook variation. Both men showed tremendous skill and tactical sense, but Mr Ryan was coming off a tremendous camp and preparation and his morale was high. After several near misses, he saw opportunity on the legs and took it to victory. Mr Cornelius showed great character in taking this fight, as he is an established superstar in the sport - to take a no time limit match against a youngster like Mr Ryan was a very commendable action on his part. Now the squad must resume training in preparation for EBI 8 and other future endeavors @jeffreyschu

Technique above all: Nicky Ryan at age 15 wins the adult advanced open weight division of Grappling Industries event showing a very finely developed leg lock game along with sound positional work. He closed out the first place with team mate Chris who also showed excellent submission skills via leg lock and sankaku. It is remarkable to see such a young man do so well against skilled adults. The photo shows how small he is compared with adults. And at 15 years old, he is not even close to adult strength levels yet. The ease and relaxed demeanor he shows when competing against grown men of high skill level bodes very well for this very talented young man.

The real significance of this week in Judo: Without question this has been the most successful week in American Olympic judo history. However, few people understand the deeper significance of what happened this week. A truly great Judoka, Isao Okano was once talking to a foreigner studying judo in Japan. He noted the foreigner was making a concerted effort to be as Japanese as possible- he was not just learning judo - he was learning to be Japanese. Okano remonstrated him, saying, "don't try to be Japanese, try to be the best American living in Japan studying Judo that you can be." He was making a very important point. When you try to copy another person or cultures style, you lose your own identity and usually you never perform as well as the person you copied. A much better approach is to build a style that may have components you took from other influences, but whose totality is uniquely your own. This is exactly what Jimmy Pedro is doing so successfully with USA Judo. He is creating a unique American approach to the sport based around disciplined gripping, superior transitions from standing to ground and very strong ne waza attacks on the floor to create a winning team and great success. American judo always seemed to suffer from a lack of identity. Attempts to copy Japanese and European models bought only limited success. Mr Pedro has found a style quite different from our competitors and has forged a winning team with it. Interestingly, this style goes in direct opposition to the current rules of modern judo, which greatly favor athletes who use mostly standing technique, but such is the strength of his approach that his athletes are winning regardless. The future will tell if this model will be able to survive the rule set of the modern sport, but the results so far are more promising than anything we have seen in American judo history. With the rise of grappling as a sport in North America and the cross training many athletes partake in, American ne waza will only get stronger and hopefully create a new generation of athletes for this burgeoning American approach to the sport and the strong sense of identity it has created 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Golden Girl: Another incredible day for American Judo as Kayla Harrison wins her second Olympic gold medal! She is the team mate of Travis Stevens, winner of the Olympic silver medal yesterday. Like Mr Stevens, her primary coach is the great Olympian Jimmy Pedro, who has done an incredible job preparing the American squad for the Rio Olympics. I remember Mr Stevens telling me on many occasions how talented Ms Harrison is and how she was not only the best in the world on the mats, but also a truly good and admirable person off the mats - she has an incredible story behind her road to Olympic glory that is an inspiration to all who research it. She showed again how strong the American squad is in Ne Waza (ground grappling) and how the American team is using this skill set to advantage against the world's best. What an incredible year for American Judo, for Ms Harrison, Mr Stevens and Mr Pedro. America and the world grappling community is so lucky to witness their work and success 😊😊😊🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸😊😊😊

One great deed begets another: I am always impressed by the way in which an outstanding deed by one student can serve as a catalyst to the other students and lift their performance. Inspired by the incredible performance of teammate Travis Stevens in taking a silver medal in the Olympics yesterday, the training room was alive with standout performances today. There really is wisdom to the old idea that people feed off their surroundings- when we surround ourselves with outstanding people, each one lifts the next in a chain reaction that can produce something truly great - this may be an individual sport in competition, but in training it is a team that makes the difference. Finding the balance between our own individual ambitions and those of the people around us is the key to longevity in the sport and success within it.

Olympic hero: A massive congratulations to Travis Stevens who represented our country with such brilliance and skill today in the pinnacle of all sports - the Olympic Games. Travis fought through some of the best Judoka in the world to get into the finals, defeating his opponents with a superb blend of powerful and disciplined gripping, mixed with a superb sense of opportunity and technical precision on the mat. One could not hope to see a better display of the fusion of standing grappling (tachi waza) and ground grappling (ne waza). The years of hard work under his great coach, Jimmy Pedro (himself a master of the interface between standing and ground) paid off with a memorable path to the finals. Mr Stevens is the first American male to win a silver medal in Olympic judo since 1992. In doing so he showed that the fusion of standing and ground grappling can produce incredible results at the very highest levels. The squad is so proud of this amazing achievement- made all the more special by the fact that he fought not just for himself or his team - but for his nation. Thank you, Travis Stevens, for representing our nation and our sport so superbly. Can't wait to see you back in NYC
😊😊😊🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸😊😊😊

Integrated grappling: At the ADCC World Championships, Garry Tonon hits a nice variation of Ouchi Gari, one of his favorite takedowns, on the very talented Dillon Dannis, a fine student of Marcelo Garcia. This takedown set up what would prove to be the decisive finish to the match, a powerful inverted heel hook. It represents a good example of skills taken from judo and wrestling integrated into the submission wrestling game with very positive results. What good are powerful submissions on the floor without the ability to bring the fight to the mat? Conversely, what good are throws and takedowns if you cannot do anything effective to a grounded opponent? Only when the two are merged do you get a truly effective fighter. I have never seen a jiu jitsu fighter get worse by adding judo and wrestling to his or her study, but I have seen many limit their development by failing to do so. Photo by Tiago Molinos

Any time, any place: The only constant in the life of a professional athlete is training. Often a busy competition schedule require extensive travel commitments. That does not mean training can be sacrificed. The athlete must be prepared to work out effectively in unfamiliar surroundings at whatever time is available with whomever is available and still get profitable work in. This requires planning and communication with the training partners you meet in location so that they become a temporary part of your program, rather than a challenge to be faced - there will be enough challenge out under the lights at the big show. Here, Garry Tonon gets good work in at Ralph Gracie's school in Northern California prior to a show. Ralph is brother to my teacher, Renzo Gracie - the family connection always makes for a welcome training location when possible.

The best laid plans of mice and men: As a coach one of the main aspects of my job is to conceive plans of action that raise the likelihood of an athlete winning an event. Yet despite our best intentions, there is always a good chance of things going awry that require spontaneous change and adaption in the face of unexpected circumstances. All the major MMA fight camps I have been a part of furnished unforeseen incidents and drama that could not have been predicted and which had to be overcome. Probably the most flawless and well run fight camp I ever saw was that of Georges St-Pierre in preparation for Nick Diaz (Interestingly, his prior fight camp with Carlos Condit was probably the worst). We had an excellent game plan, the physical preparation was excellent, superb choice of sparring partners, all match contingencies covered, no injuries, no backstage drama, perfect weight cut - everything was perfect - until the very night before the fight when Georges drank some watermelon juice for rehydration that had been too long out of the fridge and got a badly upset stomach. He spent the entire night vomiting. It was so sad to see such a perfect camp get ruined at the last minute by such a minor oversight. The night of the fight, Mr St-Pierre came in underweight and drained. We had to curtail the warm up for fear of exhausting him before the bout even began. There was some drama with Mr Diaz's camp insisting that both sides have their hand wraps double checked. This was done, but we did not want them to see how bad Mr St-Pierre looked, so he had to put on an act of confidence and vigor when they came in the dressing room. In the end, Mr St-Pierre showed why he was a great champion that night, putting on a dominant shut-out performance to win a unanimous decision - no one in the audience would have guessed how serious a problem he had to overcome. He used a system of pacing the rounds and timing the takedowns and allowing standing escapes to maintain the pace of the fight whilst controlling the action but at the same time, not exhausting himself. It worked brilliantly and the problem was overcome. This kind of adaptation is crucial in fight preparation at all levels.

Match preparation: Gordon Ryan prepares for his upcoming bout with the immensely talented Keenan Cornelius, without question among the finest grapplers in the world today. Mr Cornelius is equally talented gi and no gi, positional skills and submission skills. He brings a considerable weight, height and experience advantage, but Mr Ryan is very happy to take on such a great man - an attitude I see so often among emerging champions. Here we work on positional skills in open guard scenarios, an area that Mr Ryan often impresses me.

Working for advantage: Most of the game of jiu jitsu is the business of gaining some form of preliminary advantage and once advantage is attained, launching a decisive attack with the intention of finishing the match. In the beginner levels, advantage is typically understood only in terms of relative position - getting past your opponents legs into upper body pins. As you go higher into the sport the notion of advantage must be greatly expanded. Here I work with young standout Nicky Ryan, who at fifteen years of age has a very deep understanding of advantage in grappling.
We are battling simultaneously for balance and foot position advantage and it looks like Mr Ryan is doing a better job than me! Time to abandon ship! 😊😊

Everything begins with stance and posture: When teaching I always emphasize the iron law of stance of posture - that the human body is capable of almost limitless different configurations in stance/posture and that for any given task there is a posture that optimizes the athletes ability to perform that task. Our job is to be able to find that posture under pressure and maintain it for as long as we need to perform that task whilst shifting seamlessly from posture to posture, stance to stance, as our tasks change second by second during a bout. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows near perfect posture in the open position as he squares off with the very dangerous Josh Koschek, who displays a slightly different posture more appropriate to the skills he possesses. Both men have their respective tasks and both have chosen the ideal initial posture relative to those tasks. So often I see athletes who have a clear idea of what they want to do, but find themselves working much harder than they have to due to poor stance and posture

When one begins to learn a move in jiu jitsu, one starts with learning the correct mechanics. Ultimately however, you must go far beyond this and learn to apply moves against SKILLED RESISTANCE. Only then can you hope to win at high levels. You must be able to anticipate and overcome even the most determined counters to the moves you employ. Here Olivier Taza follows an opponent through a vigorously applied defense to a heel hook variation - breaking through the resistance and earning the submission at a recent show in England.

Calm under pressure: One of the most crucial attributes of good competitors is the ability to maintain calm under pressure. The ability to solve problems as they arise during the match is absolutely crucial to victory. Your ability to solve problems is directly related to your ability to maintain as calm a mind as possible as you work. If you look at the faces of elite athletes in all sports as they engage in tough competition, it is surprising how calm and composed they look despite the immense pressure they are under. Here Ethan Crelinsten works hard against teammate Frank Rosenthal - both men showed excellent use of leg locks and back attacks at the recent Finishers Sub Only tournament and fought a pitched battle in the final. You can practically see their minds working to solve problems as they battle for control. This kind of internal control over our own mind and demeanor is a prerequisite of control over an opponent's body. It must be developed in the gym like any other skill - you will need it in competition outside the gym

Georges St-Pierre marvels at the incredible sleeping technique of Garry Tonon napping between morning and noon classes. Note the very advanced "inverted mummy" posture utilized by Mr Tonon. A posture that would asphyxiate normal humans in their sleep whilst simultaneously resulting in a severely flattened face, yet somehow Mr Tonon manages to wake up from this and immediately drill high amplitude takedowns with Mr St-Pierre. Not quite sure what Mr Sigmund Freud would say about this sleeping posture, but I believe there is a clear subconscious desire to defend the neck at all times being shown here 😉

New Champion: Huge congratulations to new welterweight champion, Tyron Woodley. He dethroned the great Robbie Lawler in the weight division that has the most sentimental appeal to myself and so many fans. It has been a year of dramatic change in MMA. Robbie Lawler has been a very impressive champion indeed, but Mr Woodley showed patience and plan to wait for his title shot and when the chance came, he did what champions do - take a small opportunity and make the most of it - a spectacular KO on a man who seemed impervious to blows in championship fights. This was always going to be a clash between fight ending explosiveness in the early rounds versus incredible sustenance over five rounds. As so often happens, the quick starter inflicted damage from which no recovery was possible and he took a well deserved and spectacular victory.

Rainy Sunday afternoon: Grey day in Manhattan - perfect for a day of technical training with the squad. Georges St-Pierre and the team go over details and concepts at a pace that allows for skill progression and helps to avoid athlete burn out, a common problem for people competing many times a year. Ethan Crelinsten shows great work ethic by coming in for training the day after winning the 135 pound division of Finishers Sub Only event, where he used a combination of leg locks and back control to take first place. Tomorrow the weekly cycle of training begins anew with different intensity level and emphasis.

Size difference: The essential quality of jiu jitsu is to be able to control greater size and aggression with less. In the gym we are expected to spar with whoever you match up with in class, which often entails people larger than yourself. Some, like Garry Tonon, make it a feature of their competitive career also. His standout performances against big men like Marcus Almeida Buchecha, Roberto Cyborg Abreu, Vinny Magalhaes, Rousimar Palhares and here, Ralek Gracie, provide inspiration and live up to the ideals of jiu jitsu. Matches of this kind force us to emphasize different aspects of body and limb positioning, along with tactical considerations, in order to cope with the weight disadvantage. While it would be simply dishonest to claim that size and strength are not very important in determining the outcome of bouts ( there is a reason why there are weight/age/sex divisions in combat sports), it is nonetheless remarkable how training and tactics can allow a smaller person to perform very well against much larger people in what often become thrilling underdog matches.

Ups and downs: This photo was taken prior to Chris Weidman's first fight with Anderson Silva. After battling past all the other contenders for a title shot, Mr Weidman suffered a catastrophic injury to his shoulder in a training accident. I still remember getting the gut wrenching news from him via phone - it seemed his dream of a UFC title fight against the greatest middleweight of all time was gone. Soon after, Mr Weidman went through major reconstructive surgery. Shortly after the surgery, my good friend Doug Pelinkovic and I went to see him bring what money we had, food and talk to help. Soon after this he would experience terrible loss again, losing his house to Hurricane Sandy. To anyone in that room that night, it would seem impossible that this man would soon come back in the best shape of his life with near perfect preparation and decisively defeat Mr Silva to attain his dream. Looking at this photo now I remember the doubts and fears we all felt that night and marvel at the the outcome brought about by dedication to a program, a dream and unshakeable self belief. There will always be ups and downs in our lives. In those dark times it is crucial to keep your dreams alive by setting realistic goals in a program toward first recovery, then regaining your former level, and then moving forward to new levels. An odd twist to this photo is that Mr Pelinkovic would shortly afterwards suffer a terrible accident that required multiple reconstructive surgeries. I was already suffering from severe hip problems that ultimately required hip replacement surgery- so everyone in the photo went through problems requiring major surgery. As each man went through problems, he found inspiration and assistance in the actions and achievements of the other two in ways that helped him return to his place in the sport. This kind of mutual support is a crucial addition to the goal setting mentioned earlier. One of the few certainties that life offers us is fluctuation in fortune. Creating the needed conditions to create good times out of the darkness of bad times is critical to your longevity in the sport and indeed, life in general.

Professional cornering: Here is an interesting photo. It was taken less than a second before the submission victory of Garry Tonon over Ralek Gracie at Metamoris 7. Mr Tonon has secured ushiro ashi garami and is faking a figure four toe hold to create a reaction to enter a kneebar variation. The trap has been set and all that remains is to shift his left arm to Mr Gracie's leg - in half a second he will do so and victory will be his. Garry knows this, I know it and so does Gordon Ryan. We have all seen and done the move a thousand times - the only ones who don't know what is about to happen are Mr Gracie himself and the audience members you see behind us. Yet if you look at myself and Mr Ryan you will see no emotion on our faces - though we know already that victory is at hand. There is no sense of jubilation, though we know victory is certain. So often I see cornermen, even in high level events, who essentially function as cheer leaders rather than cornermen. The central idea of a corner man is to offer advice that leads to performance improvement. Yet I usually see behavior that does nothing to improve performance. All too often the advice is so general as to be useless. "Get out of there!" Does not help an athlete escape a pin. Advice must be specific and purposeful rather than general or emotional. I believe there are a few exceptions where certain kinds of emotional cornering can have value, but in the majority of cases, dispassionate, technically useful, tactically sound advice is needed, rather than cheerleading and fervent emotional appeals. MMA cornering is further complicated by the notion of physical recovery between rounds, but in grappling events this is not the case. Every time one acts as a corner man, one must ask - "is this action aiding my athlete's performance?" When those actions stem primarily from emotion and ineffectual generalities, the answer is usually no.

Teaching atmosphere: Visiting students are often quite surprised by the informal and relaxed teaching style we use. I am blessed to have highly motivated students which allows me to teach in this way. The high standards quickly create an atmosphere where the lazy and unmotivated either quickly reform themselves or seek calmer waters. I always teach to the best people in the room. I find this has a way of lifting everyone's level regardless of belt rank and pulls the best out of everyone. Though some students may initially struggle with this, I have grown to have great faith in people's ability to adapt and improve according to the level of the room as a whole. In a short time, they rise in level and make the needed improvements to keep up. A key role is played by the senior students, who often provide inspiration and informal help. Less advanced students can easily observe that the more successful ones have good learning habits - they pay close attention to instruction, spar in an experimental rather than win at all costs manner, and place equal emphasis upon offense and defense in training. Here Eddie Cummings shows his typical attention level in a mixed gi and no gi class. Even when the technique shown (a standing throw utilizing the gi) does not apply to his immediate situation (upcoming EBI 7 no gi tournament) he is actively looking for general principles that might apply to his game, thus improving himself whilst providing an excellent example to others.

MMA and Jiu Jitsu: The link between the two always fascinates me and reflections upon one often illuminate aspects of the other in unexpected ways. Here some of the MMA standouts at RGA, Rafael Natal, Nieman Gracie, Felipe Nover, Joao Zeferino and friends relax after another tough early Monday morning workout. So strange to think of NYC on a typical Monday morning, millions of people going to office jobs, getting children to school, wondering whether they should add an extra sugar in their coffee or not - whilst these young men practice strangling each other, breaking each other's limbs and getting into position to strike each other - such are the different directions we all choose in life!! 😉 In the end, they are all jobs, and like all jobs, those performed with passion, attention to detail, and expertise gained over time - in an area that you believe enriches your life in some way, will be done best, regardless of what form of work one chooses.

Teaching every aspect of the game: Here is an interesting shot of myself and Gordon Ryan cornering Garry Tonon during his victorious match with Ralek Gracie from a week ago. I don't just teach my students how to grapple. I teach them how to create a complete system of support for an athlete or a team mate through every aspect of preparation and match. Cornering is a skill like any other. I believe there are ways of doing it which can increase by some degree the odds of an athlete winning a match. I knew that I would not be available to corner Garry Tonon at Fight2Win Pro 8 the following week, so I had Gordon Ryan at my side at Metamoris 7 to learn and practice cornering for Fight2Win Pro 8 in seven days time. He did a superb job - helping take his team mate through to another leg lock victory. Metamoris 7 was thus an interesting evening for me as I coached two men in two completely different roles simultaneously - Garry Tonon as an athlete and Gordon Ryan as a corner man/coach. I am happy to say both men passed their respective tests with excellent grades 😊😊

Back in action: Garry Tonon celebrates another submission win via heel hook over the very talented champion and coach, Dustin Akbari. The match was made more interesting by the fact that Mr Akbari had narrowly defeated Mr Tonon when Mr Tonon was a brown belt. The rematch offered a chance to gauge Mr Tonon's skill development since that time and the progressive nature of our training system. The match featured some excellent throws by Mr Akbari and half guard sweeps from Mr Tonon. In the end however, the game is always about control leading to submission and in this direction, Mr Tonon showed an interesting use of a scorpion ("lockdown " to 10th planet fans) to generate kuzushi (off balancing) into a submission hold - one of his favorite heel hook variations. Here he celebrates with the victors belt for Fight To Win, who put on a nice event and continue to grow as an organization

Counting down the days: The strain shows on the face of Eddie Cummings during the final workout before his fine victory at EBI 7. These are hard times for the athlete, with a mass of concerns centered around weight loss, strategy, countering the effects of performance anxiety and a host of other factors. Dealing with this is a huge part of the final outcome. As a coach I have to keep my athletes minds occupied in constructive, rather than destructive directions. Isolation and inactivity can be fatal here. Yet at the same time, I have to be sensitive to the individual psychology of the man entering the arena. Mr Cummings is rather like myself and needs his time alone balanced with attention. Here he ruminates after a grueling last day. In a few more days his taunt look would be replaced by a broad smile of victory under the lights at the big show, thousands of miles away from the sparse and claustrophobic basement in which all our preparation is done. @jeffreyschu

How far we have come: people beginning martial arts today are beneficiaries of the best thing that ever happened to modern combat arts- the MMA revolution. Whatever problems there might be with regards contemporary martial arts, they are insignificant compared with the state of martial arts when I was growing up. Without a means of testing effectiveness in combat, the martial arts scene of my youth was littered with wild eyed loonies passing themselves off as experts. The few diamonds in the rough did not have a venue to show real skills and instead had to contend against legions of ninjas, exotic kung fu gods, brick breaking demons and internal energy superheroes. The octagon did us the eternal favor of sweeping all that under the rug. Whenever I complain about the current state of jiu jitsu or MMA, I google old martial arts magazine covers and realize we have it pretty damn good nowadays. Check out this gem from my youth. When you see two white dudes in full ninja uniform talking about competing in an arena "where the only trophy is survival" - you KNOW it's legit! 😉 Wait...those eyes...they seem so...familiar...Eddie Cummings??!! How old did he say he was??!! Could he be one of the long lost "warriors of the night?!" 😄😄

Who is this guy? Why does he savagely lock his hands on his chest and violently twist and bridge in his sleep? What on earth is he dreaming about? Why does he say the word "snap" before smiling and drifting back to sleep? What a weirdo! Perhaps I should alert the air Marshall...

Lock out! Garry Tonon shows near perfect form in a variation of a knee bar attack last night in LA against Ralek Gracie. Such was the technical precision of the move that it got an instant tap against a very skilled opponent around 40pounds heavier than himself. It was nice to see Mr Tonon broadening his competition leg lock repertoire in such fine fashion. Touched down back in old NYC - heading straight to Renzo Gracie Academy from the airport to teach - perhaps kneebars from ushiro ashi garami might be the subject matter today 😉 photo by Scott Hirano

A fun day teaching a seminar on back attack system at my good friend Shawn William's academy in LA shortly before Garry Tonon's bout with Ralek Gracie. Always a pleasure to catch up with old friends and gauge the progress of his students whilst keeping them up to date with developments in our game 😊

Big weekend for the squad: Garry Tonon wins a hard fought match against a very tough Ralek Gracie via leg lock submission. It was a fascinating camp and match as we knew very little about the opponent other than the fact that he was around 40 pounds heavier than Mr Tonon and came from a very fine grappling pedigree. Mr Gracie showed excellent defensive poise and training, a credit to his family heritage, but in the end, Mr Tonon was able to break through successfully with a fine variation of a kneebar out of ushiro ashi garami. Here we all relax with the two stars of the weekend - Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon, who won every match they entered this weekend via submission and advanced our method of grappling in a way that was very pleasing indeed. Now I have to go straight to airport and fly home to NYC and get ready to teach tomorrow morning!

Yeah...we look totally normal. The squad heads out into the night in LA looking for a meal after a long but victorious night. You know it's a bad day when a bald dude with rashguard and a fanny pack looking like a demented Captain Jean Luc Picard impersonator is the most normal looking guy in the photo 😉 God help the people of LA

Big night for the squad in LA at EBI 7: Eddie Cummings wins again - every match by submission in regulation time to win the maximum possible prize money of $20,000. Mr Cummings was able to extend his submission range in this event and incorporate elements of our back attack system which proved so effective for Gordon Ryan in the previous EBI. This system will, I have no doubt, prove as game changing as our leg lock system. It gave his performance a well rounded look featuring both Le g locks and strangles and exploded the myth that his game is one dimensional. His game simply looked several levels above his competitors and shows how he is continuing to make technical progress at a rapid rate. Interestingly the other competitors seem to be following our lead in submission grappling style, but lacked the nuances to make it work. Now we will go on to tomorrow where Garry Tonon will square off with Ralek Gracie in what will be a fascinating contrast in styles along with a big size advantage to Mr Gracie. Thank you as always for your interest in the exploits of the squad and our attempts to change the sport of submission grappling.

The subtleties of ashi garami: Whenever you attempt ashi garami, there will inevitably be some degree of exposure of your feet and legs to your opponents counters. This unavoidable fact must be factored into your plans as you launch your attacks. Sound knowledge of the many subtleties of foot and leg positioning is essential if you are to avoid being strongly countered as you attempt your own locks. A fascinating example of this occurred in what was probably the greatest leg lock battle of all time between leg locking maestros Garry Tonon and Rousimar Palhares. Mr Tonon shocked many by initiating all the leg locks in the match on the much larger and universally feared Mr Palhares. In characteristic style, Mr Palhares aggressively countered with his own locks. The crowd gasped as both men went hard for the break. Most people in the audience expected Mr Palhares to prevail due to his size and reputation as a leg breaker. Yet it was he who had to break away first. Mr Tonon did a fine job of positioning his feet in a manner that gave him mechanical advantage in this ferocious leg lock shoot out. Every jiu jitsu student must have faith in the idea that Mechanical advantage will prevail over size and aggression - this is the proposition upon which our entire sport is based - Mr Tonon showed his faith that night. Interestingly, as the match progressed, Mr Palhares stopped trying to counter leg lock and went straight to escape as a safety measure - such was the precision and effectiveness of Mr Tonon's leg attacks on his opponent. Here the two men go for their respective locks early in the match.

Progressive training programs: It is of the first importance that you design training programs that continually refine existing skills whilst adding new ones. So often I see people who make a certain amount of progress and then stop, often resulting in drop out or stagnation. When I first started training young Georges St-Pierre, he was just a blue belt. He would come down part time and learn what he could. When he first fought Matt Hughes, he was very inexperienced and his overall game, though filled with enthusiasm and talent, was unrefined. It was just his third fight in the octagon against the man who that time, was the most dominant welterweight in the sports history. Amazingly, Mr St-Pierre came out on fire and took Mr Hughes down and appeared to be winning the first round - only to be caught in a beginner level mistake and lose by armbar submission. The next time the two fought, a greatly matured Georges St-Pierre knocked Mr Hughes out to win the title. When they met a third time, Mr St-Pierre was a very good black belt in Jiu jitsu. I encouraged him to show this taking the fight to the floor and looking for submissions, even though the floor was Mr Hughes forte and it would have been safer to look for a standing KO as he had done in the second match. When the fight went to the floor it was immediately apparent just how much progress had been made. Mr St-Pierre easily passed guard into dominant pins and finished his legendary opponent with the very same armbar that he once lost to. Underneath the irony was an important lesson in progress. Time and training, ordered according to a rational plan, can completely reverse the relative skills levels of two athletes. It is so important that training programs be monitored to ensure progress is being made and that degeneration has not set in. Only in this way can you reasonably expect to defeat tomorrow the people who are beating you today.

Last training day in NYC: Last training day for the squad. As always, the idea is to take the athlete to a peak on the night of the big show. That means a juggling of conflicting demands and priorities that makes for an interesting last week. In this case it was particularly interesting as the two athletes involved have very different opponents in a completely different rule set and are themselves very different individuals. Here Eddie Cummings and I fervently discuss possible scenarios and problems whilst the supremely confident Garry Tonon looks on in bemusement at our folly.

When two truly horrible people like myself and Garry Tonon are looking happy and smiling menacingly whilst looking at the same thing out on the mats, that can mean only one thing...some poor hapless student has royally screwed up a move that was just taught - probably locked a kimura with hands improperly placed, or messed up ashi garami leg positioning or even worse, Eddie Cummings attempting any move in the standing position. We are happy because we are about to launch into a fusillade of verbal abuse and torment that will involve several different languages, evoking many gods and as many different generations of slang and curse words as we can yell in the time allotted. #horriblesenseisatwork

Four cameramen died in the taking of this photo...Eddie Cummings prepares to defend his belt at EBI 7 this weekend. Hell! I'd be too scared to take his picture - forget about the belt! 😉

Composure: When one looks at the best jiu jitsu players in competition, it is clear that the majority of them exhibit a very impressive degree of composure as they compete - even when they are under tremendous physical pressure. This stands in contrast to an average beginner class where most of the students grunt and grimace their way through the session, even when under very little pressure. This transition from grunting beginner to composed expert is critical to your long term success. Only when you are in a relatively composed and mentally relaxed state can you work methodically through the many small details required to make the moves work and make second by second adaptations to your opponents resistance. Remember this: it is not enough to merely defeat your opponent in training. You must be able to understand HOW and WHY you defeated him, so that you can replicate and eventually improve upon that performance next time. If every muscle fiber in your body is in maximal tension and your lungs are on fire, you will assuredly not be able to recall what you did during the match to win and thus you will not remember the details that brought you victory and employ them upon subsequent opponents - thus ensuring poor rates of progress in training. Learn to keep your physical intensity levels at a level where you can think and remember the reasons for success and failure in each sparring session so that each lesson builds upon the other in a way that generates progress over time, rather than a collections of exhausting brawls that furnish no lessons for the future and guarantee performance plateaus. Here Olivier Taza shows admirable composure as he locks in a heel hook to finish another opponent. Note that he is literally observing his own actions as he performs them to ensure the various details are in order. There is no unnecessary tension, just enough to get the job done. He is in full control of his mental faculties as he performs the move. Whether the move succeeds or fails he will be able to tell you why and how. Thus will he be able to either replicate its success or correct its failure the next time he uses it.

Passing guard: If you have ever had the experience of watching an MMA fight with a group of people who know very little about fighting, it will immediately become apparent that none of them understand the significance of the fighter on top working to get past his opponent's legs to a secure and dominant pin position - passing the guard. To the naive, every top position is equally dominant. The Japanese appear to have been the first in the modern era to note that this is not the case. Kano's judo clearly specifies that pins (osaekomi) do not count unless the fighter in top clears his opponents legs. The Brazilians inherited this tradition and greatly added to it, making it the centerpiece of their top game. The habit of pressuring past your opponents legs to side or mounted positions must be ingrained from the earliest days of training. Only by being able to pass your opponents legs will you be able to attack your opponents entire body with submissions. If I cannot get past my opponents legs, the only submissions I can attempt are locks to the legs. Whilst these are very good and effective, they are only 50% of my opponent's body. Eventually my opponent will see my attacks as predictable and counter. The ability to pass the legs means I can also attack arms and strangleholds - bringing the entire body into the firing line and making my attacks more wide ranging and thus far less predictable. In addition to making the whole body a target for my offense, guard passing strongly undermines my opponents offense. The vast majority of grappling offense from bottom position involves the use of the legs tangling around my head, arms and legs. Once I clear the legs, my opponent cannot do anything offensive until he first recovers his leg position. Considerations like these show why it is so important for developing students to form the habit of constantly pushing past their opponents legs into dominant pins. Among a crowd of MMA fans, when you see one of them murmuring approvingly as the top fighter passes his opponents guard whilst all around the naive fans boo and hiss, you know you have found a kindred spirit. Here,
Eddie Cummings and I tussle for leg position

Three milestone UFC's: whatever complaints people may voice about the UFC, it remains the longest running, most prestigious, most financially successful, most recognizable MMA organization among a sea of failed competitors. UFC 1 was the shot heard around the martial arts world that started a revolution. It transformed overnight the publics ideas of what real fighting would be like. UFC 100 was the biggest event in UFC history, with superstars like Brock Lesnar and Georges St-Pierre and the then unknown, Jon Jones. Mr St-Pierre fought the outstanding kick boxer Tiago Alves that night. It was truly a coaching highlight for me. I was privileged to be among the top MMA talent in the world - a who's who of fighting all stars from every era of the sport and to see Mr St-Pierre put on a flawless display to win a decisive victory from cage side. By UFC 100 the sport has matured greatly from its primitive beginnings and Mr St-Pierre epitomized the modern professional fighter in a sport exploding in popularity. Now we are in the eve of another milestone for the sport and the organization. UFC 200 represents new improvements in drug testing. Earlier UFC's had only the most rudimentary testing. Mr St-Pierre's stand against drug use and retirement over the issue prompted much discussion and change. Now the testing system, whilst far from perfect, is considerably better than previous milestone UFC's. This is a healthy direction for the sport. Here's to UFC 200 - I hope one day I watch a UFC 1000 and marvel at the positive changes since those crazy early days 😊😊

Positional advantage: A core element of Jiu jitsu is the notion of advantage. As much as possible, students are encouraged to seek some form of advantage prior to attack. In this sense, jiu jitsu is the skill of creating unfair playing conditions in my favor. Most students are introduced to the notion of advantage through the concept of POSITIONAL advantage. Indeed, this is the basic structure by which the sport is judged and scored. This provides an excellent and easily understood means of getting students thinking along the correct lines as well as giving them a very effective sense of direction as they spar each other. Interestingly, the concept of positional advantage is only really taught and discussed on the ground. In fact it applies just as much in standing positions, though this is not reflected in the scoring system. Here I coach one of the best means of gaining positional advantage on the feet - a variation of the duck under, which takes us from a neutral position in front of our opponent to an advantageous one behind him.

Peaking for an event: The main purpose of our training overall is to raise our general skill level in the sport of jiu jitsu to the highest degree possible. The purpose of a fight camp is quite different. Here the emphasis is on maximizing our performance against a specific opponent or set of opponents on a particular date in a particular venue. As such, the training tends to be much more specialized and structured according to the time available before the event. As Eddie Cummings prepares for EBI 7 we begin to work on specific drills for given opponents. Here we work on leg pommeling drills in the ashi garami position where the subtleties of the leg lock game come into play. So many people see only the general features of this position and claim knowledge that they simply do not have. I often tell the squad "it is one thing for everyone to SEE what you do, it is quite another for them to FEEL IT." People look with superficial eyes and miss entirely the key elements that make our game effective. Daily drilling between Mr Cummings, myself and the rest of the squad keeps his skill set moving in the right directions as EBI 7 approaches...

My students displaying high level sleeping technique between early morning class and afternoon class. Note the full face plant method favored by young Nicky Ryan - fascinating contrast with Olivier Taza's preferred fetal zombie position. Master of them all, however, is the sleeping wonder, Garry Tonon, who generally prefers the open mouthed drooling head-rolling-over-shoulders technique, particularly whilst in moving vehicles or airplanes...If a visitor came into the academy and saw this scene, he would conclude either that we are the laziest bums in jiu jitsu or the hardest working...I guess only the medal platform will reveal the true answer 😉

Young masters: One of the enduring cliches of the martial arts is the idea of the aged master, having spent a lifetime acquiring knowledge, having greater fighting ability than his younger, less knowledgable opponent. The simple observation that the old masters of the sport never appear on the medal podiums puts this silly cliche to rest. There is a lot more to fighting ability than knowledge. More importantly, I want to go further and say that age and time in the sport is not even a guarantee of greater knowledge. It is my belief that students can be taught in such a way that they can become young masters - they can have the knowledge of people who have spent a lifetime in the sport whilst still in their athletic prime. The key is in their method of instruction. So often I see the following problems that limit knowledge acquisition over time. First, students stop learning at a certain point and permanently plateau. Second, their instruction leaves them with only partial understandings of technique rather than complete understanding. Third, less than optimal methods of inculcating whatever theoretical knowledge they have into their physical movement in ways that lead to lowered performance. It is my belief that if these limitations are removed, there is absolutely no reason why a dedicated student of a young age could not acquire a degree of knowledge that would shock his older masters. This is always the way in which I teach my leading students. After just a few years of such instruction they often surprise and delight me with the amount of learning they carry within them. An interesting test of my beliefs occurred when 23 year old Garry Tonon took on Masakazu Imanari, the man most people identified as the most knowledgeable leg locking expert in the world. In his home country of Japan, he is known as "Tenth Dan of leg locks" in recognition of his technical depth. Yet when the action started it was Garry Tonon who easily prevailed, winning via leg lock against the leg locking master himself. The fact that the match was over so quickly and that Garry never made use of top pressure show it was not fatigue due to age or size that got the win - it was knowledge.

Happy Fourth of July!!! 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸Our great nation was founded by revolutionaries who broke from tradition in seeking a better way. I hope to create a revolution in grappling in methods of learning, operations and strategy. Happy fourth from myself and my students 🇺🇸😊🇺🇸

Keeping it fun: sometimes I talk so much about the need for intelligently directed training programs backed by intensely disciplined students that one could get the impression that training ought to be to be a joyless slog towards higher skill level. This is definitely not the case. In fact I have always found that overly serious and joyless training environments have very negative effects on long term progress. The inescapable fact is that humans are drawn towards that which they find enjoyable. The moment training ceases to be fun, it is only a question how long before you stop - some will last longer than others, but the end result will be the same. It is important to understand that a training environment can be both fun and very challenging. Shared humor is the backbone of the camaraderie that can produce a championship training room. The trick is to instill a sense among the students of when they need to be serious and hard working and when they can release tension with humor and training room silliness. Finding the right balance between the two is so important. Visiting students are often quite shocked to hear me cursing and swearing like a trooper at my students and laughing at off color jokes- I like an informal , but hard working room. Just always make sure the work gets done. Here I trade jibes with Eddie Cummings, who often exhibits a prodigious work ethic well balanced with a fine sense of humor and fun that makes him a huge asset in the training room.

Learning curves: Often I am asked questions about the length of time that will be required to achieve proficiency in jiu jitsu. An interesting corollary to this question is of great importance to many of the professional athletes that I teach - if I am to compete against an opponent who has trained far longer than me, how can I ever hope to catch up to his level, given the disparity in total training time? On the face of it, it seems impossible. If athlete A has been training 20 hours per week for ten years and athlete B has been training 20 hours a week for 5 years and A and B are of similar size and body type, it would seem that B ought to have little chance of success. It is my belief that this is not the case. Once an athlete has a strong foundation of the basic movements and concepts in the sport, there can be radical differences in learning curves that can allow for seemingly miraculous acts of catch up where athletes with significantly less total training time can do very well against more experienced opponents. The most important factor in an athletes training background is NOT length of time training, but rather rate and sustenance of performance improvement. Most coaches and teams simply teach students the same way they were taught themselves, with no thought for improving transmission of knowledge. As a result, many training programs cease being effective in continuing to build new skills after a certain point. Athletes go into skill stagnation and are more or less the same at ten years as they were at five. An interesting test of my beliefs occurred when my student Eddie Cummings competed in EBI championships. He knew he was slated to fight the outstanding veteran grappler, Baret Yoshida, who had competed very successfully at the highest levels for well over a decade. Understandably, Mr Cummings was worried that his total training time of only just over five years would not fare well against the highly skilled Mr Yoshida, who had been doing jiu jitsu three times longer than that. Yet on the night, Mr Cummings won with relatively little trouble despite having only a third of his opponent's total training time - a gratifying vindication of our program.

Body type and jiu jitsu: Very often people will ask me about the effects of body type on jiu jitsu. It appears that many people hold the belief that there is an optimum body type in jiu jitsu that confers advantage over other body types. Even a moments reflection will reveal that this is false. A look at the medal platform at the world championships will always show a wide variety of body types which are represented in no particular order of success. If I ask you to name for me the five most successful jiu jitsu champions of all time, I guarantee your list will show big disparities in body type. There is no dominant body type on the medal stands. There is however, a dominant body ETHOS. Champions always maximize the ability of whatever body they have been born with to perform the skills of the sport. Whilst there is no one body type that dominates the sport, there is a need on everyone's part to maximize what you can do with your body that will improve your jiu jitsu performance. Everyone's body has an optimal weight and conditioning that maximizes its performance for a given activity. It is your duty to find what that is for you and to maintain yourself close to that ideal (getting closer if competition is near). Thus any body type can win a world championship, but only one way of maintaining that body of yours will maximize your ability to perform the skills you hope to win that championship with. Here are three EBI champions. All three are very different somatotypes- Garry Tonon is a classic mesomorph. Gordon Ryan an ectomorph and Eddie Cummings an endomorph masquerading as a mesomorph. Yet all three have found a way to maximize their very different bodies to perform the skills they needed to win. Thus any body type can win a world championship, but only one way of maintaining it will maximize your chances of doing so.

The relationship between MMA and jiu jitsu: In my teachings I try never to lose sight of the relationship between jiu jitsu and MMA. This is something I inherited from my teacher, Renzo Gracie. My first four teachers and training partners from white to brown belt were Renzo, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All four were both grappling and MMA stand outs. All of our grappling was done in the context of fighting. Indeed, if jiu jitsu had not figured so heavily in early MMA, I never would have taken notice of the art and joined up. Effectiveness in fighting will always be the most basic appeal of any art that seems to call itself martial. As modern jiu jitsu has matured, the relationship with MMA is slightly more distant. This is a natural consequence of the two sports evolving and pushing in their own directions and the need for specialization to stay ahead of the competition within a specified rule set; but those early years still bear heavily in my thinking and in all honesty, no part of my coaching gets me as excited as helping an athlete prepare for a professional fight. Here, Georges St-Pierre and Kenny Florian go through their grappling drills in our Monday afternoon class.

The power of adaptation: Very often in the sport we have to adapt our game around changes in our body. Usually these adaptations are in response to injury or age. When one part of our body is incapacitated we have to adapt our game around that problem and find new ways to play in order to maintain our overall effectiveness. The main thing to remember is that our goal is to continually improve our overall effectiveness in the sport. It does not matter if I lose some of my best weapons due to injury, so long as I can adapt and create new ones. Sometimes this cycle of adaptation in response to physical changes and problems can have very good effects. An injury can make us play the game in a very new and exciting way; then when the injury resolves itself over time, you get your old weapons back along with your new ones. In my own case, I always favored ashi garami on my left side, but after my hip replacement I completely lost my ability to perform it. I quickly had to become more proficient on the right hand side in order to demonstrate to my students post surgery. Now it feels as natural as it used to on my left. Here I work for a rather feeble looking ashi garami on my left against the highly skilled Eddie Cummings - the end of my 14 inch surgical scar visible outside my shorts - perhaps one day it will return and I shall be ashi garami ambidextrous 😊😊

Teaching to teach: Throughout my coaching career I have always avoided the common tendency to teach with a "do this, do that" approach to jiu jitsu. I always try to teach not only the "how" of a given move, but also the "why." In this way students learn not only the technical performance of the move, but also the contextual elements that show them not only how to use it, but when and why. As I teach my students, I always try to do so in a way that enables them to teach others the same lesson. I do this by trying to explain the logic and rationale behind each move. I don't want students who can merely mimic a move, I want students who can understand its underlying principles. Teaching in this manner has a pleasing side effect; not only do students make faster progress in their own games, they rapidly take on the ability to teach these skills to others. Rather than be able to merely regurgitate information, they can explain information - a critical difference. In this way the overall level of the training room can increase quite rapidly and a mutually beneficial training environment can emerge and take root. Here my student, Garry Tonon shows his pedagogical skills with young Mikey Wilson, an outstanding ten year old student. Garry is explaining the mechanical underpinnings of ude gatame, one of our favorite upper body attacks as young Mikey enacts them.

Defeat: The only people that never lost are those that never went against the best competition. In life and jiu jitsu, defeat is as certain as death and taxes in other people lives. The question then, is not whether you will be defeated, but how you will react when defeated. Of course the initial reaction is always emotional, but after that comes two general types of reaction. The first is denial. The athlete tells him or herself that the loss was an aberration due to outside factors, an injury, a distraction, an unfavorable environment or whatever. The loss is dismissed and the athlete goes on doing what he has always done and goes to the next match essentially the same person. The second approach is acceptance. The athlete accepts the defeat as a sign that something needs to be changed if the cause of that defeat is to be overcome. It may be something small, or it may be a major overhaul, but some form of modification is necessary. This second approach generally gets the better results in the long term (though many athletes have had good careers using the first). Here Eddie Cummings and his team show the pain of a narrow loss by penalty in over time at the world championships, but already ideas of change and modification are going through our minds photo by Tiago Molinos

The iron law of posture: For every given human physical activity, there is a posture that maximizes our ability to successfully complete that activity. This insight is critical to success in physical action. In jiu jitsu our ability to work in accordance with this law is severely tested, since our position and goals can change second by second and everything is done in a competitive environment under duress. Learning how posture can improve our efficiency, learning how to move from posture to posture in accordance with the unfolding action and learning how posture is related to the goal of minimum effort for maximum effect is the foundation of the truly deep part of the study of jiu jitsu. It is here that we begin to gain deep insight into our physical bodies and their workings. Here Eddie Cummings and his opponent, Tanquinho, both display fine posture relative to their respective goals as they engage in their match at the ADCC world championships Photo by Tiago Molinos

Continuous combat: The ideal grappler of the future will be able to apply him or herself through the full spectrum of positions from standing to floor. Once combat is begun they will be able to follow the action effortlessly and confidently from upper body throws to leg takedowns to standing submissions down to the floor in both top and bottom position - strong in both positional and submission attacks over the whole body. Currently, most grapplers are specialists who are much better in certain areas than others. This creates a rather artificial or limited look to their game where the action stops as soon as they get to an area outside their speciality. This creates problems when they have to transition to fighting or MMA. Some great figures of the past give a good idea of what is possible for the future. Here is the truly great Isao Okano, who displayed great balance and flow between standing and ground technique of the highest level. Men like him are an inspiration to a future where grapplers exhibit an ability to flow continuously between every scenario in grappling at a high level of proficiency

When the fighting is over: Garry Tonon finishes another impressive performance. The self analysis that must follow every match has already begun as we reflect on his immediate assessment of the match. His initial feelings and thoughts are the first part of the process. As the next few days unfold, the analysis will deepen into video review and a congress of informed opinions, so that training and behavior can be modified in the light of experience. Only in this way can progress be made over time. Only in this way can an athlete build strength upon strength and put on increasingly better shows. Most people celebrate a win. The best analyze a win and see where improvements can be made so that winning becomes a habit rather than an accident.

If I asked you six moths ago to find a photograph of someone attempting a leg lock on the great Rousimar Palhares you would have come up empty handed. Such was his reputation in the area of the game that people would have thought it suicide to even try. Yet when Garry Tonon engaged him in a match he went forward with confidence and attacked Mr Palhares' legs repeatedly, along with a host of other submission and positional attacks. This was not the result of any suicidal tendencies on Mr Tonon's part. It came from confidence in a system of leg offense and defense he had put a tremendous amount of work into over years. Despite a huge size and strength disadvantage, he took it to the legendary leg locker and dominated all the leg exchanges. Here he tests Mr Palhares' legs with a powerful inverted Achilles lock variation that puts great pressure on the big man. Real confidence comes from knowing you have the answers to all the problems you can reasonably expect out there under the lights and the physical preparation to manifest them.

Happy Fathers Day to all! 😊😊

Three forms of body control: There are three major forms of control over the movements of the human body. The first is control over the movements of our own body. The human body has a vast potential for movement which very few people learn to fully exploit in the course of a lifetime. Sports such as gymnastics, yoga, solo dance, contortionism and others teach the student how to maximize their body's ability to move through its full potential range. Their goal is to teach control over the movements of our own body. A second form of control is seen in partner dance, professional (fake) wrestling and other such activities. Here the intention is to work with a cooperative partner and demonstrate control over the movement of two cooperating bodies. The two work as a unit and try to exhibit control over their shared movement through whatever art form they are trying to express. The third form of control is to me the most interesting. This is control over a the body of a resisting opponent who is simultaneously trying to control you. Now you have to control someone who does not want to be controlled, but who on the contrary, seeks to control you. That is when things get truly interesting. The key is to understand that the grappling arts, jiu jitsu included, must involve training in all three areas if progress is to be maximized. Students must make sincere efforts to maximize their control over the movements of their own bodies. This can be done with gymnastics and yoga or some other equivalent. Remember always - THERE IS NO LEARNING TO CONTROL THE MOVEMENTS OF ANOTHER PERSONS BODY, WITHOUT FIRST LEARNING TO CONTROL THE MOVEMENTS OF YOUR OWN. Jiu jitsu also involves the second form of control, over a cooperating partner. This is done during partner drilling, where movement skills are learned with a partner who assists you through the movements until they are understood and natural. Lastly comes control over resisting opponents in live sparring (randori) and ultimately, competition. Thus the jiu jitsu student must familiarize himself with all three faces of body control of he or she is to make a deep study of the sport.

Inside the mind of Eddie Cummings as he walks out to another match: "Coach has been watching me train every day in fight camp. He knows my game inside out. I've memorized all the complex names and code words for the moves so I can react instantly when he calls for them. He knows my game better than I know myself - I will move exactly as he calls the moves and victory will be mine..." Inside the mind of John Danaher: "Dang...I forgot this kids name again...was it Eddie Bravo? No - that's that rubbery guy from California - different guy. Ummm...Poindexter? No. Damn...maybe someone in the crowd will know...what is his game? Never can remember...wait...I think he mostly does half guard passing...yes, that's it...ok, this should be fine..."

Building a culture of respect: One of the favorite moments of my coaching career occurred at the ADCC world championships. My student Garry Tonon squared off against the very talented Dillon Danis, student of the great Marcelo Garcia. The two had a rivalry and met in the first round of the tournament. After a fierce exchange of technique, Mr Tonon prevailed with a very powerful heel hook. In a gesture that made me far more proud than the actual victory, Mr Tonon immediately went over to check if his rival was alright, then went to bow and shake the hand of his great coach and mentor - showing his respect for all his wonderful achievements in the sport. I dare say that that bow and handshake made me more proud than all the leg locks, armlocks and strangles my students have performed put together. Respect for an opponent is the foundation of the martial arts. It is what distinguishes the martial arts from mere violence. If a man fights another with hate in his heart - it is a fight. If he does so with respect in his heart - he is a martial artist. Remember - in the end, whatever trivial differences there are between teams and schools, they are insignificant compared with the many similarities- there is so much more that unites us than separates us. Building a culture of respect is the basis of our enterprise. Photo: Tiago Molinos

Pre-match attitude - study in contrasts: Different athletes enter matches with very different mindsets. The important thing is that they be comfortable and natural. I try to go with what feels right for them and what have been the dominant themes of our fight camp, rather than any preconceived notion of what is right or wrong for an athlete to feel before competition. Garry Tonon and Eddie Cummings went through camp together in preparation for ADCC world championships, but you can see the difference in pre-match mindset. Garry is as always, relaxed and jovial. Eddie looks like...um...a serial killer who kills by leg lock? Photo by Tiago Molinos

Trying to explain to Eddie Cummings that ashi garami works just as well when wearing a gi and also that it can be used for many things other than leg locks...he looks deeply offended 😉

Olivier Taza - Learning the leg lock system: A very fine example of the speed with which my leg lock system can be learned and the effectiveness with which it can be applied was presented by the very talented and hard working Olivier Taza yesterday, when he won the sapateiro invitational grappling tournament. Mr Taza won all matches via leg lock submission, including an impressive win over 10th Planet black belt Nathan Orchard - remarkable given that Mr Taza only recently received his purple belt. Mr Taza's story is quite an instructive one. He lives in Montreal and trained at Tristar gym under my student, Firas Zahabi. I often send my students, Messrs Tonon, Cummings and Ryan to the gym at Tristar to assist in grappling training Mr Taza was so impressed by what he saw that he traveled to NYC for long stretches of time, training twice a day and thoroughly immersing himself in our game. Very soon he made tremendous improvements and in less than a year became a very different player. Mr Taza is the kind of student everyone likes - quiet and humble, studious and intelligent, yet with ambitions and the work ethic to fulfill them. Yesterday all those hours on the mat manifested themselves in perfect submission victories using the leg lock system he has worked so hard to learn. Here, Mr Taza and his good friend and training partner, Gordon Ryan, reflect on lessons after class

Teaching the room: On any given day of teaching jiu jitsu, there will always be massive variations in knowledge, ability and attributes on the part of the attending students. There will be older students, some with less dexterity and coordination, some from a different school - enough variation to make it a real skill to present a class from which everyone present can benefit. How is it possible to teach a class where both a neophyte and a world champion can witness the same move and both walk away with a sense of benefit? The first thing to realize is different people will benefit in different ways from the same class. As I teach a given move, one student may focus on the grip and set up elements and benefit from this. Another may see the tactical set up component and benefit from this. Yet another may learn from the mechanical elements of breaking. Don't try to teach everyone the same lesson - teach the move and let them take home their own lesson. As a teacher, I should be able to teach a well known move in such a way that students of very different abilities can all benefit. Many teachers make the mistake of trying to slog through vast amounts of detail when teaching. Indeed, people often measure the value of an instructor by this rubric. This, I believe, is mistaken - though I know such a view will be seen as heretical by many. Students will quickly forget details when presented en masse. Much better to present the most pertinent details ranked roughly in order of importance. You don't have to teach the move in its entirety in one lesson - if the student walks away from the lesson with one clear and memorable detail that he can apply in live training and which makes a tangible increase in his performance, that is excellent progress for one day - he is a step closer on his path to perfection over time. The very realistic goal of kaizen is perfection over time; not the very unrealistic goal of perfection in a day.

Gi or no gi? Teaching a mixed gi and no gi class: The best people in the sport switch effortlessly between the two. Ultimately the sport is about controlling and submitting the human body. Masters of jiu jitsu can easily make the necessary adaptations and stay focused on that goal regardless of what their partner is wearing. The day a jiu jitsu teacher claims his success or failure in a given match was due to whether or not his opponent was or was not wearing a jacket is a sad one indeed.

Every submission hold has its own character: we are involved in a sport where the submission hold is the pinnacle of techniques- the very soul of the sport. Accordingly, deep study of the main families of submissions is essential to your progress. Each lock and strangle has its own unique character and applicability- that is why it is common to see athletes who are very strong in some, yet weak in others. One could easily spend a lifetime of study on just five families of submissions and still not come close to the limit of what is possible. Typically athletes will develop a special affinity for four of five submissions, plus several more as back up in case of emergency. Depth of knowledge counts for more than breadth of knowledge in submissions and indeed, in most elements of jiu jitsu. Here Benson Henderson works on a variation of the Achilles lock with the squad. Drilling like this provides a great opportunity to deepen your understanding of the correct mechanics underlying the lock that will make the move work in the pressure of competition

Anybody can train when they feel like training - The real question is whether you can train when you don't feel like it: Eddie Cummings and I hammer out details and plans for his upcoming bouts. This constant pushing for better results comes at a price. You see the gym is empty behind us. A few hours previously it was packed with nearly eighty people in an afternoon class - now they are gone- but Mr Cummings remains. This pattern of extra effort beyond the norm is the distinguishing characteristic of all great enterprises. So often people ask me how my students became so adept at the skills they display in competition - if they could see the daily price they pay in time and effort their question would be answered before it even left their lips...

Competition intensity: The majority of training time ought to be concerned with skill acquisition. Accordingly, I often encourage my students to train in an experimental manner where the primary emphasis is on attaining and developing new skills. This is best done by reducing the intensity of training sessions to a level where thinking and learning can occur. It is a very different matter during contest preparation and match time however. Now the athlete operates to impose those skills on a maximally resisting subject. Opponents are often shocked at the intensity of a grappler highly skilled in submissions coming at them with bad intentions. Things get much more interesting when the intent changes from "I will pass your guard or sweep you into a pin and control you," to "I am coming to break or strangle you." Here, Eddie Cummings shows his competition intensity to win yet another EBI championship belt for the squad

Former adversaries, new friends: Georges St-Pierre and Jake Shields finish up a tough day of training with the squad. They fought in front of one of the biggest crowds in UFC history. Today they trained and laughed together in front of a crowded room. Both times it was a wonderful time to be around 😊

Garry Tonon has just informed me that the new super villain in Star Wars: the force awakens is a total panty-waist dork who disgraces the fine lineage of Darth Sideous, Darth Maul and Darth Vader with a lamentable display of overall wimpiness and utter lack of spine. Mr Tonon's assessment of Mr. Kylo Ren's combat value as "completely incapable of winning a novice division at NAGA, forget about beating a Jedi," leaves me inconsolable and distraught as caught on camera...

An early innovation in my jiu jitsu: when I was a blue belt in the early mid 1990's I made the observation that almost every strangle hold in our sport has an inverted or reverse variation, except (at that time) kata gatame (often called an arm triangle strangle). At the same time, my friend Shawn Williams came to me with a problem related to guard passing when opponents would scramble to their knees in a quasi front headlock position to avoid conceding pass points. At this time I was experimenting a lot with wrestling moves like three quarter nelsons and their applicability to jiu jitsu. This marriage of seemingly unrelated topics spurred me to try an inverted kata gatame as a counter to an opponent scrambling up to turtle position- I would break them down with a three quarter Nelson and enter this new strangle. Mr Williams told me it felt very effective - at that same moment I also came up with the idea of a front kata gatame (anaconda strangle), but I later learned that I could not claim originality with this move as it was common in the sport of wrestling to apply it as a strangle even though technically this was illegal - the gold medal winning Schultz brothers were famous for this. I showed the move to Renzo , who wanted a proof that it was effective - I performed it on a strongly resisting partner who of course did not know the move and promptly passed out. Renzo laughed, got up and got the same result when he applied it to another man - thus was born what I called "the inverted kata gatame" I went on to experiment over the months with many variations of entry and finish with considerable success. I showed it to my friend and student, Joe D'arce, who quickly became very proficient in its use, particularly out of guard passing scrambles. He competed in California and quickly defeated many opponents with it. The Californians had never seen this strangle and called the move "the D'arce" after Joe - something we both still laugh about to this day. Here my student, Chris Weidman - a true specialist in the technique, applies it brilliantly to render his opponent, Tom Lawlor, unconscious in a matter of seconds on his title run towards Anderson Silva

Stranglehold or chokehold? My long suffering students will attest that I often show a fastidiousness that can make me a rather unpleasant person to be around at times 😉😡😒 one mistake that is guaranteed to evoke a nasty reaction is the very common tendency for students of jiu jitsu to confuse strangleholds and chokes. It is of the greatest importance that students gain a deep understanding of the workings of the human body - this is an art - and your canvas is the human body - learn as much as you can about it and your jiu jitsu will improve. A choke refers to the act of obstructing the passage of air to the lungs. So for example, if you swallow food too clumsily, you can be choked. Strangulation refers to the very different action of cutting off blood to the brain, usually by constricting the carotid arteries in the neck. Chokes can take up to several minutes to render a well conditioned person unconscious. Strangles will do the same in around ten seconds. Due to the fact that the airways are in close proximity to the carotid arteries, most strangleholds will also incidentally have a choking effect and vice versa - but always it is the intention of the jiu jitsu player to strangle, rather than choke, an opponent due to the much greater efficiency of the former. Therefore, it ought to be standard practice to refer to our attacks to the neck as strangles rather than chokes (and please avoid the nonsensical phrase "blood choke") Here, young Nicky Ryan works on his strangles - a move he and his brother show great proficiency in, while his notoriously nit-picky and obsessive sensei looks on approvingly 😉

Tangled up in legs: "Ashi garami" is usually translated as "leg entanglement." It captures well the idea of two of my legs immobilizing one of my opponents legs in ways that make submission attacks and positional sweeps possible. There are many variations, each with distinctive properties that make them good for some purposes, weak in others. Here I work to control the legs with an ashi garami variation on Eddie Cummings - never an easy thing as Mr Cummings is himself a young master of ashi garami, having taken on with great attention and passion every lesson on the subject I ever taught him in a way that quickly took him to the top echelons of the leg locking world. In a situation like this even very small errors have have dramatic and devastating consequences - yet Mr Cummings displays the calm and technical nuance associated with success in this position.

Back attacks: The human body is set up well to deal with threats from the front, but does not cope well with threats from an angle. The best angle of them all from which to attack is directly behind an opponent. From here the attacker has considerable mechanical and tactical advantages that should enable him to prevail in most cases, other things being equal. One of the most important skills to develop then, is the ability to work your way behind your opponent and stay there long enough with sufficient control to do damage or finish the match. Jiu jitsu shows its fighting pedigree in awarding maximum points for getting to an opponent's back - in recognition of this fundamental fact about it's value in unarmed human combat. Interestingly, many other grappling arts, such as Judo and most wrestling styles, do not award points at all, or award relatively minor points, for attaining this most dominant of grappling positions. Here Georges St-Pierre works on his back attacks prior to his bout with the formidable Nick Diaz - a skill he used extensively to dominate the action in that memorable fight.

Precioussss...nice ashi garami my precioussss...damn...I need a vacation...gotta get out of this damn basement dojo...maybe work on my sun tan a little...😉😄

Tachi waza and Ne waza: Most of the main grappling styles styles of the world recognize the fundamental distinction between grappling in the standing position (tachi waza) and on the ground (ne waza). Usually any given style has a bias through the rule set towards one or the other. So for example, modern freestyle wrestling and Judo are mostly tachi waza sports (though each has a definite ne waza component) BJJ is a good example of the opposite extreme, it is almost entirely ne waza based. The general aim of most tachi waza styles is to get the opponent down to the floor. The general aim of most ne waza styles is to pin or submit the opponent on the ground. As a general trend today, the grappling sports are becoming more specialized as either predominately tachi waza or ne waza. The result has been good in some ways - a definite rise in skill level in certain areas due to increased specialization and time spent in limited scenarios. It has been negative in others - we are seeing athletes with incredible skill in specialized domains but equally incredible naivety outside of those domains. Remember always that tachi waza without ne waza is pointless - what is the point of putting someone on the ground if you cannot control him there? On the other hand, ne waza without tachi waza is useless - what is the point of refined ground technique if you cannot get him there in the first place? Nowhere is the marriage of tachi waza and ne waza more important than in mixed martial arts, where failure to integrate them adequately often has disastrous results. Here, Georges St-Pierre works on the crucial interface between standing and ground grappling with Garry Tonon.

So proud and happy to hear of the great victory of my friend and student, Travis Stevens at the Judo world masters tournament this weekend 😊. Travis used a tremendous mix of standing and ground grappling to sweep the field and take gold in this invitational only elite tournament. Here is an image of Travis that speaks volumes about his commitment to excellence in the sport. In a world of imposters and poseurs, here is the real deal - Travis Stevens - warrior of the mats

Solo movement drills: Some of the most impressive training lessons I learned came from watching great boxers go through their solo movement training - shadow boxing. They approached this part of their training with great seriousness. Indeed, it occupied a considerable part of their overall workout and was done with a commitment and sense of purpose that was deeply impressive to me. This stands in stark contrast to the rather lazy fashion in which most grapplers approach solo drills. Usually they are done in a very perfunctory way prior to partner drills before class as a warm up. There is none of the mindfulness, sense of technical perfection and most important - relevance to actual sparring - that was so evident in the shadow boxing of the great pugilists. This experience led me to develop grappling solo drills that were designed to improve movement in ways that would make a difference in live training just as quality shadow boxing improves the sparring of good boxers. Time invested in this project will serve you well - it will give you so much more than just a warm up. It will deepen your understanding of efficient movement in ne waza (ground grappling), reinforce good habits of posture and placement and enable you to workout effectively whenever you are alone. Here, young Nicky Ryan goes through his solo drills just prior to stepping on to the mat in competition

The two faces of jiu jitsu: Every aspect of jiu jitsu has two sides - a positive side where my intention is to enforce my game upon my opponent, and a negative side where I attempt to prevent my opponent doing the same to me. So for example, in a grip fighting exchange, I try to impose my grips upon my opponent, whilst simultaneously negating his attempts to impose his grips upon me. When I pin someone and look to transition from one pin to another, I aim to position and hold myself in a way that maximizes my ability to move freely around my opponent, whilst at the same time doing my utmost to inhibit movement in my opponent. This dual nature of enhancing my aims while undercutting and negating those of my opponent is a key element of victory. Note that one without the other is without value. If I only care to impose my game without shutting down my opponents, he can move as freely as me and the result will be uncontrolled scrambles leading nowhere. If I only seek to negate what my opponent does without any positive movement and attacks of my own. I will never amount to anything more than an annoyance to my opponent by slowing him down without ever actually presenting any danger to him Here, Eddie Cummings exhibits a fine example of this duality. He has attained a position where he can readily move his body in the appropriate directions to apply crushing force to the leg of 10th planet black belt champion, Nathan Orchard, while at the same time completely eliminating Mr Orchard's ability to move in a way that would allow escape. This creates a huge imbalance in movement potential that leads to decisive victory.

Empirical tests: Nothing furnishes proof of a theory or set of beliefs quite like a simple yet decisive empirical test. Jiu jitsu often allows for very decisive tests due to the nature of submissions. This often makes way for a very clear testing of the pros and cons of a given system versus alternative systems. Here Eddie Cummings quickly latches on to the leg of noted leg lock practitioner Reilly Bodycomb and secures a decisive win - validating the effectiveness of our system in a very clear empirical test.

Extreme pressure: Garry Tonon locks up a very tight inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami on the great Rousimar Palhares, himself a master of leg locks. The pressure of top level competition shows as Mr Palhraes grimaces and prepares himself to roll out of bounds to get a release- good tactical strategy on his part and showing excellent awareness of the geography of the mat - a key factor in world championship level grappling. Note the physical tightness of Mr Tonon's ashi garami - very necessary against such a powerful and skilled opponent. This was truly a clash to determine leg lock supremacy in the grappling world

From rivalry to friendship: The very nature of our sport is centered around competition and the ability to gain and enforce competitive advantage over an opponent. One of its greatest pleasures however, comes from the realization that however strong the fervor of competition might be, in the end, the sport as a whole is bigger than any temporary rivalry between ourselves and another person - for we are all ultimately united by the kingly arts of combat. Years ago my student Georges St-Pierre was matched to fight the formidable Jake Shields, who at that time had not lost a fight in almost eight years and who had crushed numerous UFC champions and contenders along the way to his title fight. The fight and the camp leading to it were as tightly contested as any, yet years later, Mr Shields came by to train and work on skills. It was a valuable reminder to me that friendship and camaraderie are more uplifting and lasting than rivalry and advantage. In the end; it is far more important to be a good human being than it is to be a good fighter. Skills in a competitive world and the great achievements they can bring us make us stand out from the crowd, but it is our humanity and empathy that bring us back. Jake and I share some stories from old campaigns after another tough session with the team

The essence of jiu jitsu: The ability to control greater size, strength and aggression with lesser size, strength and aggression: One of the defining characteristics of jiu jitsu and indeed, all the combat sports, is the ability to control and overcome greater size, strength and aggression with less. It is the quintessentially human action of using the ingenuity of our conscious minds to make up for the deficiencies of our body. Jiu jitsu is one of the few remaining combat sports that still permits open weight bouts where this essential feature can be tested. The finest example in recent memory was the clash between Garry Tonon and Rousimar Palhares - a man who was the very symbol of size, strength and aggression in our sport and who was in addition, highly skilled in submissions, particularly leg locks. Yet it was the much smaller, weaker and less psychologically aggressive Garry Tonon who dominated most of the action - winning all the submission exchanges in a thrilling encounter of psychological aggression versus tactical aggression that went the distance. It was a superb example of the essential nature of the kingly art of jiu jitsu

Many will look, but few will see: In all things, but especially in jiu jitsu, small details, often unseen or ignored, make the difference between success and failure. Cultivating a habitual reaching for perfection in performance, however difficult and frustrating that might be, is thus crucial to your advancement. This is so often a game of inches and millimeters and the consequences of even the smallest mechanical or tactical mistakes can be very costly indeed. I tell you in all honesty that it will be excellence in the performance of the unexciting, mundane aspects of jiu jitsu - not the pursuit of the exotic and showy elements, that will enable you to prevail when you need them most. Here I go over the minutiae of rear strangles with young Nicky Ryan and the ever observant and thus constantly improving, Eddie Cummings.

Position before submission: jiu jitsu students often use this phrase - some even go so far as to define the sport this way. It is a good way to express a valuable insight to a beginner, but at the higher levels, it is an over simplification. Positional dominance is one form of control and advantage, but it is only one among many forms of advantage. Indeed, such is the subtlety of the sport at international level that it is quite possible to give up to your opponent one form of advantage whilst retaining several different forms for yourself. In this way weakness can be feigned from a position of strength and an unwary opponent taken by surprise by an unforeseen attack. Here Garry Tonon gives away positional advantage to the very talented Jake Shields whilst hunting for other forms of advantage to launch attacks

Submission holds: The various submission holds are the most distinctive and revered element of jiu jitsu - a fact revealed by the point system of the sport. You can be losing a match by any number of points, but if you are able to lock in a successful submission hold, the match is yours. No other part of the sport is valued so highly. Each of the submissions has its own unique character, which helps explain why so many jiu jitsu players are very good at some, yet surprisingly weak with others. Gaining deep knowledge of the nature and application of each of the main submission holds is a huge part of your ultimate progress in the sport. Like a large and disparate family, they are all related, yet quite different from each other.
Among the main joint locks, the most basic distinction is among the linear locks and the twisting locks. Here I demonstrate a fairly standard variation of ude garami, commonly known as "Kimura" in BJJ parlance. This belongs in the category of twisting locks and is among the most important and effective of the upper body submissions. One of its great hallmarks is its versatility; being equally useful gi or no gi, in both standing and ground grappling, from either top or bottom positions, as both a means of submission and as a means of control, as either an end in itself or as a lead in to other techniques

Jiu jitsu is largely bound up with the skill of creating some form of preliminary advantage before launching an attack. One of the most important forms of advantage is balance breaking, or kuzushi. Kano showed his genius by making this the centerpiece of his Judo program in standing throws- but the concept is just as valuable in ground grappling. At the higher levels of the sport, the ability to break through tough defenses is essential to success- generating kuzushi is one of the best preambles to attacks - without it there is little chance of an attack succeeding and a high risk of a strong counter. Here I test the balance of Eddie Cummings as a prelude to a more serious attack.

Loneliness is a crowded room: Match time; Eddie Cummings goes through our final pre match preparations as he is about to go on stage. In the end, in a crowded arena, coming from a crowded gym and a crowded corner of coaches and team mates - the athlete goes out alone. Learning to understand the strengths and weaknesses of your own mind in these crucial moments is a large factor in your success or failure. As a coach I must be sensitive to the individuality of the athlete in these moments - each one must find their own way of coping. What works for Eddie Cummings will not work for Gary Tonon or Gordon Ryan. Many a man has melted in these last moments and found their stage performance fell far below their gym performance - finding a routine to prevent this is one of the most deeply personal and difficult aspects of professional grappling and fighting.

One of the great pleasures of living and teaching in NYC is the constant influx of talented visitors stopping by to work on their skills. Former UFC lightweight champion Benson Henderson stops by for a fun grappling session with the team. Training with new partners can be a valuable part of contest preparation, as it mimics some of the elements of competing against someone you have never grappled before and who comes from a training program very different from your own. Such practice forces one to adapt and improvise under stress in much the same way that will be required to succeed in competition

Pre-contest warm ups: Getting an athlete ready for competition is a long process. In truth the outcome of the match is decided long before the day of competition by the respective preparation of the two contestants. The match itself is almost like a postscript to what has already transpired in the dojo, in prefight strategizing and in the minds of the combatants during those lonely moments of reflection and forethought prior to the bout. Here I help get Eddie Cummings ready for a match as he runs through last minute drills with Garry Tonon shortly before stepping out on stage where all of that preparation will be tested.

The value of feedback: progress in jiu jitsu mirrors that of progress in science- it comes from experimental trial and error over time. Feedback from those trials and errors leads to a new set of theories which are themselves subjected to vigorous testing and improvement in the light of failures, problems and successes. Over time remarkable progress can be made. Gordon Ryan discusses feedback with me after training with regards our back attack system that proved so effective for him at EBI 6. On his way to win the championship three of his opponents were defeated from back position (the other via our leg lock system). Here we propose modifications and improvements based on his feedback.

In all of my teaching I always try hard to convey the spirit of relentless attacks leading to submission. An interesting benefit of this is that as the students knowledge of attacks grow, so too does their knowledge of how to defend them. The deeper and richer your knowledge of how to perform a given move, the more you understand about how to prevent your opponent from doing the same. Here Eddie Cummings uses his depth of knowledge in leg locking to expertly position and hold his body to thwart my attempt at a variation of a heel hook applied from cross ashi garami and patiently work his escape

Young Nicky Ryan, younger brother of Gordon Ryan, recently turned 15 years old. Don't let that sweet innocent face fool you - if you blink while rolling with him your eyes will open with you in a submission hold. When I roll with him I often feel my life flash before my eyes...big things ahead for this prodigy...the power of time, planning and discipline- put them together and watch what seemed impossible happen

Training pace: most jiu jitsu students always train at the same pace and often without a clear goal in mind for that particular session. Learn to work at different speeds and match the intensity to your goals. Very often technical progress is optimized by working particulars skills at a slower speed. If the goal is preparation for a competitive match, then intensity levels will need to be raised to those expected at match time. Here Ms Ottavia Bourdain and I engage in skill development in ashi garami variations

Some of my favorite coaching memories involve the fascinating and complex relationship between jiu jitsu and MMA. Morning training at RGA with UFC star Rafael Natal and WSOF standout Joao Zeferino 😊

Eddie Cummings demonstrates to a terrified reporter why his nickname is "Wolverine." Note the fierce facial expression and dangerous claws asserting territorial dominance over his domain...#theydon'tcallmewolverinefornothingmofo

The path to efficiency in all physical movement begins with posture. The iron law of posture is this: For any given physical task, there is a posture that maximizes your ability perform it. For all the major scenarios of jiu jitsu, you must find that posture and train it as a habit in your movement. Only then will you be able to express the ideal of minimal effort for maximal effect. Here, Brian Glick and Garry St-Ledger demonstrate fine standing posture as they prepare to engage in the standing position

Eddie Cummings passionately explains the mechanics of the five finger exploding heart punch to myself and Ms Ottavia Bourdain. In the background several victims of the deadly technique receive emergency medical treatment and last rites...normal stuff for Monday morning class 😉

Self and Society: combat sports such as jiu jitsu teach us much about the complex interplay between ourselves and the people around us. It is on the face of it, an individual sport. You go and engage your opponent alone and as such, learn valuable lessons about self reliance and individual accountability. On the other hand, the entire learning and preparation process is very much social. We must learn to fit in to a group and form strong bonds of trust, mutual benefit and loss and cooperation. Jiu jitsu is fought and expressed as an individual but learned and perfected as part of a group - thus it provides an excellent balance between our need to develop strong individuality and our need to be a positive part of a social structure - nowhere is this more clearly seen than in the aftermath of success in competition. Here Eddie Cummings enjoys the admiration of friends, fans and support team after another big win

Guess what Mr Cummings will be working on first in today's class...#teachmetotiemybeltbeforeilearnanotherheelhooksetup 😉

At Gordon Ryan's belt promotion ceremony...Garry Tonon has just informed me that Eddie Cummings does not appear to know how to tie his belt properly...like two truly horrible and nasty sensei's we are plotting methods of publicly humiliating him for his infraction...😉🙄😊

All the various grappling arts, no matter how disparate they may appear on the surface, share one thing in common - every match, whether in training or competition, begins with gripping. I have never met a world champion in any grappling style who was not a master of imposing his her her grip upon the opponent, while denying the opponent's ability to the same. The higher the level of the sport - the more gripping skills will determine the outcome of the contest. Here Eddie Cummings and I run through some generic gripping drills prior to another big match. Mr Cummings came to me with with virtually no gripping skills - in a very short time he recognized the importance of this much neglected element of study and now is able to impose dangerous grips with all four limbs on all of his opponents. He is a fine counter example to the common, but erroneous belief that grip strength is the basis of gripping for grappling - he grips very effectively with only modest physical strength

Sad to hear my friend Chris Weidman is injured and out of his rematch with Luke Rockhold. Our lives swing endlessly from highs to lows, often in response to events outside our control. The one thing we can control is our response to those events. Keep focused on your goals and try hard not to be distracted by the disappointments and sorrows of the current day, but lifted by the vision of a better tomorrow. Have the confidence of a man who knows that if he has climbed a mountain before, he knows he has it in him to do it again. Here is a photo from happier times - it always brings a smile to my face, I hope it can for you to 😊

A truly talented friend and student - world championship level judoka and BJJ black belt Garry St-Ledger - part of the ideal fusion of judo and jiu jitsu that will create greater grapplers in future generations. He helped me greatly during the time after my hip replacement when I could barely stand, let alone demonstrate a throw - thank you 😊 Let's move the grappling arts forward through unity, not hold them back with artificial and childish divisions

As competition gets closer the focus of training begins to change from skill development to physical and tactical preparation for a specific opponent - intensity levels rise as Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon countdown to another big match

All strength is derived from unity. Unity of purpose, unity of direction and unity of sentiment- when a team of hard working, ambitious people move and work together great things become possible.

High level competition: The ultimate test of all those hours and years of gym training. The strain shows as Eddie Cummings gets ready to go out again to do battle with Mansher Khera, the outstanding student of the great Marcelo Garcia. Eddie won a tightly contested battle. Here we discuss strategy between rounds. Observe the composure and calm Mr Cummings displays after a very grueling 30minutes of action with another 10 to go. An impressive example to us all

This is the day Garry Tonon was confirmed to fight the very talented and dangerous Rousimar Palhares: I am trying to ask him if he really wants this fight despite the obvious size and strength disadvantage. The smile on his face tells you not only the answer, but also just how fearless and confident this young prodigy is. Famously he went on to dominate all the leg lock exchanges in a great match against the man widely considered to the best and most fearsome leg locker in professional fighting.

Look at these lazy good for nothing students sleeping in the middle of class!! Disgraceful!! 😉

Trying to explain to Mr Cummings that the human body is composed of many more joints than just the ankles and knees...he's not buying it

Trying to explain to Mr Cummings that the human body is composed of many more joints than just the knees and ankles...he's not buying it...

A reporter once asked me in an interview, "I heard that when you first came to America you had a low opinion of grappling arts. When was the eureka moment that changed your mind." My deadpan answer: "The first time I got taken down, pinned helplessly and punched repeatedly in the face" 😉

Photographic proof that Eddie Cummings does indeed know at least one upper body submission 😅 (many more to come in the future...)

I sometimes think I have the best job in the world - watching up close the best athletes learning and improving in the greatest sport I know...

Just a few months after this night, Gordon Ryan went on to beat everyone at star studded ebi6 - testimony to his hard work and learning over five short years 😊

Great day of light training with a truly talented group of students 😊