Submission holds - they either work completely or they don’t work at all: No one remembers a a submission hold that “almost” worked. In the heat of high level competition against athletes aren’t afraid to take some pain, the only only ones that work are those that are perfect in their application. As far as the outcome goes, a submission hold that was 98% perfect is as useless as one that was 5% perfect. ONLY THE ONES THAT ARE 100% PERFECT COUNT. As such, if you are to take the long and difficult path towards submission mastery you MUST seek mechanical perfect in your holds. It’s not easy to attain against determined and skilled opponents - but when you get there you will have a truly impressive weapon at your disposal. Look at the pressure generated by this lock from submission master Gordon Ryan - pressure and mechanical tightness like this must be your goal.

Squad senior and widely regarded as the worlds most exciting grappler, Garry Tonon @garrytonon is back in action this weekend against the great champion Osvaldo Queixinho Moizinho at @f2wbjj in Dallas Texas. Mr Moizinho has himself a very exciting and dynamic style of Jiu jitsu that won him multiple no gi world championships. He is a master of juji gatame arm bar and omoplata attacks which he can get from almost anywhere. With these two submission wizards in stage this should be a great match!

Working against resistance: Everything you do in Jiu Jitsu is done against strong resistance by someone who probably knows the moves you are attempting and knows the counters to those moves. This makes for a situation where you will GENERALLY FAIL MORE OFTEN THAN YOU SUCCEED in the application of your moves. You must get used to this fundamental fact of live sparring and competition - understand that failure is only temporary and that you always have options to follow up with subsequent attacks. Victory almost always goes to the athlete who can SUSTAIN ATTACKS OVER TIME until a breakthrough is achieved. As you feel strong resistance take confidence in the fact that you are offensive and he is defensive and that if you can maintain this long enough you WILL break through no matter how tough the resistance feels.

In all combat, victory will almost always go to the one who, to a greater degree than his rival, KNOWS WHAT HE IS DOING and and has the PHYSICAL ABILITY to do it along with the CONFIDENCE to implement it when the moment of opportunity arises. Thus victory is the meeting point of knowledge, physical skill/preparation and confidence. Spend your time developing these three factors and you will experience victory far more often than defeat.

Check out Australian submission juggernaut Craig Jones in Chael Sonnen’s SUG event today! Mr Jones was always very good, but working with the squad full time the last two years has seen him rise to a different level. A gentleman off the mat but a straight up submission assassin once he steps on stage! Follow his journey to the top!

Getting better at pins in Jiu jitsu: Pins are the highest scoring maneuvers in all of Jiu jitsu. The mount and the rear mount score double what you get for a takedown or sweep. As such there is a great incentive to get there. This often creates a mindset where the pin is enough reward in itself. In the long term however, you must go beyond this and see the dominant pins of Jiu jitsu as not just a good position to score - but a great position to submit people. The key to making this shift is your opponents ARMS. Don’t be satisfied with the pin itself - go further and trap your opponents arms. This will help immeasurably as you try to convert the pin into a submission. From the rear mount pin one of his arms with your legs and suddenly your strangle success rate will double. From the mount, walk your opponents arm out and away from his torso and suddenly you will be strangling and arm locking opponents at twice your normal rate. Make it a habit once you get to your dominant pins to start working on your opponents arms and bridge the gap between position and submission!

Experiment with different variations of your favorite finishing holds - you will need them all against tough opponents: All the various submission holds of Jiu jitsu have many variations. Each of those variations have their strengths and weaknesses. Each has a domain where they work very well and other domains where they work less well. As such it is important than you familiarize yourself with them all, as tough opponents will put up a level of resistance that will inevitably take you into different domains as you try to apply your favorite submission. Here, Garry Tonon takes on the great ADCC champion Vinny Magalhaes in an absolute division match way back in 2015. Despite the big size disadvantage, Mr Tonon was able to get in deep on the legs on several occasions. Excellent defensive awareness from Mr Magalhaes saw the two athletes exchange several different positions, prompting Mr Tonon to go through several different varieties of ashi garami to maintain pressure - here he works with an outside lock as his opponent turns prone to shut down an initial inside sankaku lock. Rapid fire transitions from one variation to another in the face of changing positions and circumstances is a hallmark of good submission specialists - and it must become a part of your game too!

In a world of confusion those who have a clear sense of where they want to be will prevail: Some of the scramble situations we find ourselves in Jiu jitsu can be totally disorienting. Both athletes head over heels and spinning like tops. It is crucial that you be able to go from this common type of scenario and emerge in a good situation, or at least, a better one than your opponent. The key to this is to have a small set of goals as to where you want to maneuver towards as you tumble around around each - so that you are working towards those goals even as you tumble. When the tumbling stops - you can emerge in a winning position. Don’t just scramble for the sake of scrambling - scramble towards something. Being someone mostly interested in submission I usually like to aim towards some form of leg entanglement in a heated scramble. Variations of ashi garami are almost always available and when the scramble is done you are in a potentially match winning position or a good position to sweep for a reversal. You might have different preferences and aim for juji gatame arm bars in a scramble, or a Kimura, whatever you prefer - just have a prior goal at the onset of a scramble to make sure you got something good in your hand at the end of the scramble.

In Jiu jitsu you can FEEL failure before it happens - use this to your advantage: You spend a lot of time drilling moves - as a result you all know what a GOOD application of the move feels like. As such, when you are sparring and your application of the move is inadequate, you have a tactile sense of failure - it just FEELS wrong. Moreover, there is a time period from the beginning of the application to the onset of that sense of failure. As you fight to apply the move you can feel yourself coming up short of the ideal of the move you as you felt it in drilling. THIS IS A CRUCIAL MOMENT. Most people will feel the onset of failure, recognize it, and give up so they can start all over again. Instead, try hard to see this as an opportunity to make a renewed attack either with a re-application of the same move or a switch to a new move. Here, Garry Tonon has made a spirited attempt at an inside heel hook but you can clearly see his opponent has slipped his knee through Mr Tonon’s knee line - this clearly signals the failure of the initial move. At this point your mind must start searching for follow up attacks. In a game where failure occurs over time and in which failure can be felt before it is fully manifest - you almost always have time to search for alternative follow ups if you just train your mind to do so.

The great theme of Georges St Pierre’s career - preparation supersedes everything: Fighting and competition can be a scary thing. It’s natural to think of it interns of how it appears to an audience - as a battle between two athletes on a competitive stage where the man or woman who shines best on the night takes victory - but the great theme pushed by arguably the greatest MMA athlete of all time is that the athletes PREPARATION is more important than any factors on the night of the bout. As such, the entire focus of Mr St Pierre’s career was in progressive skill development over the year and meticulous preparation in specialized fight camps for a given opponent whenever a bout contract was signed. Understand this - NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF THE OUTCOME OF A GIVEN BOUT IS DETERMINED BEFORE THE ATHLETES STEP IN THE CAGE OR ON THE MAT. What transpires on the stage is just a reflection of their relative depth of preparation prior to the match. Don’t focus on giving your heart and soul on the stage - FOCUS ON GIVING YOUR HEART AND SOUL IN THE PREPARATION LEADING UP TO YOU STEPPING ON TO THE STAGE - and then the bout will take care of itself.

Young masters: When we think of martial arts masters the image that usually comes to mind is that of a wizened Pei Mei type talking like Yoda and recounting many decades of knowledge of the art. In fact reality is quite different. Mastery is not a reflection of your physical age, but rather THE NUMBER AND QUALITY OF HOURS OF PRACTICE you have behind you. This means that it is possible to get deeply impressive levels of mastery at a young age. Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones are in their mid twenties, yet they have each spent so much time on the mats and done so in such an efficient and progressive manner that I have no doubts whatsoever that both can be considered true masters of grappling. Their knowledge level of everything from strategy, tactics, mechanics and training methodology of grappling is as good or better than masters twice their physical age. The key to this notion of young mastery is practice time and practice quality. Only when large amounts of time where each session BUILDS UPON THE LAST IN A PROGRESSION TOWARDS A GOAL does one see early mastery. I see in these young athletes a level of knowledge that usually takes much longer to accumulate. When you come to assess your progress, don’t get distracted by insignificant factors such as your physical age, how many years you have been training etc etc. Focus on the only factor that counts - how much time spent in progressive high quality training have you accumulated? Be confident that well planned training can get you towards mastery in fewer years than our common images of martial arts mastery suggest and that there are many youngsters out there with extremely impressive levels of mastery - perhaps one day you can be one of them!

Improve your pinning by focusing on your opponents elbows: It’s always a good feeling when you get to a strong pinning position on an opponent, but it will be a much better feeling if you go beyond the basic pin and start focusing on controlling his elbows in addition to the basic position. Most of your opponents escapes and ability to survive from underneath a pin involve his elbow (there’s a reason why they’re called elbow escapes). If you take take his elbow out of position - either away from the torso, over his shoulder or towards his center line - you will greatly subvert his ability to escape, keep him flat on his back and set up your submissions so that you can use position to set up submission, rather than be satisfied with the pin alone. Here, Nicky Rod does a fine job of walking his opponents elbow out and away from the torso towards the shoulder line - this will make escape difficult and submission easy - the best goals you have have when asserting your pin control!

Your guard is four limbed, not two: The centerpiece of guard position is your legs. Your legs are radically stronger than your upper body and so guard position is the best way for smaller people to take on and defeat bigger opponents from underneath. Nonetheless, we must always understand that it is THE SYNERGY BETWEEN ARMS AND LEGS THAT WILL MAKE YOUR GUARD EFFECTIVE BOTH IN DEFENSE AND OFFENSE. In the case of guard retention, when your opponent beats your LEGS, it will be your ARMS that hold him off long enough for the legs to reclaim their position. In the vase of offense, it will be your arms that hold the opponent for your legs to make their way into the various ashi garami, triangle and arm bar position that will bring you victory. Always it will be that critical INTERACTION of arms and legs that will make your guard a stalwart of defense and a powerhouse of offense. Look how Nicky Ryan’s arms form temporary barriers and frames against a strong passing rush and how this creates the time and space to bring the legs back into play and defend the position. Make your guard an interactive four limbed monster of attack and defense and your bottom game will be much closer to where you want it!

The back - How should I play between the position and the strangle? I coach always that in a no gi submission match with no striking, the back is the ultimate position. When athletes wear a gi the mount is arguably as good as the back because you have the collars to creat a strong strangle threat that combines will with arm bar threat. When punches/elbows are allowed the mount becomes a devastating position, but for no gi grappling the back is king. A natural question to ask is - what is the relationship between the position and the main submission from there - the rear strangle? In the great majority of cases focus first on solidifying the position first and strangle second. As you get more advanced, your opponents will get very adept at defending the strangle and you must then start trapping arms to get the breakthrough - my students are all very adept at this crucial skill and employ a step by step system to get the breakthrough. Understand that the higher you go, THE MORE YOU MUST START TO CLOSE THE GAP BETWEEN THE POSITION AND THE STRANGLE. The moment you lock the position, YOU SHOULD BE THREATENING THE STRANGLE and in some cases where appropriate, you can even get you strangle arm set FIRST and then get the position AFTER. Look at how Garry Tonon immediately creates a strong strangle threat against the great ADCC champion Davi Ramos the second he locks in the position - this is very important against such a skilled opponent as this. The more threat you can create at the neck, The easier it will be to trap arms and sometimes even get a quick finish as your opponent defends the position instead of the submission

When you train with the smaller guys: In Jiu jitsu we are expected to train with a wide array of partners. Some will be very good, some will be beginners, most will be somewhere in between. Additionally, they will come in all shapes and sizes. Figuring out the unique challenges of each different body type is a big part of your development. In response to the many different types of training partner you will work with, you must learn to develop different intensity levels in your game. When training with smaller or less experienced partners, use this to develop your defense or a weaker part of your game. Remember - unlike competition, the goal of training is DEVELOPMENT, not victory. That means seeing a sparring round with someone you know you can defeat easily not as a chance to beat them as expected, but as a chance to take some aspect of your game that needs improvement and spend time on that or by handicapping yourself in some way to make the match more even. In this way you can derive great benefit from training with a lessor partner in ways that will make you more successful in the future against your toughest partners.

Three great entry points into submission
Ashi garami
Front headlock
Kimura
The game of Jiu jitsu has a dizzying array of moves, tactics, principles etc and in the hurly burly of sparring or competition it can be very difficult to remember what to do. Whenever confusion reigns - SIMPLIFY. If you are searching for submission in a dynamic and chaotic situation - focus on the three best entry and most accessible entry points that will give you a tight hold on even a very challenging opponent and get you in a position to start threatening submissions. These are ASHI GARAMI, KIMURA and FRONT HEADLOCK. Ashi garami will open up a vast number of sweeps, reversals and leg lock submissions. Kimura will open up submissions via Kimura itself, plus juji gatame arm locks, triangles and sweeps/takedowns. Front headlock will give you Guillotine, Darce, Anaconda strangles (among others) and transitions to the back along with many takedowns. In a chaotic and confusing scramble - stay focused on these three control grips - they are almost always available at some point, and will get on the short cut to submission! Here, Craig Jones, a young master of Ashi garami, gets a deep bite on his opponents leg that points him a situation to attack with leg locks and sweeps and immediately gets his opponent into a defensive mindset.

My leg lock lock instructional video is on the BJJ Fanatics daily deal today! Big savings on the video that started a revolution
https://bjjfanatics.com/collections/daily-deals/products/leglocks-enter-the-system-by-john-danaher
You can follow the link on my Instagram story if you are interested!

I am often asked the question - what makes a good student? People offer all kinds of attributes - intelligence, dexterity, coordination, strength, flexibility, height, mental toughness, confidence etc etc. In fact over the years I have seen champions emerge who were totally dissimilar in their attributes. Some were confident, some weren’t. Some were strong, but not others. When you look at the winners podium you see every body type and psychological profile represented. In the end I came to the conclusion that there was no set of attributes that determined how far you would go in Jiu jitsu - except one. There was one attribute that every champion I ever met or trained possessed. It was the only commonality among them all. It was PERSISTENCE. All of them withstood the many trials, heartbreaks, pitfalls, boredom, fatigue and sacrifices on the path towards excellence and stayed true to the course. When I think about this I find it very encouraging. Most of our physical attributes are determined at birth and most of our mental attributes are determined quite early in our upbringing and so there is little to no choice in them. But PERSISTENCE is something that all of us can realistically exhibit, regardless of whatever else we have or lack. In this sense, you all have what it takes to get very good indeed if you can develop and strengthen this simple and widely available attribute. Don’t worry too much about your progress for this day or this week - concern yourself more with this year. PERSISTENCE OVER TIME is the most valuable trait you can possess and interestingly, the one most likely already in your possession.

Dominate the space between the knees: A fundamental premise of guard position is that THE TWO LEGS MUST WORK IN UNISON IF THE POSITION IS TO BE EFFECTIVE. If you can place the your body between his knees and prevent the legs from working together, you will have taken a big step towards shutting down your opponents guard. In addition, you will have placed yourself in a fine situation to pass. Look at Craig Jones wedging himself between the knees of his opponent in a way that totally shuts down the bottom athletes ability to use his legs in unison. Now he has shut down most forms of attack and resistance from the bottom player, he can focus on a choice between passing and leg lock attacks - and there is very little his opponent can do to stop either. Look for this situation whenever possible as you pass. You will find the other fellow can’t attack with much, whilst you can attack with whatever you want.

Half guard passing - Once you control the head you can focus upon extracting your leg: The ultimate goal of every half guard pass is to extract your leg and pass either to the two sides of your opponent or straight up the middle to the mount. A crucial step on the path to that goal is to pin the head and shoulders. This is usually done via crossface and/or underhook, though there are other good methods as well. Here, Gordon Ryan uses only a cross face without an under hook. This means he must pay extra attention to keeping his opponents hips flat on the mat so that he is stable enough to begin extracting his leg. Don’t think the cross face alone is enough to flatten an opponent and keep him flat - your hips are an important part of that process also. Walking your hips forward into his is an excellent way to use your legs to keep him flat rather than rely exclusively on your arm.

The power of the triangle - Gordon Ryan victorious in Dallas: Gordon Ryan defeated 10th planet standout Kyle Boehm here is Dallas tonight in his first return to competition since the covid 19 crises broke out. It was wonderful to be back in action again and see so many of the great figures of the sport again after the long lockdown inactivity and what seems like an eternity. The match featured a no time limit submission only format - arguably the most “pure” form of Jiu jitsu as there is no doubt about the eventual winner. These matches have a very different pace and tempo from regular points matches with time limits. Mr Ryan paced himself well early on but started to apply increasing amounts of pressure as time passed until he was about to take Mr Boehms back after a leg lock attempt and in a scramble transitioned beautifully from arm bar to triangle. The threat of the strangle forced Mr Boehm to come forward and into a very interesting bent arm lock variation within the triangle (essentially a variation of an American lock) that created a vicious break and a quick end to the match. It was a fine example of MULTIPLE THREATS - so important in high level Jiu jitsu where the resistance levels are very high. The triangle offers an incredible ability to fuse together strangle threat with multiple arm lock threats - you have juji gatame, ude gatame (reverse armlock), kimura and American locks (even a wrist lock in there). It is so hard for an opponent to cover all the simultaneous threats - worse still when the person doing it is Gordon Ryan. Hope you all enjoyed the show. Thank you to the promotion and flograppling for starting the road back to Jiu Jitsu with the these small first steps. Wishing you all the best from Dallas, Texas!

The beginning of every application of a physical technique is the mental act of recognition of opportunity: Every time you go to apply a move or tactic in the sport of Jiu jitsu the first step is a mental one - recognizing that the opportunity is there to apply it. Learning to train your eyes and brain and SEE and RECOGNIZE is this a HUGE part of your development. A big part of your training must therefore be a kind of MENTAL PROGRAMMING that teaches your eyes to see and your kind to recognize so that your body can pull the trigger and execute the move. Nowhere is this more important than programming yourself to see the multitude of opportunities that occur to take the back during any grappling exchange. The back is a huge percentage of our body’s total surface area - so opportunity will ALWAYS be there as you grapple. Learning to see and recognize those opportunities is the beginning of actually TAKING the opportunities and becoming renown as a master of back attacks. Here Garry Tonon sees a fleeting vision of the back and immediately capitalizes!

I had the pleasure of a chat with the crew at @londonrealtv a while ago and they will air the interview today. We discuss Jiu jitsu and my remarkable students along with some other related topics. Hope you enjoy it!

First contact: Every grappling match begins with the closing of distance and first physical contact, whether it be in standing position or on the floor - it greatly behooves you to have a plan in mind BEFORE first contact rather than make contact and see what happens. There are only so many ways the two of you can initiate contact - having a good response to the major possibilities worked out ahead of time let’s you get off to a good start - and when you are facing tough opponents, that’s a great thing. In order to make an effective and proactive first contact you will need an appropriate STANCE, MOTION, GRIP FIGHTING SEQUENCE and PLAN OF ACTION for the initial encounter. These will all vary depending upon what your aims are. Make sure you devote some time developing these SKILLS OF FIRST CONTACT. So many times the outcome is heavily influenced by those crucial opening seconds.

In Jiu Jitsu no single pin will be final: Pinning in Jiu Jitsu is very different from other grappling arts. In most styles of grappling a pin can end a match if held for a period of time - but not in Jiu jitsu. Pins never end a match in Jiu jitsu no matter how long you hold them. As such you can never hope to win by simply holding someone in place for extended periods of time. Add to this the simple fact that if your opponent is roughly the same size and skill level as you are he will invariably be capable of eventually escaping your best pin if given sufficient time. So in Jiu jitsu training to hold a single pin is not really the goal. Instead, the idea is to hold it long enough to score (around three seconds) and then to hold it long enough to tire and frustrate an opponent enough that as they try to escape you cause them to concede an opening that will let you either to move to a new pin and get more points or to a submission attempt. ONLY USING PINS IN COMBINATIONS SO THAT AS HE ATTEMPTS TO ESCAOE FROM ONE YOU SWITCH TO ANOTHER WILL ENABLE YOU TO HOLD DOMINANT POSITIONS FOR EXTENDED PERIODS OF TIME AGAINST STRONG RESISTANCE. Don’t just think about holding him down with a single pin, but rather about FLOWING FROM ONE PIN TO ANOTHER AND SMOOTHLY BYPASSING HIS ESCAPES BY MOVING TO A NEW VARIATION OF THE SAME PIN OR A NEW PIN ALTOGETHER. You can only immobilize an opponent so long before eventually he gets out - focus primarily on the skill of moving AROUND resistance from one pin to another once you feel your original pin is becoming untenable. Dynamic movement will keep you in good position longer than squeezing someone from the same position as long as you can and at the same time will open up many submission opportunities so you can bridge the gap between position and submission

Use all your options when passing half guard: Half Guard passing represents perhaps the most high percentage and versatile method of passing your opponents guard in the sport. Use it well and use it often. Whenever you choose to use it, be aware that you can pass in three directions. First, to the same side as you initiate the pass. Second, straight up the middle to the mount. Third, across your opponents body to the far side. All three are highly effective and all three combine well with each other. Learning to use all three possible directions, especially in combinations, will make it very difficult for an opponent to stop you. Here, I have back stepped over to the far side to get into a particularly effective passing method that controls an opponents head while while creating great pressure by getting head and hips pointing in opposing directions. Make sure you have at least one trusted method of half guard passing for each of the three main possible directions of passing from half guard and you will soon find your passing game generating a lot more success for you!

I am very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video HALF GUARD PASSING AND DYNAMIC PINNING. As many of you know from watching my students, I am a huge advocate of forcing your way to half guard and using this a premier passing position due to the unique possibilities for the most important kind of control in Jiu jitsu - head control. This is probably the most versatile form of guard passing as it works equally well in Gi, no gi and MMA. It offers great opportunities to greatly increase your passing scores by passing directly to mount and it is fair to say it is the passing method that requires very little athleticism and no speed. A closely related topic is dynamic pinning. Pinning in Jiu jitsu is very different than other grappling arts. It offers the greatest point scoring potential in the sport getting mounted or rear mount scores double what a takedown or sweep scores with far less effort and athleticism required. At the same time it creates the kind of pressure and purposeful movement required to enforce your upper body submission game. If you are interested in the potential of these skills to help your game - check it out! Link in my Instagram bio 😜

If you can’t get under ‘em...knock ‘em backwards: A big part of my approach to open guard situations is to get deep UNDER an opponent so that you can lift and elevate them into vulnerable position from which attacks often succeed. Any kind of lifting attack will require you to get UNDER AN OPPONENTS CENTER OF GRAVITY. Pretty soon opponents will figure that out and start backing away from you to prevent you getting under them. That’s when you must start adjusting the direction of your initial attack from UNDER and FORWARDS to BACKWARDS in the same direction as their defensive movement. Playing these two games against each other as a dilemma pairing will make you a very dangerous attacker from open guard.

The ultimate pressure pass - half guard: There are two main methods of guard passing. The first is based on MOVEMENT. The idea is to move rapidly to an angle and close distance at a rate that your opponent can not keep up with. Good examples would be toreando passes, x passes, long step passes etc. Second, there are pressure passing methods based around the idea of STOPPING THE OPPONENT FROM MOVING. Good examples would be over/under passing, stack passing etc. The best form of pressure passing in my opinion, is HALF GUARD PASSING. The reason is that the pressure is usually applied directly to the HEAD AND SHOULDERS, which has the greatest effect of stopping movement in your opponent. CONTROL OVER THE HEAD IS THE SINGLE MOST SIGNIFICANT FORM OF CONTROL YOU CAN EXERT UPON THE HUMAN BODY. No other passing method offers such unrelenting and intimidating pressure as half guard passing. The main weapons at you disposal are a strong cross face or reverse cross face to control the head; and either a far side or near side underhook to control the shoulders. Look how Gordon Ryan, a truly devastating half guard passer, flattens out his opponent to set up his cross face and work towards an under hook on either side - then with direct control of the head and shoulders the pressure mounts very quickly indeed - leading to the kind of passing success you will need as you progress to the higher ranks!

Dynamic pinning: Jiu jitsu has a very different conception of pinning from other grappling sports and learning to understand those differences is extremely important for your development and success. In most grappling sports pins are static and held for time and the pin itself can end a match. Once you get the pin there is no need to move, you just hold him in place for the specified time and it’s over. In Jiu jitsu a pin never ends a match. Moreover, not all pins score points. Side pins, north south pins are considered good and valuable, but score nothing. THE REAL REWARDS IN JIU JITSU COME FROM DYNAMICALLY MOVING FROM ONE PIN TO ANOTHER - THAT’s how you get big scores and set up submissions. Here, Nicky Rod has done a fine job of getting mounted - but you can see he is not satisfied with the static pin - he has loosened his feet as he isolates his opponents head and arm. This will allow dynamic transitions to other pinning positions to set up the submissions that he really wants. Learning to move from pin to pin WITHOUT GIVING UP SPACE AND LETTING AN OPPONENT ESCAPE is one of the most valuable and rewarding skills in the sport and is one of the key bridges between POSITION and SUBMISSION. It’s a wonderful thing to have a solid and secure static pin - that’s the first skill you must master in pinning - but you MUST go on to develop the real match winning skill of dynamic pinning, where you move smoothly from pin to pin. Only then can you use the unique characteristics of Jiu jitsu pinning to your advantage

Don’t be satisfied with the mere act of pinning - go the extra distance and isolate his limbs away from the torso: It’s good to get to a classic pinning position like mount, side or rear mount, but that won’t help much against a well trained and mentally tough opponent who knows his escapes. Once you get to a pin, the onus is one you to immediately work to get his arms separated from his torso so that you can
1 - get even better control over your opponent by making escape considerably more difficult
2 - make the task of dynamically shifting from one pin to another (the best way to score big points in Jiu Jitsu) much easier
3 - bridge the gap between position and submission by isolating a limb in a way that make submission far more likely than simply waiting for an opponent to make a mistake.
Here, Nicky Rod amplifies the pulverizing pressure of his top mount game by separating his opponents elbow from his torso to make a transition from pin to submission much more likely. Make this a habit every time you get to a pin and you will immediately find you are much harder to escape from, move more easily from one pin to another, and score a lot more upper body submissions

You have to be able to perform your favorite moves under any conditions: Usually when we drill moves it is under ideal conditions. Our partner is not resisting, we’re in a comfortable position, breathing comfortably, normal orientation, skin dry - but when it’s time to do it for real; it’s almost always under FAR FROM IDEAL CONDITIONS. Upside down, exhausted, opponents skin slippery as an eel and resistance at maximum, often in ways you did not anticipate. That’s what sparring is for. Drilling gives you the outline and direction of what you are supposed to do, but only sparring will give you the tenacity, improvisational nuances, tightness etc that will make it work when the chips are down. Here, Garry Tonon practices his beloved heel hooks upside down as he rotated through three hundred and sixty degrees - just as is required in most realistic match situations. Of course most of of your drilling will be under ideal conditions - that’s normal and preferable when your start out m, but set some time to drill under non ideal conditions to, it will help when it’s time for sparring 😜😜

If you can train yourself to survive any predicament in the gym, you can walk into any competition with confidence. Set some time to subject yourself to the stress of bad positions and situations. Staying calm and composed under stress is a skill that can be learned like any other, but you will never learn it if you are always the hammer. Take some time to feel what it’s like to be the nail. The more you do that in the gym the less you’ll need it on the stage

YOU! Yes you...that was the worst arm bar in the entire history of arm bars...you could go back in a time machine to feudal Japan and observe in fast forward all the arm bars performed since the thirteenth century and you would not see a more feeble attempt at an arm bar than that one! You couldn’t arm bar a sleeping, drunk one armed man with that miserable technique! #positivereinforcementFTW

Passing half guard - head control: The final stage of most forms of guard pass is to get control of the head and shoulder. In most cases you begin by passing the feet, knees, hips and then finally getting a hold of the head to complete the pass. Half guard passing is very different. In this case you usually get past one knee and then get control of the head and shoulders - THEN you go to extract your trapped leg and pass the guard. The great advantage of half guard passing is that is enables you to control the head PRIOR to the pass rather than as the COMPLETION of the pass. This creates unusual amounts of control and pressure as you pass. Here you can see Gordon Ryan, a true master of half guard passing, exert eye popping pressure on a training partner as he goes to work passing half guard. Though the head is the primary control - don’t neglect the shoulders - this usually done through some form of underhook - here Gordon Ryan has selected double underhooks, a particularly devastating form of control. Take advantage of the unique character of half guard passing to create the kind of match winning pressure you will need to pass the best guards in the gym.

Heels and toes: Jiu jitsu is a subtle game. Sometimes the smallest actions can have deep consequences. A good example is the significance of shifting an opponents weight on to different areas of the feet. A well balanced person has the weight going down through the center of their feet. All that changes when you can draw an opponents weight FORWARD ONTO THEIR TOES or alternatively, BACKWARDS ONTO THEIR HEELS. When you can do this you can throw/sweep them forwards and backwards with ease - if you can’t, it’s going to be very difficult to throw or sweep anyone your own size and skill level. You must learn the craft of shifting your opponents weight to the toes and heels - this is the precursor of most successful throws and sweeps. When sweeping opponents TRY HARD RO GET A SENSE OF DRAWING THEM ON TO HEELS OR TOES BEFORE YOU COMMIT TO THE ACTUAL SWEEP. This will massively increase your success rate.

Distance control: When you first go to engage an opponent from seated guard there are a lot of variables that will influence how you will engage. Some of these variables are within your control and some are not. One that often is within your control and which has great importance, is DISTANCE. Depending upon what kind of attack you want to employ, you will want to be at an appropriate distance for that attack. Learning to move in such a way that you control the distance between you and your opponent so that you can choose the weapon of your attack is a big part of your development. You should be able to move efficiently from the seated position - scooting - so that you can close distance, maintain distance or increase distance, depending upon what you want to do. Here, Gordon Ryan and the great Xande Ribeiro square off and try to gain advantage through distance before they even engage in grips. Both athletes know what they want, both have a good idea what the other fellow wants - now it will come down to movement skills to see who can actually GET want they want. Often there is considerable jousting for distance and angle at this part of the game - this is normal and to be expected. These skills may not be the exciting to learn, but they have a big impact on the outcome, so make sure you devote time to them.

Don’t stay on your knees in a closed guard - stand up and open it: One of the most common problems i see beginning students struggle with is opening a closed guard. On the surface it feels like you are better off staying in your knees as you are stable and can retract your arms and neck for safety. This is an illusion. Remember that as along as you stay inside the closed guard you have very little effective offense in a grappling situation (MMA is very different). despite being in bottom position, your opponents hips are actually higher than yours, which means he has some very effective offense from bottom. There are a few specialized ways of opening a closed guard from your knees, but they tend to be used either by a few specialists in those methods or by beginners on other beginners. As you go higher in level, in the vast majority of cases, you will need to stand up to effectively open your opponents guard. When you first try you will feel unstable and be knocked down many times. Don’t despair. Get back up and try again. It doesn’t matter if you get knocked down to your butt, so long as your opponent doesn’t actually get in top of you he won’t score. In time you will be knocked down less. Through all of your early attempts and frustrations I offer you this - WHATEVER PROBLEMS YOU HAVE GETTING KNOCKED DOWN BACKWARDS WHILE STANDING IN YIUR OPPONENTS CLOSED GUARD ARE INSIGNIFICANT WHEN COMPARED WITH THE PROBLEMS YOU WILL HAVE WHEN YOU ARE PULLED FORWARD INTO A CLOSED GUARD ON YOUR KNEES. The former is an annoyance, the latter will very often end in your submission. You must develop your ability to stand in a closed guard and open it with confidence - it is a foundational skill of the sport.

Building your repertoire: When a young musician develops, a big part of that development is building a repertoire of musical pieces that they can play extremely well, a good gauge of their developing maturity as an artist is the growing extent of their repertoire. As a Jiu jitsu athlete, you are as much an artist as a musician, and like them - you must constantly seek to both refine and expand your repertoire; only your repertoire won’t be concerned with music, but with moves enabling you to control, break and strangle opponents. Make sure that at any given time you have a specific set of moves (usually a rather small set) that you are actively working to learn and develop into something you can use successfully against your toughest opponents. If you keep coming out to fight the same people with the same moves it will become difficult as they learn to predict and anticipate your attacks. Actively adding to your repertoire is a fine way to make you unpredictable and stay ahead of your competition. Here, Nicky Rod works on his leg lock game - totally new to him when he first started - but one day can perhaps be a major part of his offense. So too in your own life - just because you are not good at something now does not mean you are condemned to stay that way. I have seen many an athlete turn a weakness into a strength in time - you can too!

When to be tight and when to be loose: when it comes to physicality, Jiu Jitsu is a game of contrasts. There are times we need to be loose and relaxed and times we need extreme isometric tension in order to be effective. Learning to balance these opposing demands is a key requirement for your improvement and the price of getting it wrong is either fatigue or ineffective application of potentially winning moves. As a general rule, the more MOVEMENT is the key to gaining advantage, the looser and more relaxed you want to be. Tightness makes our movement both tiring and inefficient. The more STOPPING AND OPPONENTS MOVEMENT is the key to success, the tighter we want to be. Here, Craig Jones shows total isometric tension in a spirited application of a heel hook. This is exactly the time you want tightness to hold an opponent in a finishing lock long enough to do real damage. It’s hard to imagine that just a few seconds before and after this photo his body was very relaxed, making it possible for him to move smoothly and easily into the move and into a follow up afterwards. Learning to switch gears between softness and hardness is a big part of your progress in the sport and represents a good sign that you are making progress. If you constantly find yourself getting tired or having opponents skip out of your moves even when the initial application was good, then there is a good chance that your physical switching from dynamic looseness to isometric tension is at fault.

Get a good bite on the leg: Probably the single most common error I see young athletes make when entering into cross ashi garami to get an inside heel hook from bottom position is failure to rise up from the floor high enough to capture the leg close to the hip. Don’t be satisfied with getting to your opponents knee - when he resists he will only have to slip the knee an inch or two and he’s out. Come up off the floor and get the lock of your cross ashi garami up high by the hip. This will give you a deep bite on the leg that will prove very difficult for an opponent to extricate himself from. In addition it will make it easier to off balance the opponent to create better breaking conditions

Pins - static pinning and dynamic pinning: In Jiu jitsu the biggest point score come from pinning. Getting to mount or rear mount score double what a good takedown or sweep scores. You must be able to exhibit pinning skills in two main ways. The first is STATIC PINNING. This is the ability to hold a resisting opponent in place for time. The minimum requirement in three seconds, if you can’t hold the pin and exhibit control for three seconds you will not score. Of course in most cases you will want to hold much longer than this to tire and frustrate your opponent and set up further opportunities to score. The second is DYNAMIC PINNING. This involves transitions from one pin to another. This is without doubt the key to getting big scores in Jiu jitsu. If you can transition from pin to pin you will rack up big points and create the kind of movement that sets up submission. Nonetheless, it all starts with the foundation - static pins. You must learn to hold a man down and stick him. Here I am demonstrating one means of doing so - loading my weight to one side while posting wide with one hand and crossfacing with the other arm, whilst at the lower body cross ankles create a closed wedge around the hips. This creates a combination of wide base, preemptively loaded weight, closed wedges and head control that will make escape surprisingly difficult. Play around with these concepts along with experimenting with posture, particularly your spinal posture and you will soon be unmovable in top position!

The magic of ashi garami: Most people associate the use of ashi garami by my students as a leg locking position, but never forget that it is equally useful as a sweeping position from bottom and a passing position from top. Only when you start to use the POSITIONAL function of ashi garami will you be able to maximize or SUBMISSION potential. Here, Gordon Ryan sends a man tumbling to the mat with a standard form of ashi garami - this will immediately create a dual positional and submission threat. He can attack the legs or get up on top with his own legs in the perfect position to begin passing pressure. As much as you may enjoy leg locking out of ashi garami - don’t neglect your positional attacks from this incredible hold!

Fastest way to control a leg lock scramble? Control both legs: Nothing is more frustrating when going to attack an opponents leg than the other fellow twisting and turning, heisting over your hips, scooting back and away to free his knee and all the other commons lines of defensive movement that make it difficult to get to the heel and apply your lock. You can drastically curtail that defensive movement by controlling both legs and sitting your opponent to his hips. This will immediately slow things down and bring order to chaos. When you can control movement and pace you can think clearly - and if you can do that you can win most of the time. So next time your opponent is flying about in your ashi garami, bring him back under control by securing the second leg - you will immediately double the amount of danger he is in and halve your workload - a solid forward step in the path to victory!

Half guard passing and MMA/fighting: Modern Jiu jitsu has many exciting and very effective methods of guard passing that have risen to prominence in last decade. When it’s time to apply some of these to MMA or fighting however, they often run into problems due to lack of gi grips or the fact that many opponents simply stand up from bottom position as you try to pass. When it comes time to pass under fighting conditions, one method stands above all - half guard passing. When I used to coach George St Pierre for his passing/top control, the overwhelming majority of training time was spent in forcing half guard and passing from there. No other method adapts so well to the rigors and demands of MMA than pressure passing from half guard. He used this with great effect throughout his career - repeatedly passing even world champion Jiu jitsu specialists with no problems. I can confidently attest that no other method of guard passing adapts so well to gi, no gi and MMA as half guard passing does. Even when Mr St Pierre trains in pure no gi grappling he is able to put even elite level grapplers under shocking pressure using this simple but powerful method of guard passing. Notice how his chest to chest contact will make it very difficult indeed for an opponent to stand up on his as he passes

Learning to extract your leg from the grip of your opponents legs is among the most valuable skills in all of Jiu jitsu: A fundamental feature of Jiu jitsu as a sport is that positional dominance is largely understood in terms FREEING YOURSELF FROM THE GRIP OF YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS. As long as an opponent controls you to some degree through the use of his legs, you are not considered to be in a dominant position. As you get better at Jiu jitsu you will find more and more you can get quite close to passing an opponents legs, only to have your opponent snatch ONE of your legs in a last ditch attempt to prevent you scoring. A second situation is that you actually do pass your opponents guard, but he manages a partial escape by grabbing one of your legs with his and thus breaking your pin. As your opponents get better a third scenario you will often encounter is that if athletes who favor half guard bottom as an attacking position and who actively look to ensnare on of your legs so that they can enter their favorite attacks from there. These three common situations will all require you to be able to extract your leg from your opponents grasp and get to a dominant pinning position. It is thus one of the most commonly occurring scenarios in the entire sport and one that you MUST be very good at managing. It tends to be a rather slow moving situation due to the close body contact. As such it is a scenario that older and less athletic athletes can excel in and defeat younger and faster opponents if they know what they’re doing. Here I am demonstrating a partial sit out method of stabilizing the position, an essential prerequisite to extracting the captured leg successfully. Learning to get a controlling upper body grip and marrying that to a stable posture are the first steps in a good extraction that can get you the dominant positions you seek at relatively little cost in physical output and tactical risk. It will be among the first skills you will need to become a master half guard passer and dynamic pinner.

Look where you want them to land! Whenever you want to throw someone from standing position or sweep from guard position, you will need to align your body’s structure and in the direction of the throw/sweep. Only a unified effort recruiting every part of your body will get the job done against strong resistance. One of the best ways to do this is to obey the simple adage - LOOK WHERE YOU WANT YOUR OPPONENT TO LAND. In many cases (there are exceptions) this simple act of looking will get your head pointed in the correct direction. The head leads the body and will thus help you create a unified effort in the proper direction to get the results you seek. Here, Nicky Ryan launches into a beautiful hook sweep (sumi gaeshi). By looking where he wants his opponent to land he creates a powerful body align that creates high amplitude and a spectacular finish. Next time you are sweeping from bottom, employ this simple but very useful principle and you can get better results!

The soul of Jiu jitsu will always be submission: Every combat sport has its soul. For boxing it is the knock out punch. For judo the perfect ippon throw. For wrestling the pin. In Jiu jitsu it is the submission hold. You can be losing the entire match, down by a landslide of points, but if you successfully apply a submission hold - you win regardless. A submission hold trumps all. I would wager that for all of us the original appeal of Jiu jitsu that brought us in the door and kept us in the dojo despite many injuries, disappointments and frustrations, was the innate appeal of CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. That is the ideal and the appeal of Jiu jitsu. As a coach, every lesson I teach has this message as it’s underlying assumption. As a student, every training session you partake in should have this as your underlying direction. The further your Jiu jitsu slips away from this basic appeal and degenerates into a study of advantages and match tactics and holding on to a lead, the less interest you and those around you will have in the game. When an athlete makes submission his or her priority, they will be a both a dangerous opponent and an entertaining performer - the faces in the crowd tell the whole story about the most basic appeal of Jiu jitsu and the best direction to take your game.

The pins of Jiu Jitsu: Any grappling style that involves ground work will have some form of pinning built into it. Pinning demonstrates control and dominance. Each grappling style has its own interpretation of pinning and the differences between them are very significant for your development within each sport. In Jiu jitsu the whole notion of pinning is radically different from other grappling sports such as wrestling, Judo and Sambo. The basis of Jiu Jitsu’s interpretation of pins is the idea that pins should reflect the degree to which a pin allows the dominate athlete to strike an opponent while not being struck back. As such, Jiu jitsu is unique among the main grappling sports in that it recognizes rear mount as a pin - even in cases where you are underneath an opponent. In wrestling, Judo and Sambo rear mount scores nothing. In Jiu Jitsu is scores the maximum four points. There are five major pins recognized in Jiu jitsu. The first two are non scoring - you score zero points when you attain them. They are great positions with high tactical value, but you get no points for getting them.
1 Side pin
2 North south pin
The other three are the scoring pins of Jiu jitsu.
3 Knee on Stomach - 2 points
4 Mounted pin - 4 points
5 Rear mounted pin - 4 points
You can clearly see that the by far the biggest point scoring opportunities in Jiu jitsu come from the ability to MOVE INTO A SCORING PIN AND FROM ONE SCORING PIN TO ANOTHER. This skill of dynamic pinning, the skill of moving into a pin and between pins is crucial for your development and allows you to amass big scores on an opponent with almost no risk. The biggest challenge when you learn these skills is to balance MOVEMENT with TIGHTNESS. You want to be loose enough to move efficiently from one pin to another, but tight enough that you give no space for an opponent to escape as you move. As such, it’s a subtle part of the game and given the scoring methods of the sport, the most lucrative!

The best entries for Ashi garami based leg locks from bottom position require you to first either get your opponents hands to the mat or butt to the mat: want to increase your success with leg locks from bottom position? You need to develop two precursor skills. You should be able to make your opponents hands touch the mat by tripping him forwards, or make his butt touch the mat by tripping him backwards. If you can make this happen at will, you will find the world of leg locks opens up a LOT easier for you. Almost all the skills of Jiu jitsu have PRECURSOR SKILLS - Skills that you must have if other subsequent skills are to be made possible. The two great precursor skills of bottom position leg locks are getting opponent hands to mat or butt to mat. Like any general rule of Jiu jitsu there are some important exceptions, but most of the time it holds true and will help your performance in this part of the game

The two most dominant grapplers I ever saw had something in common - they were devastating pinners: Over the many years I have spent running classes in the basement in NYC, the two most dominant grapplers I ever saw were Gordon Ryan and Roger Gracie. There are many commonalities between them and some important differences, but the thing they share most in common and which is important for YOUR development is that both men were truly devastating in their application of the various pins of Jiu jitsu. Having either of them on top of you once they had passed your legs felt you had a Cadillac parked on your chest while you attempted to do escapes. The pressure was so immense in any one position that you almost hoped they would move to another position to score, just to get a temporary reprieve from the pressure. A minute under a mount like theirs felt like an eternity. There is no question that a simple pin can be among the most devastating weapons in your arsenal if applied to its full potential. Learning to shut down escapes and generate pressure while moving from pin to pin is perhaps the single most important skill in raising your submission success rate - particularly at the higher levels. You must begin to pay attention to your posture and how certain subtle changes in posture can make you feel lighter or heavier; how a shift to one side can sit down a potential escape, how moving up or down an opponents body can change how he tries to escapes. Pinning is perhaps the most subtle part of the entire game. The movements are very small but have deep consequences for your success or failure. Here, Gordon Ryan makes someone’s life totally miserable with one of his trademark mounted pins. Ask yourself what is he doing with his posture at this moment ? His foot positioning? Head position? Near side elbow position? Learning to answer these questions is part of your journey to developing a truly devastating arsenal of pins - from which your submissions game will greatly benefit!

Trust: It’s important to understand that I never coach INDIVIDUALS - I coach the ROOM. Only when the whole room is on the program can individuals rise to their potential. Of all the characteristics I try to imbue upon the room, one of the most important is TRUST. My athletes are renown for their ability to escape from seemingly hopeless situations, specialize in the use of potentially very damaging types of joint locks, and focusing on submission above all. This is only possible because the athletes trust each other to train hard, but not to recklessly try to hurt each other. In a game where victory comes from holds designed to snap limbs and strangle people unconscious, there has to be an understanding among the athletes that they will train hard, but not recklessly. If i know my partner will not try to immediately snap on an arm lock as hard and fast as he can, this gives me the confidence to practice my escapes and get a feeling for what i need to do in a more competitive situation. The rule with joint locks that I always preach in the room - you can extend the limb but not hyper extend the limb. Focus on control of the limb rather than snapping it. This keeps it realistic enough for students to practice and acquire skills but safe enough to give them confidence to try out risky escapes and counters they will need in top level competition settings. Here, Gordon Ryan practices his last ditch escapes against armbars with a junior who gives him realistic tension but not dangerous hyperextension. In this way you can practice even the more extreme elements and skills of Jiu jitsu in a safe manner

Half guard top - no need to rush: Of all the methods of passing guard, passing from half guard gives you the most ability to slow things down and dictate the pace. You must learn to use this in your favor. When you first get over your opponents knee and enter half guard - take a moment to to first solidify your top position rather than rush into the passing game. Your first goal should be to shut down your opponents ability to off balance and move you (if he can do that he will be attacking you relentlessly). This means there will be a contest for arm position (most opponents will be looking to get an under hook), head position (opponent will be looking to get your head far forward over his shoulders) and hip position (opponents will be looking to get under you and on to one side rather than flat). Who wins these three battles will generally dictate the overall battle from half guard. So when you first settle into half guard - look to win these three battles first before you go into your favorite passes. Here, Nicky Ryan loses the battle for arm position but compensated by winning the battles for head position and hip position, setting him up for some strong passes.

Have a definite goal when you scramble: Scrambles are one of the most common scenarios in Jiu jitsu. Too often, scrambles degenerate into a situation where athletes are moving for the sale of moving, rather than towards a goal. As the pace and intensity of the scramble intensifies, so does fatigue and confusion, until you are left with a feeling of having done a lot of hard work with nothing to show for it. It’s important that you movement always be movement with DIRECTION. In a scramble it is often difficult to identify and choose a direction because it’s all happening so quickly. The four easiest and most readily available desirable outcomes are front headlock, Kimura, ashi garami and the back. When you first start of your scramble training, I recommend using the back as your primary goal since it scores both points and submissions (the other three score submissions but no points). It will give you a clear sense of direction no matter how confusing the scramble. In time you can add the other three, but initially - focus on the back. Next time you are whirling around the mat like a gi inside a clothes dryer, starting looking at your opponents back as your next stopping point - you will be pleasantly surprised at how just being mindful of that goal will make you arrive there!

Memories: Here is a set of photos taken in the basement from long ago. This was during the MMA period of my coaching prior to the squad. My primary focus was on getting Georges St Pierre and Chris Weidman to championship victories. The grappling classes reflected the needs of the athletes for a Jiu jitsu that would apply well to the cage. You can see Mr St Pierre, my great friends Roger Gracie (who was transitioning from grappling to MMA at this time) and Romulo Barral, Shawn Williams and a VERY young Garry Tonon (did you recognize him?). So many athletes have come through these doors over the years - different people, different goals, different times - but Jiu jitsu can be adapted to them all. Looking at these old photos makes me realize how lucky I have been to meet and work with so many amazing people over such a long time. I miss those old days and all the great people you see on the mats - wherever you all are I wish you the best! Stay safe. Hopefully before too long we’ll all be back in action. Thanks to Luca Atalla for the awesome photos!

Overwhelming and passing a good guard player - the half guard route: When you have a dangerous guard player underneath you, there are few better routes than getting chest to chest, with an intimidating cross face and flattening him out with either an underhook or hip walking so that he is left with little offense. The beauty of half guard passing is that it reverses the normal order of events in guard passing. In most guard passes you pass the hips first and control the head last. In half guard passing the first target is usually the head and then you pass the hips by extracting your leg. As such it is qualitatively different from regular methods of guard passing. You must make it a separate study and delve deeply into it. Almost all of the great guard passers had strong half guard passing as a big part of their repertoire - make it part of yours too!

Gordon Ryan learns the art of tactics: Every Sunday (before this whole Coronavirus thing kicked in) Gordon and the squad come in to do a private class. We discuss a topic and get to practicing/sparring. One day Gordon was asking questions about match tactics. Usually he doesn’t bother with tactics at all - he just goes out on stage with the intention of controlling and submitting his opponent come what may - but as you can see - Mr Ryan may well be a true young master of control and submission - but he is a straight up white belt when it comes to devious tactics!!

The quality of your connection will be the criteria by which the worth of your submission holds will be judged: Most of the time whilst grappling it’s a good idea to keep a soft and pliable body that you don’t exhaust yourself and so that you can move efficiently and not give away your intentions to an opponent. That changes however, when you lock yourself into a submission hold. Now you want a tight body with strong isometric tension that will lock your body to your opponents and stay in place long enough to get the win. Look how Garry Tonon locks himself to his opponents hip with a tight figure four lock that will not be shaken loose easily. This will enable him to stay in place despite the most acrobatic defensive maneuvers, hip to hip, where he should be for a good heel hook finish. Learn to distinguish between your need for pliability when moving for position and your need for tension when preventing movement and aiming for submission - only then will you be able to make position and submission skills work in harmony rather than against each other.

Great victory for Craig Jones! Aussie grappling super star and champion Craig Jones took on the great Vinny Magalhaes, former ADCC champion, last night in Chael Sonnen’s Submission Underground Event. Mr Sonnen has done a great job of keeping the event running during the Coronavirus epidemic by staying inside government regulations - events are played without a crowd and with special restrictions on the numbers and interpersonal contact of people inside the venue etc etc. In the end regardless of the situation it’s always two athletes and a referee inside the cage and when the action started Craig Jones went straight into his powerful leg attacks. Mr Magalhaes has a well deserved reputation for tremendous resistance to submission holds in general and leg locks in particular. Previously squad members Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan had gotten close but not the breakthrough. This time we worked on a particular strategy based around hip positioning and Mr Jones brilliantly worked it to get a severe break. Mr Magalhaes showed his usual unflappable composure but after two very strong inside heel hook attacks it was apparent that there was a spiral fracture of the fibula - that’s an injury that is rarely seen with heel hooks as usually the soft tissue of the knees and ankles gives way first. Mr Jones is as much a gentleman on the mat as he is off - he realized what had happened and backed off. It was agreed by all that the match could not continue even though Vinny had never actually tapped. There is only so much that flexibility and stoicism can do in the face of a determined application of good breaking mechanics so the match was over. Mr Jones was always a real stand out, but has shown tremendous improvements over the past twelve months. He went through a very difficult training camp for this event due to the many restrictions and limitations in currently in place that put very precise limits on who he can train with and how often and under what conditions - but he went through it all and on to a brilliant performance on the stage. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

The back is the perfect marriage of position and submission: Normally we think of position and submission as differentiated. One comes before the other. Most players tend to be either a positional player or a submission player. The back is the position that lets you be both at the same time. Not only is it the strongest position in the sport - no other position creates such a massive difference between your attacking potential from there and that of your opponent. You have access to the most high percentage attacks in the sport plus devastating strikes if this were a fight, whilst your opponent has almost nothing. At the same time, no other submission comes close to rivaling the principle submission from this position - the rear strangle. Thus the back represents the intersection of the two main elements of Jiu Jitsu - position and submission. Make it your lifetime study to get there and finish from there - the day you make positive progress in this direction you will see the results

Train your mind to see and identify the next steps: People talk to me about SPEED in combat sports all the time. Don’t get me wrong - physical speed is a wonderful attribute to have and is extremely valuable in combat sports - but let me tell you this - THE MOST IMPORTANT SPEED IS YOUR SPEED OF SOUND DECISION MAKING. If you can make good decisions faster than your opponent you will appear faster than an opponent who is physically faster than you. Most actions begin with a decision. If you are making decisions faster than the other fellow you will have the advantage of a head start that can make up for slower physical actions. Of course the decisions themselves have to be good ones - idiotic decisions made quickly don’t help - but as they say, even a decent decision made in a timely fashion is better than a great decision made too late. When you watch people spar, don’t just watch for entertainment - watch to learn the mental skill of second by second decision making. Try to figure what they ought to be doing to each other as the action unfolds. You can do the same thing watching competition footage of athletes. This kind of mental training has direct ramifications for your physical game and will make you a better physical athlete next time you are sparring.

Don’t use triangles because of short legs? Rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) FTW! The triangle has many variations. Unfortunately in Jiu Jitsu most students only really make use of one of the variations - the front triangle - usually performed from guard position. There is no question that the front triangle has proven to be the most applicable and effective in Jiu jitsu competition, but many students tell me it they they are simply too short legged to get the move to work for them in sparring. While there are some ways to maximize your effectiveness with short legs, it is nonetheless quite clear that short legs can be a problem for front triangles. If you want to make use of the incredible power of triangles but feel your leg length is an issue - START USING REAR TRIANGLES. Rear triangles, due to the changes in position and angle, are much easier for short legged athletes to use on broad shouldered opponents than front triangles. Once you start scoring regularly with rear triangles perhaps your confidence will rise and you’ll be more willing to try again with front triangles 😊 You never know! Here, Nicky Ryan locks on a flawless rear triangle and shows its incredible power as a restraining hold, arm lock potential and a strangle - it’s an amazing weapon for everyone - including short legged athletes (like me 😜)

If the most important battle of the position is the hand fight - learn to trap and immobilize hand and victory is yours: So much of our sport involves gripping and grabbing - learning negate and opponents grips is a huge part of the game. Even better are situations where you can trap an arm/hand entirely and take it out of the fight completely - it’s hard to hand fight when you can’t move your hands! 😜😜 Here, Gordon Ryan goes into his signature hand trapping sequences from rear mount, ruining his opponents ability to use his hands as a barrier to strangulation - once this is achieved the chances of a successful application of the strangle go up tremendously. The hands may not be the strongest part of the human body, but they are the means by which typically begin connection to an opponent and perform most of our tasks - learn to negate or remove an opponents ability to use them whilst retaining your own ability to use your own hands and you will be a very difficult person to defend against

Pathways to the back - the elbow: The back is king of positions in grappling. You score maximum points for getting there and you are in a position to attack with the most high percentage finishing methods in the game whilst your opponent has virtually no effective attacking options. There are many pathways to the back - it is the duty of Jiu Jitsu students to study and master them all - but the best one all round and the method you should start with is the ELBOW. If you can get past the elbow - the back is yours for the taking. There are many ways to beat the elbow - you can drag it, duck it, slide by it - they all work well. Here, Gordon Ryan uses an arm drag to beat the elbow in an attempt to take himself from in front of his opponent to a situation where he can get behind him and where everything is easier. When you are in front of a tough opponent, don’t just look at his elbows - see them for what they - A GATEWAY TO THE BEST POSITION IN THE SPORT! Once you make that perceptual change then you can start changing your position to one where you can win!

BJJ fanatics is launching a big sale starting today through next week! All my instructional videos 30% off! Increase your knowledge so that when we all get back to the mats you can translate that knowledge into skill - and get a lot more wins on the mat under your belt!

Two approaches to leg locking: When it’s time to attack the legs there are two main methods. The first is to get to the finishing position as soon as possible so that it is set before an opponent can gather up an effective defense. The second is to exert sufficient control over an opponents hips that they cannot move defensively. This enables you to pin them for extended periods of time in leg locking positions and work your way patiently to the finishing position and completion. Both methods are very successful. If you choose the second method a big part of your success or failure will come from a principle of control I call “double trouble.” When an opponent goes to escape any given ashi garami based leg lock, the overwhelming majority of the defensive issues are caused by their other leg (the one you aren’t locking) - if you can control THAT leg as well as the one you intend to break - you double the difficulty of escape for your opponent. Here, Gordon Ryan makes use of double trouble to secure a knee bar finish. Look for many ways to employ this important principle in your lower body attacks, whether it be leg locks, takedowns, sweeps - it will make you much more successful on the mats

The greatest submission of them all - pressure leading to fatigue: let me tell you something rather obvious but which has torment ramifications for your success or failure in grappling - EXHAUSTED PEOPLE ARE FAR MORE LIKELY TO SUBMIT TO YOU THAN FRESH PEOPLE. Understand this - a BIG part of submission is mental - it’s always an act of choice to submit and exhausted people are far more likely to make that choice than an opponent who is not under any physical duress. Learning to PRESSURE AND OPPONENT OF TIME so that they get NO RELIEF from the constant PHYSICAL PRESSURE and TACTICAL THREAT is as much a part of the submission game as perfect breaking mechanics and positioning. When you are sparring l, constantly monitor the physical state of your opponent and learn to dictate pace and position - for these two key ingredients will be the means by which you can make even a strong opponent wilt in time. Remember, every opponent will be strong and explosive at the onset of a match - your job is to test how strong and explosive he is at the tail end of a match. Pressuring an opponent into fatigue is as much a part of the road to grappling success as position, leverage and all the other major keys to a great game.

Downtown ninja: First Bane - now NINJA’S!! WTF!! Going for a solo stroll around a very quiet downtown Manhattan - I always knew growing up in the 80’s watching ninja movies would pay off one day!! Normally if you walked around Manhattan like this you’d get arrested; but in these strange times you’d get arrested for NOT dressing this way! 😂😂 You know me - Always setting the latest fashion trends. Hope you are all well!

Quiet days in NYC: It’s strange seeing the city like this - almost no one about as the seasons begin to change. I’ve lived here almost thirty years and never seen The Apple this way. One of my first students @zimlion took some beautifully haunting photos of the city the last few days that give some impression of the ghost town that NYC has become. The city has an eerie science fiction vibe to it. It has created a time for something that modern life doesn’t give us many opportunities to pay attention to - our surroundings, the change of seasons and most important - self reflection. Wherever you are, I hope you are safe and finding ways to adapt and grow. This situation won’t last forever, but perhaps the lessons we learn about ourselves and our lives in this down time will.

Strangers: One of the most valuable training tools you have is a stranger. The overwhelming majority of our training is done with people we know pretty well. This is good, as their constant progress alongside us forces adaptation and growth if we are to stay abreast of them. However, every so often you get chances to train with someone you’ve never trained with before, and this can be a very positive learning experience. They will move in unfamiliar ways, employing techniques differently from you and sometimes use techniques you have never seen before. This forces you to think and improvise on the spot - one of the more difficult feats of combat sports. So when the opportunity arises to train with someone that is not part of your regular circle (and of course, they seem to be a safe training partner) - take it - it’s the best way to test your ability to instantly adapt to new challenges. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon train with strangers shortly before a grappling tournament in England early in their careers. The same need to adapt and improvise to an unknown challenge will be required to an even greater degree in competition.

Possible Bane sighting on NYC subway: I was heading down to the supermarket for weekly grocery shopping when I came across this fellow sitting on the train with some other people who appeared to be working on some kind of underground construction project. He somewhat resembled criminal mastermind Bane and so, struck by curiosity, I approached as close as current social distancing protocols allow and said, “Excuse me sir, I was just wondering if you are in fact Batman’s arch nemesis Bane?” He turned to me and said, “It doesn’t matter who we are...what matters is our plan...” Then he returned to a conversation that appeared to be about the stock market, nuclear blast radius and some guy named Bruce...should I be worried?

There are a thousand possible targets for you to attack from bottom positions - but whenever possible - make your opponents BALANCE the first target - only then will all the others be realistic options. Gordon Ryan does a fine job here of getting his opponent completely out of balance - now he can attack wherever he chooses - upper body, lower body or sweep/reversal. Your opponents first line of defense to all your attacks is his stance - if you take him out of balance you will break his defense and open a floodgate for all your favorite moves.

The back and the serpent: There is something very serpentine about a good back attack. Whenever a constrictor snake goes to attack it’s prey, it needs several key elements. The first is an initial connection or anchor to the body of its victim. This is done by biting. The bite is almost always applied close to the head in order to optimize the subsequent actions. Then the snake wraps itself around the victim in order to apply constructing pressure that can stop the victim from breathing and according to recent research, stop blood flow around the body causing unconsciousness and ultimately heart failure leading to death. Now when humans go to the back there are some important similarities and differences. Just like constrictor snakes we need an initial anchor to the opponents body. We have neither the ability nor the desire to do this with a bite, so instead we use our hands, which, like the snake, must be applied close to the head. The hands lock around the head on one side and under the elbow on the other - offering an anchor as good as any serpents bite. Then, just like a snake, we need to throw some coils around the middle of the body to solidify our connection to the opponents body. For us humans, this is best done with our legs. The other big element we share with constrictor snakes is the need for the ability to stop blood flow. Snakes are blessed with power and length that we feeble humans will never have, so we we have to be very specific in our target - the neck. This target is small and vulnerable and the human arm is more than sufficient to close off blood flow at this location. Here is Gordon Ryan, looking remarkably serpentine as he shows all the classic features of a strong back attack - a strong initial anchor to the head via a control hand under the elbow connected to the wrist, backed up with coiled legs around the torso, finalized with an arm around the neck directly attacking blood flow in the opponent. Learn your lesson from the serpent, who has been performing this mode of attack for millions of years before humans even existed, and watch your back attack improve dramatically as a result

The incredible power of experimental testing, observation of results and refinement over time: The single greatest asset that combat sports have is the application of a simplified scientific method - start with a conjecture or theory, test it with various forms of experimentation, observe the results of testing those conjectures and theories in sparring and competition and make adjustments and refinements over time in the light of your observations. In time you can make incredible progress in knowledge and skill. Along the way you will discover that many commonly accepted beliefs are in fact quite doubtful and some theories that are commonly considered absurd actually have some merit. Using this trial and error method will take time, but it will furnish the most trustworthy conclusions in the long run. I will always favor conclusions attained by rigorous trial and error over the usual appeals to authority, tradition or orthodoxy. Every day on the mats gives you a chance to exercise this trial and error method. Every moment off the mats gives you a chance to think and speculate over new theories and conjectures that you can test when you return to the mats. In this sense the mats are your laboratory, your training partners your experimental assistants and your sparring your experimental testing. Here I am many years ago at one of Renzos schools before the blue basement experimenting with triangle and Kimura overlap with the very talented Magno Gama, with whom many trials and errors were made early in my career that steered me towards my current coaching philosophy. When it comes to making progress in Jiu Jitsu you have many resources - all of them have their good and bad points - but none will ever surpass the value of your own restless and enquiring mind as it seeks to solve problems through the raising and testing of questions and theories and refinement of your answers over time

Alignment to angle: Most of the time when we begin from bottom guard positions we BEGIN aligned square to our opponent; but when it’s time to enter and FINISH the most high percentage submissions from the various guard position it’s usually the case that we need to misalign ourselves and create a substantial angle to be successful. Learning to make a habit of this constant switch from aligned to perpendicular is a huge part of your journey towards mastery of bottom position attacks. Make your use utilize both LOWER BODY methods - feet on hips to push to an angle etc) and UPPER BODY methods (scooping inside the leg with your arm to pull yourself to an advantageous angle). Paying attention to this fundamental feature of guard position attacks will make you much more successful from bottom position!

Learn to create multiple threats to break through tough defenses: The higher the skill level of your opponents, the harder it will become to finish them with even very strong single attacks. At some point you have to start creating multiple threats at the same time to force talented opponents to spread their defensive resources thin and make a final breakthrough possible. Look at how Gordon Ryan threatens with a Kimura grip that can also threaten a juji gatame arm bar and even a triangle entry of the hips can swivel around the torso, whilst also creating a positional attack via threat of points for attaining rear mount. Attacking in this matter puts an opponent under tremendous pressure and very few can stop it if applied for a good period of time. Once you become strong with a few single attacks, start exploring how you can link those attacks together - some fit together more naturally than others. Don’t forget to add in lower body attacks - while you may have to move a little further the results can be outstanding.

Making first contact with your opponent - start with hands and head: All grappling requires contact with your opponent. When it’s time to initiate that contact it is almost always the case that we begin with HANDS and HEAD. You must get used to getting to your grips with your hands and establishing forehead to forehand contact. This will create situations where you have ENOUGH CONTACT WITH AN OPPONENT TO CREATE STRONG DEFENSE and at the same time, be close enough and with sufficient contact TO INITIATE OFFENSE WITH A HIGH PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS. Make a habit of making first contact with well placed hands and (gently) head and you’ll get off to a strong start every time!

Identify the potential threat(s) and negate it - then go to work: The most obvious and important feature of all combat sports is RESISTANCE. You are expected to impose your moves upon an opponent who is actively resisting your attempts at those moves AND who is simultaneously attempting to impose his own moves upon you. It’s tempting when this occurs to turn this into a battle of wills - if I want it more than the other guy, perhaps i can prevail; or, I simple expend more strength and energy than the other fellow and outlast him. While these approaches can certainly work, they are not an expression of the ideals of Jiu Jitsu. Instead, look to identify the specific grips and positions your opponent is using on you. Identify what specific dangers they create and begin BY FIRST NEGATING THOSE GRIPS AND POSITIONS and only when you feel they have been nullified, go on to impose your game. AVOID SITUATIONS WHERE YOU ARE BOTH SIMULTANEOUSLY TRYING TO IMPOSE YOUR WILL UPON EACH OTHER - this always degenerates into a dog fight where the stronger and fitter man wins. Rather, begin by robbing your opponent of any means of imposing his moves upon you, and only then trying to impose your own game. Here, Gordon Ryan begins his guard pass - NOT WITH PASSING, but rather with the shutting down of his opponents butterfly guard by compressing his feet to his buttocks and locking the hips. Without free movement of the feet and hips the butterfly guard is useless. NOW it’s time to think about how you wish to pass. To get the POSITIVE results you seek - BEGIN WITH NEGATION

The less time you spend directly in front of your opponents legs - the better: Whenever you play top position your primary concern is getting past your opponents legs. The overwhelming majority of your opponents submission and positional offense relies on his legs - if you get past them he will not be able to launch many serious attacks upon you, whilst you can launch many attacks upon him. Make it a habit to immediately step to an angle outside of your opponents feet and knees and you will make your job in top position MUCH easier. The second you get an initial angle on your opponent you put him in a defensive framework where he is only concerned with recovering his leg position, rather than attacking you. As soon as the engagement begins - GET TO YOUR OUTSIDE ANGLE - and soon you will find too position is a lot easier and more profitable for you

Two things you need: The first is a clear sense of what you want to accomplish. The second is a clear understanding of what the main obstacles/problems that prevent you from making that accomplishment. If you have these two things you can start the magic of problem solving to get to your goals. See everything in Jiu Jitsu in the light of these two things and you will go far

The power of observation: There are many great learning tools in Jiu Jitsu - I always rate realistic drilling, experimental research and structured sparring as the three most important. Another which I value highly is OBSERVATION. You can learn a tremendous amount through ACTIVE observation of athletes sparring. By this I mean watch the action in such a way that you are actively trying to assess what the athletes ought to be doing second by second - essentially the act of putting your mind inside their sparring session and critiquing them second by second. This can be done either watching live as we are here, or video. Whenever the main methods of sparring, drilling and physical experimentation aren’t available - go ahead with active observation - you will love the results next time you are on the mats.

If he can’t grip you he can’t control you - if he can’t control you he can’t attack you: The game of grappling begins with grip. Learning to IMPOSE YOUR OWN GRIPS WHILST DENYING GRIPS TO YOUR OPPONENT is this a HUGE part of the game. You simply must make grip fighting a serious study if you are to make progress in Jiu Jitsu. The athlete who consistently gets to his or her grips first has a huge advantage in a competitive situation. Here, Georges St Pierre practices grip denial - once this has been achieved, its time to attack. You don’t want to just deny an opponent grips - that’s a negative way to play. You want to deny him grips as a lead in to your own positive attacks - when you can do this, your game will leap forward.

Letting your opponent pick his poison: It’s always impressive to see an athlete impose his will upon another and force him into a given finish even when the other fellow knows very well what’s coming. What is every bit as impressive however, is the art of DELAYING YOUR CHOICE OF FINISH UNTIL YOU SEE YOUR OPPONENTS REACTION TO YOUR INITIAL THREAT. Once you make an initial attack upon a knowledgeable opponent you can expect some form of defensive reaction. If you have a good understanding of what those defensive reactions are - you can capitalize upon them in ways that will dramatically increase your effectiveness on the mat. In truth, there are only so many effective ways to defend the main attacks of Jiu Jitsu. If you invest time in getting to know what those are you can learn to anticipate an opponents next move and take advantage of them as they occur. THERE ARE FEW GREATER ADVANTAGES IN COMBAT THAN KNOWING AN OPPONENTS NEXT MOVE. If you can gain that advantage few will be able to stop you. Take your favorite moves and start to learn the most common and effective reactions to them. Then start building a game based around the anticipation of those reactions. Whatever success you had previously with those favorite moves will be DWARFED by the new success rates you experience with a game that combines those favorite moves with follow ups based on anticipation and the advantage of knowing the next step in an opponents game.

From open guard on a standing opponent: Dominate the head and dominate the space between his elbows - and victory will be yours. Whenever you have a standing opponent in your opponent guard, your first goals is always to BREAK HIS POSTURE/BALANCE. One of the best ways to do this is through the use of the cross lapel grip and the use of a foot on the bicep that dominates the inside position between his elbows. If you can keep his head lower than his waist and his elbow behind his shoulder - he won’t be able to threaten you with passing but you will be able to threaten him with any sweep or submission of your choice. So when you go to tie up from open guard - dominate the head and dominate the inside position at the elbow - your success rate will immediately rise 😜😜

Back in time: Here is an old clip from around 2005-6 featuring me teaching a young Georges St - Pierre the fine art of ashi garami entries from top position. I am contrasting traditional methods that focus upon ankle control and falling backwards away from an opponent, with an approach I often favor, focusing control on the area between the knee and hip and falling forwards into and across an opponent to set up strong heel hook and Achilles lock entries. This is an excellent application for MMA as legs often are used to defend against strikes and become quite vulnerable to a switch into leg locks. It’s a fun look back into the old days long before the squad, early GSP and of course...legendary haircuts...Apologies for horrendous video and sound quality - this was all long before the modern marvels of digital cameras and smart phones.

Worried about forward stacking pressure when you’re going for your favorite submissions from bottom? Angle is your friend. Learn to RE-DIRECT forward stacking pressure by turning beyond perpendicular so that the forces of your submission hold COMPLIMENT your opponents stacking pressure rather than fight it. This will off balance your opponent and force him to either back off the pressure or get swept into an even worse situation. Make ANGLE a big part of your triangle and arm bar attacks from underneath and you will experience a lot more success from guard with your submission game!

Learn to prioritize: Sometimes it can seem like the many details and nuances that underlie the main moves of Jiu Jitsu can be a burden when it’s time to perform them in a competitive situation. As you try to remember them all it might seem they actually slow you down and become less efficient in your movement. Understand that the information has an order of priority. There are always one or two main ideas that are most responsible for the success or failure of the move and then come all the other details, usually in an order from most important to least important. For this reason it is crucial that you be able to list the three or four main details in (rough) order of importance (this will vary somewhat from one individual to another so make the list a personal one). In this way you will learn to focus on the small number of main ideas that make it work without being burdened by trying to satisfy too many demands of you afford every detail equal priority. In this way you can get information to work FOR you instead of AGAINST you - and that’s when the game becomes fun.

When in doubt...Jiu Jitsu is a complicated sport with a requirement on your part to learn a lot of information - sometimes it’s a good thing to have one simple idea or directive to give direction to all that information - this can be worth its weight in gold in a stressful match situation where it’s unclear what the next move ought to be. In ashi garami based leg locks - that simple directive is always GET AS CLOSE TO YOUR OPPONENT AS YOU CAN AND STAY THERE UNTIL THE JOB IS DONE. The vast majority of your opponents defense will involves loosening the connection of your ashi garami and then pulling away to free the knee of his trapped leg. SO FOCUS ON GETTING AS CLOSE AS YOU CAN AS EARLY AS YOU CAN AND STAY THERE. Only when you stay true to this simple directive can you apply all the other stuff you need to demonstrate your growing leg lock mastery.

You can make the strongest arm weak if you put it behind an opponents back: A huge part of Jiu Jitsu is the study of exploiting the inherent weaknesses of the human body. For example a sizable part of my approach to leg locking is built around the simple idea that shackling an opponents two ankles together strips him of most of the mobility required to escape the ashi garami he is caught in. Another classic example is the idea of shackling a prisoners hands behind his back - a simple insight that has successfully restrained countless strong men since the dawn of time. Try to take advantage of the fact that there is a dramatic difference between our strength potential when our arms are in front of us versus situations where are arms are pinned behind us. The most commonly seen application of this principle in Jiu Jitsu is with the kimura lock. Kimura is often disparaged as a strong mans move - but if you can reliably get the opponents hand behind his back you can apply it very well on the strongest of opponents. Here, Craig Jones does a fine job of quickly getting an opponents hand behind his back to set up many potential attack options and completely robbing his opponents arm of any strength.

When you encounter resistance - do you see closed doors or open doors? If there is one thing you can safely assume in combat sports it is that every opponent you ever face will resist every move you try upon him with as much tenacity and skill as he can muster. RESISTANCE TO EVERYTHING WE ATTEMPT is the basic feature of all combat sports and the thing that makes them realistic and effective. Now when you encounter resistance to your moves, your mind can react in two ways. The first is natural, but undesirable. This is to feel frustration and a sense of failure that your opponent identified the threat you created and stymied it. The second is created through training and is highly desirable. This is to see the resistance as a pathway to new attacking possibilities elsewhere. An opponent cannot close one door without opening others - YOU MUST HAVE FAITH IN THIS! Your job is to identify the new possibilities and act on them promptly. Here, Nicky Ryan has had an initial attempt at an arm drag partially stopped by an opponent - just a second after this photo was taken he had already gone into two subsequent attacks en route to victory. What do you see here? Where would you go? Could you do it under the pressure of match conditions within the time available? These are the questions you must constantly ask yourself on your march towards your Jiu Jitsu goals

The three routes to victory in combat sports - the first is to have such PERFECT EXECUTION of technique that it can be known and anticipated by an opponent but he simply cannot stop it (this usually requires a skill and/or athletic disparity (speed,strength or size) between the two athletes. - The second is based on SYSTEMATIC CONTROL where the idea is to have such a an elaborate system of set ups, controlling grips and positions that an opponent is gradually funneled into an ever more controlling predicament that increasingly limits his defensive options until escape becomes virtually impossible (this is typically only possible when extreme control and a slower pace is available which usually means ground techniques)
- The third is to be able to DECEIVE an opponent as to what your real intentions are and achieve a breakthrough via feint/fake/misdirection that creates an opening or weakness that can be exploited before he can detect the ruse and create an effective resistance (this is typically done more in speed based elements of combat sports usually standing techniques where speed is far easier to generate than on the ground)
Study all three methods - you will need them to break through against knowledgeable opponents

There is a strong relationship between guard passing and taking an opponents back: We normally think of passing an opponents guard to the side, or occasionally to mount; but some of the most commonly occurring and profitable opportunities come in situations where opponents turn into defensive turtle positions to prevent giving up passing points. YOU MUST BE ABLE TO CAPITALIZE UPON THESE OPPORTUNITIES!! Not only can you potentially score more points with a back take than a guard pass, but in addition you are now in the single best finishing position in the sport. Keep you eyes open for the back when passing!!! Be ready to capitalize immediately upon the great opportunities in front of you!!

My favorite way to pass guard: There are many effective ways to pass an opponents guard, each has their good and bad points - but if I had only one way to pass guard for the rest of my life I would unquestionably choose the method of FORCING MY WAY TO HALF GUARD AND PASSING FROM HALF GUARD. Of all the methods out there, this is in my experience the most versatile and the most high percentage. It works equally well gi or no gi, grappling and fighting. All my students excel at it and it figures very heavily in their passing game. No other method of passing can create such direct pressure upon the opponents head, which is a big part of why it is so successful in world championship competition. Next time you get stymied in a tricky guard, break it into two steps - force your way forward into half guard and then pass from there!

If you understand exactly what the main underlying body movement patterns of Jiu Jitsu are - you can shut them down - and if you can shut down the MOVEMENTS, then you can shut down the MOVES. The vast majority of the moves from bottom position, everything from pin escapes, guard retention, sweeps etc etc all involve the body movement of SHRIMPING (in its various manifestations). It stands to reason then, that if you study exactly what is required to shrimp your body, then you will know exactly what it is required to shut it down; and if you can shut down shrimping, you will have shut down any move from bottom position that is reliant upon shrimping to work. Shrimping always has three key elements. A planted foot, a moving hip and a moving head. If you can subvert any of those three elements, you can shut down the movement overall and any subsequent moves that were based on it. This is why I put a heavy emphasis upon learning the underlying solo body movements of Jiu Jitsu - not as a boring and fruitless warm up before class - but as a specialized study in its own right. Understand the movements and you can grasp how to shut them down. Shut down the movement and this shut down an opponents moves. Here, Nicky Rod does a good job stopping a shrimping movement at the head and hips to prevent any effective defense to his passing attack.

My philosophy of attack in Jiu Jitsu can be stated in a single sentence. Learn to attack the whole body with equal efficacy from top or bottom position, but if you have a choice, favor the back above all.

When you have a good position - TAKE YOUR TIME: One of the traits of good Jiu Jitsu players is that they know when they have to hustle and when they can slow things down. A great skill that you need to develop is that of CONSOLIDATION. When you get a good position - LET THE POSITION DO THE WORK FOR YOU. The only time you should be working hard is when you don’t have a good position. The whole purpose of good position is that it creates a situation where the other guy has to do more work than you do. If you are working harder than him when you are winning something is wrong. Next time you get a position take your physical tension down a notch and switch your effort to the mental game of plotting your next move. As the body relaxes, the mind gets more active and it’s the mind that will guide you to your next step.

What are your next two moves if this one fails? One of the great features of Jiu Jitsu is the relatively SLOW PACE in which the game operates compared with other combat sports. When a move is starting to fail - YOU CAN FEEL THE ONSET OF FAILURE before it happens. Take advantage of this fact. Make sure that you have the next two moves planned out ahead of time any time you enter into a given move. This will greatly increase your effectiveness on the mat. It’s not realistic to think too many moves out into the future - there are too many contingencies to cover for that to be realistic, but two is a a very doable and realistic number that will turn your failures into success. Start with your favorite positions and map out your best options when they fail in a particular way. I promise this will increase your win rate much faster than learning entirely new moves.

Grey zones: Most of the time in Jiu Jitsu we like to push the game towards certainties. We like the idea of positions where it’s known by both sides who has dominant position, who is winning and who is learning. However, as you rise in skill level there will be more and more occasions, the majority of most matches in fact, where the picture is much more grey. It is unclear who has advantage or disadvantage and the two athletes will have to improvise from unorthodox positions where it could go either way. Learning to navigate from uncontrolled scramble to dominance is not easy when you start. There are a thousand different directions you can go. My advice when this type of issue first arises in your training is simple. YOU CAN NEVER GO WRONG WITH THE BACK. Make the goal of every scramble your opponents back. This will give DIRECTION to your scrambles when everything just seems like a tumbling confusion. It’s not the ONLY option - there are many - but all things considered it’s probably the BEST option - so make that your first goal whenever your positioning is confusing and ambiguous - you can’t go wrong.

The biggest sale in BJJ Fanatics history!! The company I make instructional videos for @bjj.fanatics is having their biggest sale in the history of the company today through next week in response to the corona virus situation. Company directors Bernardo Faria and a Michael Zenga told me that there has been a great demand for video instruction during this time where regular training has been curtailed for most of us. They have just created a sale that is bigger even than the Black Friday sale! 42% off all my and the other instructors videos across the store! This one came out of nowhere as usually Black Friday is the biggest sale of the year but special times require special responses - sounds like a great idea to me! If you are interested check out the sale and build your knowledge!!!

Ever try to untie complex knot under pressure? Did getting emotional or hyped up or excited help you untie the knot? No - it never does. Jiu Jitsu is the task of untying many complex knots in a sequence under great pressure as an opponent is trying to tie you in knots - getting emotional isn’t going to help you there either. You will be amazed how much better you perform just by keeping a calm mind and a cold heart as other people get emotional around you. The best problem solvers know that a calm mind and spirit solves problems better than an emotionally fraught one. No matter how much one part of your mind screams at you - the conscious decision making part of your mind should stay calm - only then will you get the results that bring out the excitement!

The two most important parts of the body to control - head and hips: Never lose track of the big picture - we humans are vertebrates. Essentially we are a skull connected to a spine which is anchored to the hips and everything else hangs off that! As such the spine is the longest lever in the body and given that we always like to maximize our effectiveness by working at the ends of the lever - most of our strongest attempts to control the body must occur at head and hips. Whenever you feel lost out on the mat and nothing you do seems to work and control over your opponent seems an impossibility - renew you’re focus upon the head and hips - I am certain you will perform a little better

I am very happy to announce the release today of my 100% FREE video SELF MASTERY: BJJ SOLO TRAINING DRILLS. It is designed to help everyone get through any situation where you are denied regular training - in particular the corona crises. Just as a good boxer develops movement skills for his craft with shadow boxing - so too a grappler can do the same with shadow grappling. The problem most people have with solo drills is that they perform them as a simple warm up before class with zero mental engagement. Done in this way they have little value because the student never gets to associate the movement with an actual combat skill. Only when you know THE WHY AND THE PURPOSE of the movement and actively IMAGINE/VISUALIZE a competitive sparring situation as you perform the movement in a spontaneous/realistic fashion (not a mechanical and thoughtless warm up) do they make a difference to your sport performance. Of course nothing will ever replace the primacy of partner drills and sparring as the major source of progress in the sport, but I do firmly believe in the value of a combination of movement drills/shadow grappling, a good physical training program to enhance strength, flexibility and endurance (I leave that to the athlete to choose their program as preference varies a lot and there is no evidence showing any one method to be demonstrably better than the others for grappling purposes) and knowledge acquisition through video analysis/learning either by watching great athletes (if you have the necessary observational skill) or instructional videos. If you can make positive strides in those three directions you will most certainly not deteriorate in skill and you will set yourself up for very rapid improvement when you return. This free video is designed to help you with the first of those three training directions. If you are interested, check it out at @bjj.fanatics Wishing you all the best progress possible through this time away from training - stay healthy and stay sharp!

Training alone - Three directions to make genuine progress when you can’t be in the dojo: Whenever I have students who can’t make it to the dojo for regular training I always encourage to work hard in three specifics ways. The first is to put time into solo movement drills/training. Every sport has a unique set of postural and movement demands required to play efficiently - those of Jiu Jitsu put an extraordinary emphasis on floor movement, especially from supine (back on the floor) positions. The more efficiently you exhibit the underlying movements of a sport, the better you will perform the moves and the faster you will learn new ones. Second, stay in good shape. Jiu Jitsu is a contact sport where physicality plays a big role in the outcome. This is an opportunity to increase your overall physical prowess with gains in strength and flexibility. Over the years I have seen every variation of strength and conditioning program. No one method stood out as obviously superior to the others. I’ve never seen an athlete or group of athletes take on a new strength program and suddenly get dramatically better results than they were previously. Find a program that suits you and which you enjoy and which has a proven record among respected athletes and trainers and you can’t go wrong. Third, seek to increase your knowledge of the sport in all aspects. Knowledge is power. Very often just knowing one new piece of information can get you a win where previously you would have lost. Video is the preferred method of knowledge acquisition when the dojo is closed. Study the games of the great athletes past and present, if you find that difficult due to inexperience (at championship level the action is sometimes difficult to understand or confusing or unclear), instructional videos from your favorite athletes are a great alternative. Using this three directional approach means that when you return your body will move better, you will be stronger and more flexible and your mind will know more - this will set you up for rapid progress rather than deterioration during your time off. It has worked for all my athletes and it will work for you too!

Special announcement: corona virus: Over the last few days the Jiu Jitsu community world wide has faced a situation that is entirely unprecedented in the history of our sport - the majority of students and schools will have to cease regular training. We all accept that there will be many times we have to stay away from the mats - injuries, family commitments, travel etc etc can all keep us out of the dojo - but this is different, we will all be kept away at the same time despite being physically able to train. I have received a vast number of requests for advice on how to train and improve while unable to attend the dojo. Last night I called the team at BJJ fanatics and jumped on a train to Boston to film a video on exactly that question. BJJ Fanatics will release the video in the next few days (after editing) FOR FREE. It’s yours. I want to do this for the BJJ Community. Jiu Jitsu has given me the best times of my life and now I want to give something back to Jiu Jitsu during the worst time for the sport. One thing I have always loved about this game is the passion and commitment of the people involved in it. Every day I see men and women from all walks of life make incredible sacrifices to get to their Jiu Jitsu goals - this ones for you. The video covers how to train effectively by yourself so that when this crazy time is over and we all get back to the business of snapping limbs and strangling each other unconscious, you are better than you were before this damn virus screwed things up. I cover my favorite solo drills that I use whenever I’m beat up, traveling or just unable to get on the mat. I explain exactly what the link between the solo movement and the actual combat skill along with an actual workout program you can use solo to boost your skill level. Remember - every MOVE in this sport has an underlying MOVEMENT that makes it possible. Without the movement, the move won’t happen. Training your movement skills will enhance your performance of the moves when you get back in action. BJJ Fanatics just needs to edit it and then release in a couple of days. I’m on the train home now, tired but happy - wishing you all the best - stay safe and stay on track

When you can’t get the breakthrough with your hands - strangle with your legs: Probably the most common source of frustration when you attempt to strangle from the back is your opponents defensive hand fighting and chin positioning that prevents you getting a clean strangle. Indeed, concerns over exactly this problem was the motivation behind my back strangle system where we use our legs to trap defensive arms and if necessary, strangle over a defensive jaw (mandible strangles) - these signature techniques are often brilliantly used by my students to get breakthroughs where most people experience failure. Nonetheless, there is always going to be that day you simply can’t get through the defenses with your arms. In those cases, it’s time for you to make use of the impressive strangling power of the LEGS - using the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku). I don’t Carr how strong your opponent is - his hands aren’t as strong as both your legs - the rear triangle will overcome hands and give you additional arm lock and wrist lock options that virtually guarantee a finish. There is no question that strangles with the arms are the most high percentage finishes from the back - always use them first. But when they aren’t working be ready to switch to legs and get the finish!

Lost time? There are not many certainties in Jiu Jitsu but here is one - AT SOME POINTS YOU WILL HAVE TO TAKE TIME AWAY FROM THE MATS. It may be due to an injury, a personal crises, family problems, financial issue - or in this cases - unanticipated pandemic. I am sure many of you are faced now with the prospect of time away from the dojo due to this problem. A natural question to ask is - is this going to ruin my hard won progress? The answer is - THAT DEPENDS ON YOU. My crippled leg and resultant problems meant I often had to take periods of time off. One case that occurred when I was a white belt may be of some relevance to your situation now. I tore my knee meniscus practicing drop seoi nage (I always had a love/hate relationship with that throw - I love its effectiveness but it was hell on my crippled knee - if you have normal healthy knees it’s fine and a throw you all ought to study in depth). I tried to train through it but kept re- injuring it and so finally agreed to just take time off and let it rest. I took off two months. In that time I practiced whatever solo drills i could perform every day. As I performed them I visualized performing them on a sparring partner in live training. Then I performed callesthenic training to maintain strength and stretched. In free time I would watch video (video in those days was old VCR cassettes with terrible picture quality 😂😂) I tried to gain understanding of set ups, tricks and mechanics of the stand out athletes of that time. When my knee finally felt better I went back to the dojo with some trepidation - I think we all feel that we will get crushed by everyone as they have all been training hard in our absence. In my first returning class I was matched with a blue belt who always used to beat me and to my absolute shock I easily triangled him with a simple set up I had observed and practiced in my solo drills. I submitted him twice more that night despite never having done it before. I say this only to illustrate the point that TIME OFF DOES NOT HAVE TO BE TIME LOST. Keep your body in shape, your mind active, and use solo drills as a boxer uses shadow boxing and you can come back better than ever!

Gaining a superpower: Imagine if you were offered to power of being able to see five seconds into the future. Would it not make you almost impossible to defeat in combat? You could literally avoid or counter any move before it can be applied against you. In a way - Jiu Jitsu gives you that superpower. One of the great benefits of physical control over an opponent is the RESTRICTIONS ON POSSIBILITIES it imposes upon him. A match or fight can be a wild and unpredictable affair. We have no idea what our opponent will do at the onset of a match - but as we get further and further into the business of control we cut down our opponents movement options into a few predictable alternatives. By the time we get to finishing positions a good Jiu Jitsu player can literally read the future as there are only a couple of realistic options for an opponent to take. YOU MUST LEARN TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS INCREDIBLE POWER TO KNOW WHAT AN OPPONENT WILL DO AHEAD OF TIME. From all your favorite finishing positions, map out the few realistic counters and plan your counters to those counters. Then work backwards from the finish all the way to the set up, mapping out the main reactions to your best moves. You will be pleasantly surprised by how few realistic reactions there are to the more controlling positions in the sport. This means that once you gain advantage, you will be able to funnel an opponent into progressively fewer and fewer options as you work towards finishing positions. When you know where an opponent will be and what he will be doing a few seconds from now - your job will be a LOT easier.

Life takes us in many directions - but you can always come back to Jiu Jitsu: Many people appear to think that my Jiu Jitsu coaching began with the rise of the squad - in fact it began more than a decade before the squad first came to prominence. I was known mostly for coaching the link between Jiu Jitsu and MMA to great athletes like Georges St Pierre and Chris Weidman. Yet during that time I had many very fine Jiu Jitsu students as well. Most of them chose not to compete or just compete locally since grappling was not a lucrative sport in those days and most of the focus in the gym was on MMA preparation. One of those early students was Steve Williams. He was among my first black belts long before the squad. In time he moved away to Las Vegas to pursue a music career. Almost a decade later he returned to NYC and began training with the squad back in the basement where he learned his craft. Recently he entered some local competitions to see if his game could still hang with all the changes of Jiu Jitsu in recent years - this video captures some of the action. We all have different forces pulling on us in our lives - we never know which direction we will take - but through it all, you can always return to Jiu Jitsu. Your skills can get rusty, your body can get out of shape, but you can always come back and those skills you worked so hard on will come back quickly and once again shine like the edge of a knife. Great to see skills return and an old school black belt can still shine after all these years 😜

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest instructional video in the GO FURTHER FASTER Fundamentals series - PASSING GUARD - which focuses on two of the most important skills in all of Jiu Jitsu top game - opening a closed guard and passing an open guard. Ninety percent of our time in Jiu Jitsu is spent either in bottom position retaining/attacking from open guard or passing guard from top position - MAKE SURE THIS FUNDAMENTAL FACT IS REFLECTED IN YOUR TRAINING TIME! As always I present not just a collection of favorite moves, but a complete program to get the job done from start to finish against a skilled opponent. The focus is on the most high percentage guard passing moves in the sport - not the flashiest or coolest - but the ones that really work at the highest levels and work across all belt levels, all weight categories and all types of opponent. If you are interested check out the link in my bio! Wishing you all the best with this crucial part of the game! 😊😊

When you can pass guard you get to choose the battleground: The beauty of guard passing is that it enables you to put yourself in positions where your opponent cannot use his best weapons - his LEGS - to defend and attack from bottom position. It creates an immediate and devastating ASYMMETRY where you can attack at will whilst your opponent can only defend. A second great benefit is that you can now attack the whole body and choose where you want to to attack - legs, arms or neck. No other positional skill opens up so much variation in submission choice as guard passing - there is a reason why it is the centerpiece of the top positional game in Jiu Jitsu - make it the centerpiece of your game too!

Fighting the big guys - the story of Nick Ronan: This weekend in England, talented junior Nick Ronan entered the Polaris Grappling Grand Prix qualifier tournament in Bristol UK and won gold. What makes this a really interesting story is that Mr Ronan weighs less than 170 pounds and this was an open weight tournament with many of his opponents weighing over 240 pounds and higher belts. Now my advice to my students when they take on the big boys is always the same - FOCUS YOUR ATTACKS UPON THE BACK AND THE LEGS - for these are the areas of the body in which strength and size play the least role in the outcome. The human body is set up in such a way that no one can apply much strength behind themselves and with regards the legs, dexterity, positioning and knowledge play a much bigger role in the outcome than size. Nick Ronan did exactly that - winning every match by heel hook or back attack. When you take on the big men - focus your attacks on the back and the legs and get the breakthroughs! Now Nick Ronan is qualified to enter the Grand Prix tournament and compete against some of the most famous heavyweights in the world!

Big wins at a fun day of competition at local event for Gordon Ryan and Nathalia Santoro: Gordon Ryan and partner Nathalia Santoro spontaneously entered a local grappling tournament Grappling Industries in Ohio at the Arnold Classic fitness event while traveling for a seminar. Gordon winning every match by submission probably did not surprise anyone, but Nathalia, who has not been doing Jiu Jitsu very long entered the expert division and won every match via leg lock submission! This is a fantastic achievement for a blue belt who started the game quite late in life and who had no background in martial arts whatsoever. I always love to see episodes like this as they show what is possible with hard training and a good plan in a relatively short time frame. Ms Santoro trains alongside her partner in crime every day and has made incredible progress and today was her day to show off that progress. She hit a blitz of heel hooks and Achilles locks to take the gold! Congratulations Nathalia!

Do leg lockers need to be able to pass an opponents guard? I question i am often asked is whether athletes who specialize in leg locks even need to bother with guard passing - after all, can’t they just directly attack the legs and forego the whole notion of getting an opponents guard? Certainly if you were very good at leg locking you could employ this strategy, but it would soon run into problems. The problem with this line of thinking is fourfold. First, it makes you very predictable - that’s never a good thing in combat sports, as opponents will soon figure out what your game is and adjust themselves accordingly. Very soon it will be exceedingly difficult to get the breakthrough with leg locks alone. Secondly, it largely removes what is perhaps the single biggest determinant of success or failure in grappling in general and leg locks in particular- physical and tactical PRESSURE OVER TIME that melts opponents so that they are far easier to defeat in the tenth minute than they were in the first minute and which creates distraction so that as an opponents defends guard passing he is easier to leg lock and as he defends leg locks he is easier to pass. Third, the whole idea of the leg lock revolution that my students started was to attack 100% of the human body, rather than just the traditional upper 50% of the body. When you refuse to pass guard, you simply make the same mistake in reverse - now you can only attack the lower 50% of the human body and the entire arsenal of upper body submissions is denied to you. It would be a sad thing to launch a revolution against attacking half the human body and end up doing the same thing only substituting lower body for upper body. Fourth, the most effective submission holds of them all - strangles - require you to get to the upper body. No guard passing ability means no strangles from top position. As much as I love leg locks, there are always going to be some opponents who simply refuse to tap to them and will fight in with badly damaged legs. You need to be able to pull out the heavy artillery and strangle them unconscious - so you need to be able to get past the legs to the upper body - even if you love leg locks!

Garry Tonon opens his new school and gets promoted to Second Dan: It was great going out to The wilds of New Jersey and seeing the grand opening bod Garry Tonons new school! He has amassed a fine group of students and is doing an excellent job showing them the kingly art of Jiu Jitsu at @brunswickbjj Even though Mr Tonon is world renown as the most exciting grappler on the planet he does a truly excellent job teaching all aspects of Jiu Jitsu including the more mundane but absolutely crucial fundamentals, so that all ages and body types can be effective on the mat. Joining us were Gordon Ryan, who received his first degree promotion and Garry’s first coach and mentor, Tom DeBlass. It’s a very proud moment for me to see the all round success of my students, not just personal success on the stage, but community success through teaching and mentorship which expands and improves the sport we all love so much. Congratulations to Garry and all his students on the new school!

Sometimes you just know you done f**ked up...One of the surest signs of progress in Jiu Jitsu is understanding WHY you lost. We all know that feeling of “oh no...i just f**ked up.” Its good that you have those feelings - it’s a sign of progress. The worst feeling is getting beating and not knowing why or how - then you cannot even begin to improve your performance. Losing is never a pleasant thing, but losing and NOT KNOWING WHY is completely intolerable since it takes away the VALUE OF LOSING AS A LEARNING EXPERIENCE. Whenever you lose a match or experience some form of failure that feel is important, never just take the loss and move on. The idea is to analyze it and make corrections. Losing is entirely normal and completely forgivable - but losing without analysis and modification to create a better you is not. Just as important as your training sessions are you post training debriefings, where you must go through the good and bad aspects of the session and propose changes for the next one. Only when each session is followed by analysis can one session benefit the next and progress over time be made. Your physical training training stops the moment you leave the mat, but your mental training does not.

Some areas of Jiu Jitsu are an endless ocean of moves - some have only a few: Of all the skill sets in Jiu Jitsu, the one that has the fewest options is probably OPENING A CLOSED GUARD. There are relatively few methods of doing this that work reliably in a competitive match. The same methods you learn in a beginner class will be the same methods you learn in a black belt class - just performed better. The basic demand to attain a strong working posture and get up to your feet admits only a few variations. This is a skill that you really need since there you cannot even begin to PASS a guard until you can OPEN a guard. There are not many moves to learn that are actually effective - but the skill is a difficult one as your opponent can set many traps as you try to posture and rise and so ironically the skill of opening a classed guard is among the first skills you will learn - but one of the last you will master. There may not be many moves to learn, but they are not easy to perform on a skilled opponent.

Nothing good comes from standing directly in front of your opponents feet and knees - get to your angles! The legs are the center of Jiu Jitsu. When you’re in bottom position, everything is about keeping your legs between you and your opponent. When you’re in top position it’s all about getting past his legs. Whenever you are playing top game, LOOK TO GET OFFLINE AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE AND AS OFTEN AS POSSIBLE and you will soon be much more successful. Your hands are not strong enough to move an opponents legs by themselves - so use your hands only to temporarily immobilize his legs just long enough to step to an angle. Once you get a good angle outside the legs, your opponent is now in a defensive cycle and is now primarily concerned with retaining his guard rather than attacking you - that means you can focus on passing his guard rather than defending sweeps and submissions - and that will help make you much more successful in top position!

Victory in Boston! At the BJJ Fanatics 170 pound tournament tonight junior squad members Oliver Taza and Ethan Crelinsten defeated some very tough and talented opponents to get to the finals while Gordon Ryan defeated Pat Downy in a submission grappling match via submission and lost the return freestyle wrestling match via tech fall. Obviously Gordon Ryan can quickly and easily win via submission against a wrestler and no one would be impressed by this, so instead Mr Ryan’s main mission tonight was to show that a Jiu Jitsu athlete can be very competitive with even an elite wrestler in the standing position within an ADCC/IBJJF type rule set - this he certainly did. Under ADCC rules he did not concede a takedown and took down his distinguished national champion opponent twice. Mr Downy appeared very tired (wrestling matches are a very fast paced six minutes while Jiu Jitsu matches like the one tonight have a totally different pace and look). At around fifteen minutes Gordon Ryan applied a move commonly used in wrestling, a power half Nelson and Mr Downey strangely submitted, probably from fatigue as there was no actual submission hold in place. It was an impressive thing to watch a Jiu Jitsu athlete score in the standing position against such a distinguished wrestler. In the freestyle match of course it was a different story as Mr Downey expertise in pressure and pace got him quick push out and takedown points and then turns on the ground in par terre. For Oliver Taza, this was his career best performance tonight - defeating the very talented PJ Barch and John Combs via submission en route to the final. Ethan Crelinsten was the smallest man of the tournament, weighing only 145 pounds in a 170 pound tournament and showed tremendous heart to win his way to the final against substantially bigger and stronger opponents. It was a great night for the squad and a fun mix of rules from around the grappling world! Hope you enjoyed the show!! Wishing you all the best from Boston!

On the road! Gordon Ryan (certifiably most dangerous driver in the United States - even more deadly than Garry Tonon and Renzo), Nathalia and myself on the road to Boston for the BJJ Fanatics Grand Prix tournament. Mr Ryan will compete in a fascinating combination of matches against the outstanding United States national freestyle wrestling team member Pat Downey who represented our nation with distinction at the last world championships. The two men will compete in each of their specialized domains. First they will do a no time limit submission only grappling match - which clearly favors Mr Ryan; and then a freestyle wrestling match (both athletes will have to wear wrestling shoes and singlet and follow all current rules of the sport) - which clearly favors Mr Downey. It will be fascinating to see two elite level athletes compete in both their speciality and an unfamiliar sport back to back! Hope you all enjoy the show! See you in Boston!

Your head is a heavy weight at the end of the longest lever of the human body - learn to use it effectively: The average human head weighs just over ten pounds (around 4.5kg) and is positioned at the end of the longest lever in the human body - the spine. As such it can be used to supply a surprising amount of weight in directions you need if used correctly. Look how Gordon Ryan uses head position to nullify what could be a dangerous underhook. Learning to use the PLACEMENT of your own head and the DISPLACEMENT of your opponents head is a big part of what it means to maximize the nature of the human body to advantage. Ten pounds may not seem like much, but when it’s connected to a long lever it can get very heavy indeed as that lever gets lowered over your target. Think about connecting a ten pound dumbbell to a good sized stick and then holding the other end of the stick in your hand. As long as you keep the stick vertical it is quite manageable - but as soon as you lower the weighted end of that stick it quickly becomes a very heavy burden indeed! Learn to use your head in similar ways and you can become a burden to even a very strong opponent in ways that can point you towards victory

Dual threat: Nothing creates a sense of dread in an opponent more than having to deal with multiple serious threats at the same time. Whenever you create one threat, your opponent must respond with a counter. When you present two simultaneous threats it is difficult for him to counter one because that counter to the first threat will often expose him to the second. As a result many opponents will freeze in the face of dual or triple threats and become much more controllable than usual. Here, Garry Tonon creates a dual threat - one at the upper body with Kimura and a lower body threat with inside foot position whilst facing the hips (making for a very easy entrance into ashi garami variations if he should lose the kimura). Now the opponent has to defend both at the same time resulting in a situation where he simply has to hold his arm last and feet together defensively and thus preventing movement that would actually make escape possible. The result? An immobilized opponent. In this way you can see that THREAT is as effective for immobilization purposes as pins

Open guard - off balancing forward and backwards: A distinguishing characteristic of great guard players is their constant use of KUZUSHI or off balancing skills as a precursor to their big attacks. The main directions of kuzushi from guard are forwards and backwards (there are some good off balancing moves side to side especially when wearing a gi, but most or forwards and backwards). When you go to off balance someone FORWARDS from open guard, the best methods usually involve a PULL WITH YOUR UPPER BODY AND A PUSH WITH YOUR LOWER BODY; whilst off balances in BACKWARD directions usually (though not always) involve a PUSH WITH UPPER BODY AND A PULL WITH LOWER BODY. The idea is to create a simultaneous application of two forces at two locations in opposite directions - THAT’S what knocks an opponent off balance and creates the kuzushi you will need to break through a tough opponents stance and posture and get your moves to work!

The single greatest step you can make in combat sports, and the insight that forms the core of my coaching philosophy, is to see combat as primarily A PUZZLE TO BE SOLVED WITH THE MIND rather than a frightening or exhilarating ORDEAL TO BE ENDURED AND OVERCOME WITH THE BODY AND CHARACTER.

Understanding your legs: A distinguishing characteristic of Jiu Jitsu is the tremendous emphasis out upon grappling your opponent primarily with your LEGS. The guard position in all its many variations is stressed more than any other. It is important therefore that you understand the broad principles that enable your legs to be an effective weapon in the fight from bottom position. Understand that the HIPS are the engine room of the guard position. They provide the power and position that underlies guard play. By shifting side to side and slowing you to move between seated and supine positions they can out you in a position to attack and defend effectively. The KNEES are your shield in defense - the closer to your torso the stronger your defense - as long as you present two knees in front or around your opponents waist/hips (open and closed guard) or around one of his legs (half guard ) you are defensively sound and have the possibility of offense from underneath. Your FEET solidify the connection/grip of your legs upon your opponent. They transmit the power of your hips and knees in meaningful ways to your opponents body. Don’t just touch your opponent with your feet - GRIP him with your feet - and you will be able to use your legs as you do your arms. We spend all our lives using our hands and arms for a multitude of difficult tasks without thought - Jiu Jitsu asks you to do the same with your feet and legs - when you do, you will be a very dangerous opponent from underneath.

Squad rampage: The squad went hunting for medals last night in Florida at Sub Stars grappling event. Ethan Crelinsten fought above his weight class against Enrico Cocco and came out victorious. Nicky Ryan took on MMA champion JZ Calvacante and winter with a devastating heel hook. Nicky Rod took on black belt Roosevelt Sousa and won via strangle. In the main event Gordon Ryan took on Tex Johnson and won easily with a stranglehold kata gatame. Victory over high level opponents is not the only goal of Jiu Jitsu, not the deepest goal - but it certainly is a good sign that your training program is going in the right directions. Hope you all enjoyed the show - thanks also to Garry Tonon doing a fine job cornering fellow athletes to victory when he could not compete himself due to suffering a cut in training a few days before the event.

Make sure you know the antidote to your own poisons...We all have our favorite submissions. As you get better at them you will inevitably run into opponents who see their effectiveness and want to use them against you as you have against them. It’s very important you know as much about DEFENDING your favorite submissions as you do attacking. There is an added benefit to this training. Learning to defend a submission is like learning it backwards - it offers fresh perspectives on a move you already know and makes you look at the move from different angles and points of view that often boosts your knowledge for offense as well as defense. Know your moves from the perspective of both attacker AND defender and you will gain deeper knowledge and avoid falling victim to your own poison!

What scenarios must you be effective from in open guard? The vast majority of guard play in Jiu Jitsu is from open guard. There are many variations of open guard and the sheer amount of material you need to learn can seem overwhelming at times. Rest assured however that when you look at open guard in terms of the NUMBER OF POSSIBLE SCENARIOS FROM WHICH YOU MUST BE EFFECTIVE (a rather small number) rather than the NUMBER OF POSSIBLE MOVES (an extremely large number) then things seem much more manageable. Your opponent has three options - kneeling, one knee on floor and standing (within the standing category there is a particularly important option - the split squat, often referred to as “headquarters” position (I’m not sure why). You have two options, you can be seated or you can be supine. So the number of possible general scenarios is not so big. You will need at least a couple of trusted and effective moves in each of those scenario combinations. Seen in this light you can see it’s a very manageable project. My favorite move when I’m seated and my opponent is on his knees has always been the hook sweep (essentially a ground version of the sumi gaeshi standing sacrifice throw). It works equally well gi and no gi and combines extremely well with many other moves - particularly leg locks. Make sure your training program covers all the scenarios of open guard and soon you will be able to attack regardless of which scenario you may find yourself in 😜

The easiest way to expand your repertoire of moves: As we make progress we are constantly looking to add new weapons to our arsenal. As a general rule, the more weapons were are skilled in using, the more dangerous we will be to our opponents. However, developing new skills is time consuming and as we devote lots of time to new skills, inevitably we have to dedicate less time to maintaining old skills which can be detrimental to our game. Probably the easiest way to develop new skills is to LEARN NEW VARIATIONS OF MOVES YOU ARE ALREADY GOOD AT. This requires relatively little training time, since the new skills are closely related to existing skills and complements, rather than harms existing skills. Think about the triangle. Most Jiu Jitsu athletes know it well and can perform it solidly. Yet when we say THE triangle, usually we mean the FRONT triangle - the most common variation in Jiu Jitsu. There are FIVE major variations of the triangle - front, side, rear, reverse and “back to front” (hantai sankaku). You can greatly expand your submission Arsenal just by adding the other four variations at little cost in training time. For almost any move you favor you can do similar things. Jiu Jitsu moves usually have several important variations, which are related to each other, yet different in important ways so that in practice they perform almost like different moves. Do this with all your favorite moves and in a short time you can triple your offensive arsenal! Here, Georges St Pierre works on variations of the triangle to expand his repertoire

Routes to the back: In a grappling match there is no more dominant position that getting behind your opponent. It is up to us to master all the major routes to the back if we are maximize our potential in the sport. While there are several good paths to the back, the simplest and most direct will always be that of getting past your opponents hands and elbows. There are vast number of ways to do this, and opportunity is everywhere, given that most of the time the two opponents are facing each other and trying to come to grips. It doesn’t matter whether you are standing or on the ground, top or bottom, gi or no gi - EVERYTHING GETS EASIER WHEN YOU GET BEHIND AN OPPONENT. Understand that the METHOD of getting there are PHYSICAL, but the RECOGNITION OF OPPORTUNITY is MENTAL. Until you make the mental step of seeing the opportunity, the physical act of getting there will not happen - so train your mind to see the opportunity to take the back every time it occurs - your game will never be the same.

When you can separate knee and elbow you can pass and pin: One of the main difficulties associated with passing the guard of a trained opponent is separating his knee and elbow on the side towards which you are passing. As long as your opponent keeps his knee and elbow framed together you will not have the space required to establish chest to chest contact and though you may have passed his LEGS/HIPS - you have not passed his GUARD. Learn to understand the need to separate knee and elbow as part of the guard passing process and you will have a lot more success getting to your pins. Don’t be satisfied with the superficial action of getting past the legs and hips - this has little effect on a skilled opponent. Even as you are doing that, start plotting how you lever apart his knee and elbow so that you can actually profit from passing the legs/hips and get your score. Here, Garry Tonon does a fine job of keeping knee and elbow far apart as he exerts his passing pressure and is rewards with a gap big enough to drive a truck through - result? A clean pass to a controlling pin.

Getting our Australian and Canadian students ready for competition is always one of my favorite parts of the job...

Harnessing The incredible potential power of the spine: As a general rule the human body is a rather feeble thing - it does however have two remarkable sources of power - the hips and the spine. If you wish to be capable of defeating big strong and athletically gifted opponents - you must be able to maximize your use of both. With regards the spine, it has remarkable weight bearing properties when made into an ARCH. The spine can arch in two ways. The first is forward rounding of the spine that makes your spine into the shape of the bottom of a rocking chair. The second is a backwards rounding often referred to as a back bridge. Both methods enable a smaller person to carry and move shocking amounts of weight. Here, Gordon Ryan, a master of arching the spine forwards into the rocking chairs hair that enables inversion and elevation gets a big man moving in the directions he wants so that he can enter the legs. You must make spinal training a part of your daily regimen - it’s effects will directly benefit your Jiu Jitsu. Daily inversion/folding and bridging will give you an arch that can carry a heavy load and move an opponent as you want.

Why does Jiu Jitsu put such an emphasis on passing guard? From your first lesson in Jiu Jitsu you were told that if you are in top position your first priority is to get past your opponents legs and pass his guard. The reasons for this are important. A fundamental principle of Jiu Jitsu is to seek always an asymmetry in attacking potential in your favor. We always want situations where you can attack your opponent more readily and in more devastating fashion than he can attack you. The best way you can do this is to get past your opponents legs. Almost All of the major submissions and strikes from bottom position require the use of your legs. If you get past those there is very little to be concerned with. You on the other hand, now have a vast array of strikes and submissions that you can use. Even in matches that don’t give points for guard passing it is still very much worth your while to pass an opponents guard just to be able to exploit this desirable asymmetry where you can attack at will whilst an opponent can barely attack at all. Think about a situation where you had no guard passing ability whatsoever. What kind of offense could you apply to your opponent from top position? You would be limited to leg locks - you could only attack 50% of the human body. Interestingly, when you can only attack the lower body your leg locks become predictable and easy to defend. When you can pass guard you can attack the whole body - you still have the leg lock option (even better leg locks because your opponent doesn’t know if you will be passing or leg locking) and now arms locks and strangles as well. The whole realm of strangles only opens up when you can pass guard - and strangles are the single most high percentage finishes of them all. So even if you are, as I obviously am, a lover of the leg lock game, KEEP WORKING YOUR PASSING GAME AS THE FOUNDATION OF TOP GAME JIU JITSU. Only then will you be able to fulfill my ideal of Jiu Jitsu - to attack the whole body rather than half of it.

Patience is a virtue: A very natural feeling in combat sports is that speed is the greatest virtue. In many combat sports there is a lot of truth to that. In Jiu Jitsu however, because the majority of the action is on the floor where speed is limited and in close connection to another body - an even greater impediment to fast movement - speed rarely proves to be the deciding factor in the application of a given move. Our minds however, often don’t get this message, and tell us to frantically work to apply a move quickly before the opportunity is lost. In the majority of cases however, especially those performed from a dominant position, it is usually the cases that a slower and more purposeful application of moves gets the job done better. The whole purpose of dominant position is to LET THE POSITION DO THE WORK FOR YOU. Relax and take your time - he’s not going anywhere and as long as the positions maintained it does not matter how many times you fail in the application of the next move because the position is still there to try again until you achieve the breakthrough you seek. Here, Gordon Ryan, young master of back control and finishing, characteristically works at a slow and methodical pace towards a finish

Match your strength against his weakness - the triangle: Jiu Jitsu is a grappling style focused almost entirely upon the use of your LEGS to control an opponent. The best scenarios are those that match the strongest part of your body - your legs and hips - against his upper body. This is how a smaller person can defeat a bigger person. The quintessential example of this is the triangle. It directly matches your legs and hips against an opponents head/neck and one arm. Learn to enter into the five major variations of the triangle from any position, too or bottom, and you will dramatically improve your ability to make your legs the centerpiece of your control game and at the same time, be able to submit an opponent in a number of different ways. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of the triangle, ties up an opponent and now has his choice of how and when to finish

It doesn’t matter if most of your body is in bottom position when your hips are on top of your opponents hips: A distinctive feature of closed guard is that even though your body as a whole is in bottom position, your HIPS are in top position on top of your opponents hips - and your hips are the most important part of your body when it comes to grappling. Learn to take advantage of this fact. Here, Gordon takes advantage of top hip position from bottom closed guard to threaten a sweep and play off the defensive reactions to this threat. He has come up so effectively that the whole idea of bottom position is moot at this point. The beauty of sweeping from position featuring top hip position is that any successful sweep will lead directly to a mounted pin after the sweep - greatly adding to the effect.

Can you feel the tension? Learning to read your opponents body is a key skill in all combat sports. At any given moment in a grappling match your opponent will be applying his strength at a certain INTENSITY and DIRECTION. You must be cognizant of this at all times, for this is the best guide as to what you ought to be doing as the match unfolds. Understand that as an opponent strongly resists a given move, that resistance will be applied in a direction resistant to that initial move. That tension can be exploited in two ways. The first is to continue the move and power through the resistance. If you began strongly this will often works. In many cases you will feel a rapid rise in tension in your opponents body. This is like the tension being wound up in a spring. If you successfully break through the resistance you will often find that the resistance creates a spring loaded effect that redoubles the effect of the original move and the opponent literally flies with the move. Here, Nicky Ryan awards an opponent some frequent flyer miles as the initial resistance to his sweep creates a breakthrough point with considerable energy behind it that results in an ass over head double whammy effect - very satisfying. The second way is to suddenly change to a second move that exploits the opponents defensive reaction by going in the same direction as the resistance - this too can result in some quite spectacular sweeps and throws and flying the unfriendly skies. Keep alert to that tension and watch the amplitude of your sweeps double overnight!

The only thing better than one well applied force is two well applied forces: A central concept in Jiu Jitsu is directionality of force. A force applied in the right direction at the right time can produce spectacular effects, whilst that same force applied in an inappropriate direction will produce negligible results. The greatest effects come when you learn to couple forces - to apply forces in opposing directions at the same time upon your opponent. This creates powerful turning forces that can greatly amplify the effects of submissions, sweeps and takedowns. Look for this whenever you can - Jiu Jitsu is full of examples. A scissor is a fine example of this principle in everyday life. Jiu Jitsu takes that same mechanical principle and applied it in variations of the scissor sweep. Here I use a spider guard variation of the scissor sweep to create a considerable turning force upon a training partner. Whenever you see opportunity to use this principle - and there a MANY in Jiu Jitsu - use it and emphasize it - you will like the results!

Barriers: @blondefighter Katlyn Chookagian was stopped in the third round by the great champion Valentina Schevchenko tonight here in Houston. Ms Schevchenko showed her championship pedigree with a powerful performance both on the feet and the floor, winning via TKO with strikes from a very well applied side crucifix after an excellent upper body takedown. What makes me proud of the athletes i work with is never the events result - that is never fully determined by us - but rather their preparation for the event - which IS determined by us. Ms Chookagian May not have won the championship tonight but she showed a champions mindset with her preparation. She gave her all in camp and got to the best level possible in the time available. She fought with courage, holding nothing back - there is nothing more any of us can do than that. Barriers are in front of all of us. Some we can rise over without much effort. Some can stop us in our tracks. The greatest test of who we are is our reaction to those barriers, both as we approach them and try to climb them. Ms Chookagian’s first reaction backstage was to ask when she can get back to training and start climbing barriers again. She took only superficial damage so it won’t take long for the journey to begin again soon. Whatever the outcome may have been - That’s a champion right there 😊😊wishing you all the best from Texas! Hope you all enjoyed the show! Thanks as always to the team! @mcmahon_pj @babyfacebenoit @coachmarkhenry @kycerm for all their great work in preparation

Blonde fighter ready for action!
@blondefighter weighed in successfully today in Houston Texas for her bout tomorrow night at UFC 247 against the great Valentina Schevchenko. As always she has prepared very professionally for what is without doubt the greatest challenge of her career against arguably the greatest pound for pound female fighter on the planet. There is a real big fight big show atmosphere here in Houston with a great fight card filled with MMA super stars and talent. Looking forward to working with Mark Henry, the Renzo Gracie academy Muay Thai team and Katlyn’s wrestling coach and husband Kyle Cerminara. Hope you all enjoy the big show tomorrow night!

Open guard is a four limbed beast - not two: The mistake complete beginners make when learning open guard is to grapple with their arms. This is totally hopeless. Soon they wise up and start focusing on their legs as the basis of open guard. This is MUCH better, but over emphasis on the legs alone creates an over defensive open guard - hard to pass but not very dangerous. ONLY WHEN YOU USE ARMS AND LEGS TOGETHER IN UNISON CAN YOU BE EQUALLY STRONG IN OFFENSE AND DEFENSE AND ABLE TO COMBINE UPPER BODY PULLS WITH LOWER BODY PUSHES (and vice versa) TO CREATE OFF BALANCING THAT MAKES YOU A DANGEROUS ATHLETE FROM UNDERNEATH. As soon as you engage your arms and legs together your spine will round in the shape of a banana and friction with the mat will be greatly reduced and produce a rocking motion that will creat fast motion and enable you to carry and move your opponents weight - THATS when the magic of open guard begins! Here, Nicky Ryan show a superb interplay between upper and lower body engagement from open guard.

Sometimes jiu jitsu can seem like the most complex sport in the world - so many moves to learn and master! Yet at its conceptual heart it is very simple. The entire bottom game of the sport can be summarized in a single sentence. WHENEVER WORKING FROM BOTTOM SEEK ALWAYS TO KEEP YOUR LEGS BETWEEN YOURSELF AND YOUR OPPONENT AND BE CONFIDENT THAT AS LONG AS YOU DO THIS, HE WILL NEVER BE ABLE TO CONTROL YOU AND YOU WILL ALWAYS HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO ATTACK HIM WITH SUBMISSIONS AND REVERSALS. When you can see the big picture all the myriad details fall into order and even the esoteric elements of the game makes sense

Gordon Ryan just released his new instructional video SYSTEMATICALLY ATTACKING THE TURTLE POSITION. This is an incredibly detailed and complete dissection of the postion by the best no gi back attack expert I ever saw. Like all my senior students, Mr Ryan is every bit as good at teaching as he is in competition and he shows it here in this video. I put a very high value on independent thinking and strongly encourage it in my students. All my senior students have developed their own unique approaches and details to the game I taught them and have gone beyond my teachings to develop their own personal game - Mr Ryan shows his approach to the back attack game that made him such a super star in the world grappling. If you want to become an outright assassin from the back who can take the back, hold the back and finish from the back - this is an asset that you will cherish for many years. Check out his Instagram bio for links and see if this can take you closer to your Jiu Jitsu goals! 😜😜

Start small to finish big: There was a notable moment this weekend at the Kasai Seven grappling championship that has important implications for your own development in Jiu Jitsu. Nick Rodriguez finished a champion black belt with a nicely applied heel hook to take a fine submission victory. Mr Rodriguez has not been training long in Jiu Jitsu and like anyone starting out, submission skills don’t come naturally. When he first started working leg lock skills there was the usual feeling of “this will never work for me” “there’s so much to remember! How will I ever remember all this under stress?” “My body isn’t made for this move” Understand that everyone goes through these feelings and doubts. The techniques of Jiu Jitsu and submission in particular, are not born fully grown. On the contrary, they are born just as you were - weak and in need of nurture and nourishment. But just as time made you stronger, so too, training time will make your technique stronger. When you first start working a technique start small - just get a feel for the basic movement. Experiment with different postures and angles without resistance. In sparring, start with smaller, less experienced opponents and build slowly from white belts through blue, purple brown and black. Follow this gradual path of escalating degrees of difficulty where YOUR CURRENT SKILL LEVEL IS MATCHED TO THE DEGREE OF DIFFICULTY OF THE TASK YOU HAVE SET YOURSELF. Ignore the voice of defeat in your head that will always question your ability and potential and one day that weak and ineffective technique that you never thought would amount to anything will be one of the most feared in your arsenal. Here, Mr Rodriguez battles for the legs in the gym - on the long and frustrating path that led to applying it against a champion - that same path that we must all walk.

Don’t let a fascination with one area of the game blind you to other potentially useful areas: Jiujitsu is a game of oceanic vastness and none of us will ever come close to fully exploring all the possibilities it offers. It is generally best to focus upon a small subset of moves and devote a lifetime to mastery of those - better to be a master of a few moves than mediocre at many moves. Nonetheless, there are many times when we could expand our current repertoire very profitably with just a slight addition to our skill set. I will illustrate with an example. When it comes to leg lock entries from bottom position the main categories of entries are elevating, sliding, inverting and rolling. Let’s say you were already very good at the most commonly used methods - elevating, sliding and inverting entries. A really simple and easy way to greatly increase your leg locking effectiveness would be to add rolling entries. Rolling is a simple body action easily learned by most people and opportunities to use it are everywhere. It takes you to the same finishing point as all your other favorite entries and works with already existent skills that you have, so it’s not like you are learning an entirely new skill set - but rather a valuable addition to your established skill set. That means you can probably get great results with it in a short time at little cost in effort. The game is full of such possibilities sitting right in front of you that could make a real difference to your performance if you just identified them and did a little work incorporating them. Think about your current best moves and which new skills would best work around those skills. Once you identify some of those new skills, start training them and watch your game rise in level!

Outstanding display from Nick Rodriguez at Kasai Seven this weekend: Another truly impressive performance from purple belt juggernaut Nick Rodriguez as he took on a field of champion black belts last night in Texas. The short matches of six minutes made it difficult to get a decisive result in the time available but there is no question he got the better of world champion opponents Vinny Magalhaes and Cyborg with his rapidly improving guard passing skills that put his opponents under great positional pressure. Then he showed his developing submission skills with a very nice heel hook victory over Bruno Bastos. Due to a quirk in the rules of Kasai events he did not go to the finals - He and Cyborg had accrued the same number of points and Mr Rodriguez appeared to dominate the action in their match together and Cyborg had been given a win for a match that never happened (Mr Magalhaes pulled out due to injury after his match with Nicky Rodriguez). Because Cyborg had more wins even though one of those wins was an injury forfeit, he went to the final where he showed his toughness by fighting through a nasty earlier facial cut to win the final. Nicky Rodriguez went to battle for third against Kyle Boehm and again showed his developing positional ground game - threatening the back and getting a tight mounted position to take another great win. It’s always a joy to watch improvement and positive development and the young Jersey juggernaut showed exactly that this weekend. It’s incredible how much he has accomplished in his short time in the sport and clear that his skill level is rapidly rising and he is a major threat to even the legends of the sport. There is a good lesson for all of us as we take our own journey towards self improvement and progress - hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Carrying weight: Any time you work underneath an opponent there is a real danger you will have to carry his weight for extended periods of time. This is tiring and leads to restricted movement- neither is desirable. As much as possible try to create situations where your opponent has to carry his own weight. One of the very best ways to do this is to snap his hands to the floor. Any time you do this the majority of his weight will be carried by his own hands. This will make other parts of his body feel very light. Here, Nicky Ryan snaps an opponents hands to the mat from open guard. As his opponent now carries most of his own upper body weight; his legs will become light and easy to move. Mr Ryan takes advantage of these lightened legs to enter into a variation of ashi garami. When you want one part of his body to feel light - get another part of his body to the floor so that his weight gets divided and you now only have to lift a fraction of his weight rather than all of it. The easiest and most practical part of his body to get to the mat is his hands

The old saying is that there are only two certainties in life - death and taxes. Those are certainly two things of which we may be completely certain - but let me propose a third - IF YOU EVER GET A HOLD OF BOTH OF YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS (particularly at the ankles) AND PUSH HIM IN SOME WAY - HE WILL FALL TO HIS BUTT. Whenever you have an opponent in your open guard who just seems unsweepable (not sure if that’s really a word but I’ll go with it 😜😜) - GO BACK TO THIS PRINCIPLE. Research ways to get a hold on both ankles from guard whether with hands or feet or both and push - you will bring him down every time I promise you. That doesn’t mean you will always score - you have to get up and reverse him for that - but it’s a step in the right direction!

The three things your opponent just can’t hide in a grappling match: Once you come to grips with an opponent you obviously want to hide certain vulnerabilities from each other. No one wants to expose their back obviously and most opponents do a good job reducing back exposure as much as possible. There are three things an opponent will find very difficult to avoid exposing himself to. First is the front headlock. Any time you try to tackle a leg or lower your level, an essential movement in any extended grappling exchange, you become vulnerable to a front head lock. Any time you reach for an opponent, inevitable in any grappling exchange, as you have to grip to begin any form of action, you become vulnerable to KImura. Any time you wisen your base, essential in grappling as no one want to be taken down or swept, you become vulnerable to Ashi garami based leg locks. These three families of submission- strangles from front headlock, kimura and Ashi garami based leg locks; no opponent will be able to totally hide from you in a grappling match that goes longer than a couple of minutes. Make them part of your arsenal. Your opponent can hide many things from you - but he can’t hide those three.

Don’t let opponents impose their grips upon you: All control in grappling begins with grip. Without grip and connection there is no grappling. Even a white belt on his first day can instinctively feel the danger of a powerful and well directed grip that allows an opponent to dictate his movement and will intuitively resist it. As you gain in expertise you will learn to distinguish between ineffective grips and highly effective ones - it’s simple to tell the difference- any grip that gives his control over your ability to hold a stance and move is effective. Any grip that doesn’t do this can be safely ignored or even exploited; but grips that DO feel effective cannot be ignored - in these cases it’s usually wise to defend or negate such grips immediately, or if the danger is high, break them completely and start again. DON’T TOLERATE OR IGNORE GRIPS THAT PREVENT YOU HOLDING A STANCE OR MOVING AS YOU WANT - this is simply surrendering too much advantage to your opponent. Negate them or break them. You don’t want to become an overly defensive player who simply breaks an opponents grips and continually disengages without ever playing a positive attacking game, but on the other hand, you don’t want to be naive and get crushed because you tolerated grips that made it almost impossible to succeed. Finding the right middle ground between defending and opponents grips and imposing your own so you can get in with your attacks is a big part of your path to grappling maturity. Here, Georges St Pierre defends the dangerous grips of Gordon Ryan - one of the best grip players in the game - so that he can work effectively from open guard

A big part of your confidence will come from having a plan of WHAT YOU WANT TO DO in the match; but an even bigger part of your confidence will come from knowing you can handle anything THAT YOU DIDN’T WANT TO HAPPEN in the match. When you’re not scared of the worst case scenarios, you won’t be scared of anything.

Two approaches to submission: Submissions are the soul of Jiu Jitsu. All of the skills of Jiu Jitsu are designed to take you in that direction. When it’s time to enter into submission there are two clear paths. The first is to use a fast entry that gets you so quickly into a winning position that an opponent simply does not have the time necessary to create an effective defense and must submit. The second is one where you use relentless pressure and control break through an opponents defense over time and force a submission. Both methods are highly effective, but I think it’s fair to say that the control based method is responsible for more wins than the speed based method. In addition, control based methods work better for a broader range of athletes and give better long term results because speed based methods tend to work in conjunction with surprise. Once an opponent has seen the move a few times the surprise is lost and you will need more than speed to keep succeeding. Nonetheless as students we all ought to strive to be good at both, even if we tend to favor one over the other. Sometimes it helps to divide your submissions up into your speed submissions and your control submissions based on situations. For example, entries into submission from standing positions make for much greater use of speed (humans move at their quickest when standing rather than on the floor), where as ground grappling permits much greater control, but a much slower pace. So for example, you might train your juji gatame arm bar from standing and knee on belly positions as a speed move, while your arm bars from mount, side position and closed guard as a slower control based move. However, you do it - leave room for both approaches in your training as both are proven pathways to the highest goal of victory by submission

Divide your goals into long term and short term: In order to make progress you must have goals. Without goals we are like ships adrift on an ocean without a compass or star to guide us. Not all goals however, are to be achieved at the same time. It is important that you divide the achievement of your goals by time. Some goals are easier to achieve, perhaps for example you just want to improve a skill that you are already quite good at. This won’t take long and so this might be a goal you aim to achieve inside a month. Other goals might involve entirely new skills completely outside of your current skill set. This might be put into a three to five year category. It is important that at any given moment you have a clear sense of your goals divided by time. You should have a goal for your next workout. A goal for the coming week. Several goals for next three months to a year. A few big goals and many smaller goals for next three to five years. The fastest learners I ever coached were generally the most goal oriented athletes. NOTHING SPEEDS PROGRESS BETTER THAN A STRING SENSE OF DIRECTION - and the best way to ensure that sense of direction will work for you is goal setting. Set your goals and divide them by projected completion time and work on them every time you step on the mats. Here, Nicky Rod works on his long term goal to become a strong leg locker in between his short term goal to better integrate his wrestling skills with Jiu Jitsu skills. Sustained progress over time needs diversified goals, some short term, some long term, determined by how your current skill set will influence expected completion dates. Only in this way can you achieve you longest term goal - to be the best Jiu Jitsu player you can be

Angle: The human body is set up very well to defend attacks coming from directly in front and very poorly adapted to deal with attacks directly from the rear. As a result, opponents will do everything they can to prevent you getting the preferred rear positions. A good substitute when you can’t get directly behind an opponent, but still don’t want the difficulty of direct frontal attacks, is ANGLE. getting to an angle on an opponent gets away from strong frontal defenses and is a lot easier to get to than all the way behind. In the case of most submissions entry from bottom position you will need some degree of angle on your opponent to get a good entry and a sting mechanical finish. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of going perpendicular to an opponent from underneath and as a result, enters easily into a strong leg attack. Don’t fight your way in from the front when you can halve your difficulty by entering in from the side. Take the take to find angle first and attack second. You will get twice the success with half the effort.

Jiu Jitsu is not about perfection. Not even the best among us have perfect Jiu Jitsu - nor has anyone in the past and neither will anyone in the future. Jiu Jitsu is about the PURSUIT of perfection through the use of rational thinking in response to the myriad problems we encounter and testing these thoughts physically through trial and error and edging just a little closer every day towards the unattainable dream of perfection. Take confidence in the fact that if victory is all you seek - your Jiu Jitsu doesn’t have to be perfect - it just has to be better than the person in front of you. The real battle however, is not with the person in front of you; but rather with the distant dream of perfection within you and the growth of character and skill required to push yourself daily towards that shimmering dream you know you will never reach but whose pursuit will make you a far better person than those who live without a dream and an ideal.

Heels or toes? A lot of what determines the effectiveness of a given move is unseen by bystanders. This gives rise to the notion of “invisible Jiu Jitsu” which captures well the idea that the success or failure of moves sometimes can’t be seen by spectators. One of the most significant determinants of whether certain moves will work is our opponents weight distribution - in particular, whether his weight is currently located on his heels or toes. The difference may well be invisible to an onlooker but it is of great importance to the action. When the weight is on the heels, sweeps and takedowns to the rear will prove highly effective with minimal effort. When the weight is on the toes, sweeps and takedowns to the front will work very well. Trying to force a rear sweep/takedown when the opponents weight is on the toes takes a lot of effort and will likely end in failure. As you rise in experience you will soon learn that you can manipulate an opponents weight on to toes or heels as you desire. When you want weight on the toes, push, and as the opponents resists and pushes back, his weight will gravitate to the toes - just as you desired. Here, Gordon Ryan senses an opponents weight is momentarily on the heels and immediately takes advantage with one of his favorite sweeps to the rear!

One of the great balance breaking methods in Jiu Jitsu: Pull the upper body with your arms and push the lower body with your legs - they will stumble every time - and if you can stumble the man then you can sweep the man! When you look at the photo you will see lines of tension running through my training partners gi jacket - indicating a pulling action on my part. In addition you can see tension in my right leg as it extends - indicating a pushing action on my part. Performed at the same time on a vulnerable spot you can see the inevitable result - a stumble and fall on my training partners part. When it comes time to break balance, only the COMBINED action of push and pull will have the effect you seek. Pushing on the legs without pulling on the head and upper body is worthless. So too, is pulling on the head without pushing on the legs. However, when you combine the two - magic can happen and you can stumble the biggest men in the gym.

Figure out where the threat is coming from and position your defense accordingly: you only have so many resources available for defense - so it’s important to use them wisely. You must learn to make on the spot assessments of where the next threat will come from based upon your opponents current positioning. Here, Garry Tonon has taken a good attacking position behind Georges St Pierre. Normally if someone is out to your right hand side, the LEFT hand is your primary defensive hand to strangles and head control as it is well positioned to intercept your opponents dangerous right hand. However, in this case Mr Tonon has cunningly taken his right hand to the far side of Mr St Pierres neck - the new emerging threat is thus the front headlock/guillotine - a move that Mr Tonon excels in. With equal cunning Mr St Pierre has put up the RIGHT hand as his primary defensive hand to stop this new threat. Being observant of the encroaching threat and placing your defensive resources accordingly is a big part of what makes you a defensively sound grappler. Take the take to observe where the threat is coming from at the start and the amount of effort you will have to expend to take care of the threat will be greatly reduced!

If you can make an opponent involuntarily put his hands to the mat to recover balance from open guard - you can make magic happen. If not, everything you try will be a fight. Remember, if his hands are on the mat - they aren’t on you - and if they aren’t on you, he can’t pass your guard and he is open to whatever attacks you initiate. SO GET THOSE HANDS TO THE MAT WHENEVER YOU CAN - a whole world of offense that was previously denied to you will soon open up!

I’m very happy to announce the release today of my latest instructional video GO FURTHER FASTER: OPEN GUARD. This covers the main skills and tactics you will need to excel at this crucial element of your Jiu Jitsu game. My students are well known for their deadly open guard game - here I teach the technique and tactics that underlies so much of their competition success. Open guard is the most exciting part of the bottom game and allows you to use all four of your limbs against an opponent who is often limited to using two against you and thus enables a skilled smaller opponent to take on and defeat larger opponents. Hope you enjoy it! If you are interested there is a link in my Instagram Bio

There aren’t many certainties in life - but there is one certainty I’ve learned in Jiu Jitsu that I would bet my life on and which can help you become very effective from open guard - IF YOU CAN GET A GRIP ON BOTH OF YOUR OPPONENTS LEGS AND EXERT A PUSHING FORCE BACKWARDS THAT GETS HIS CENTER OF GRAVITY BEHIND HIS HEELS - Then I don’t give a damn how fast, strong, heavy, flexible, acrobatic or athletically talented your opponent is - HE WILL FALL TO HIS BUTT - GUARANTEED. That does not guarantee you will score - a tough opponent may well scramble back up and recover before you can score - but I promise you he will fall - and that gives you an EXCELLENT scoring opportunity that in time you can exploit every time you’re on the mats. Here I am using ashi garami to control one leg whilst holding the other - both ankles controlled and a simple push with the ashi garami - KNOCK DOWN! Every time - now it’s up to you to work for the score/top position from there. Make this simple insight part of your open guard game and I promise you that you will start sweeping people you never previously swept 😜

The fundamental choice in Jiu Jitsu - inside control or outside control: When it comes time to control the human body the fundamental choice you will have before you is whether to control your opponents body by gripping outside/over his limbs or inside/under his limbs. They represent very different methods of control with different goals. As a general rule, inside control is best suited for opening an opponents limbs out and away from his torso, whilst outside control is typically best suited for pushing limbs across the center line and exposing an opponents back - but these are generalizations with important exceptions. When it comes to open guard, probably the most well known and proven method of outside control is DE LA RIVA guard, where your leg entwines the opponents lead leg from the outside. There are many variations utilizing different grips. This is an excellent position from which to launch your open guard offense, or, if you prefer inside position, to transfer to guards based upon inside position, such as ashi garami, X guard, reverse De La Riva etc. Train yourself to tie up your opponents lead leg with your de la Riva hook and get whatever grips you want from there - then it’s time to decide whether you attack directly from there or switch to another guard - either way, De La Riva guard will prove an invaluable means of initial control and a fine staging point from which you can direct an opponent into any kind of open guard that you favor

When you can put a strong mans hand behind his back you make him into a weakling: There is a massive difference between the strength of a man whose hands are in front of him and a mans whose hands have been out behind him. There is a reason why police officers cuff dangerous felons with hands behind the back rather than in front - you should adopt the same policy whenever possible as you grapple. Probably the most well known way to do this is through the Kimura lock. Here, a Gordon Ryan does a great job of getting the hand behind the back into a position where effective defense becomes almost impossible. If the hand is allowed to stay in front, you will have to find ways to incorporate your legs into the move or it will degenerate into a contest of strength. The earlier you get the hand behind the back the better. Your opponent will find it very difficult indeed to recover from such a position as this!

Removing a potential base of support prior to a sweep: Sweeping tough opponents from open guard is never an easy thing. You can however, make it a lot easier by first taking away an opponents base of support in the direction of the sweep. This usually means trapping an arm on one side of the body and sweeping towards the side of that trapped arm. Here I have my partners right arm trapped between our bodies. This will make a sweep to my left much easier. This comes at the price of additional hand fighting prior to the sweep so that you can trap the arm - however a little extra work at the start of an enterprise usually leads to easier work down the line - and that’s exactly the philosophy of arm traps as a precursor to sweeps. Use them whenever you can and watch your open guard sweep game make some serious progress!

Approach what you really want indirectly: We are involved in a sport where all the main moves and all the best counters to those moves are known by both parties - so how the hell so we ever get moves to work? One of the main methods is subterfuge - concealing your real intentions until it’s too late for an opponent to stop them. Whenever you want something in Jiu Jitsu it’s often a good idea to convey to your opponent that you want something else and as he pulls away from that false advance, you take what you really want. This principle must underlie most of your game. You can get away with direct approaches in beginner class, but as you go with better people you will find a much greater need to make use of indirect attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan comes to grips with the very talented Roberto Jimenez. Even in this early exchange you should be thinking in terms of indirect approaches. If you want a collar grip, fake a sleeve grip - as your opponent pulls his hand away to thwart you he leaves open what you really wanted all along - his collar. Let this kind of thinking permeate your game from start to finish and you will find yourself getting past resistance that used to stop you.

Helping where you can: I am sure many of you have been reading as I have of the terrible damage being done by the bush fires in Australia. The squad, myself, Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon, Craig Jones and Nicky Rod will be selling all of our videos and money from the sale will be collected by @bjj.fanatics go to rescue efforts. Wishing all our friends in Australia safety from this terrible conflagration and the sad aftermath for both people and wildlife. 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺

Work in pairs, triples and quadruples: Having a strong offensive move is a wonderful thing, but not nearly so wonderful as having a strong complimentary move that goes in the opposite direction to overcome resistance to the first move. Better still when you have a third or fourth move (I don’t recommend going beyond four shot combinations as typically by that point control and connection has been lost to a degree that follow up attacks are unrealistic). Remember that the fundamental feature of sparring and competition is RESISTANCE TO WHATEVER YOU ATTEMPT, so having moves that feed off that resistance is one of the keys to success. Here, Gordon Ryan is threatening with one of his best weapons, a strong hook sweep (sumi gaeshi) off a shoulder crunch grip. His opponent is contorting himself to avoid the sweep, but in doing so is exposing himself to two submission follow ups - one upper body (straight armlock ude gatame) and the other lower body (ashi garami based leg locks). Mr Ryan chose lower body and easily entered the legs (unfortunately time ran out just as he got the position). Never think in terms of single attacks but rather, always go the extra distance and conceive of a complementary follow up that follows the lines of resistance to the first move - you will soon be rewarded with breakthroughs against even the toughest resistance.

A Jiu Jitsu player can learn to live with many things, a broken arm, a broken leg, hell, even a broken heart - but one thing he or she can NEVER learn to live with is a broken POSTURE. Your stance and posture is the basis of everything you do in this sport. Almost every failure on our part in Jiu Jitsu can be traced back to an earlier failure in stance and posture. For all the main positions and moves there is an ideal posture to get the job done efficiently. The further you stray from that ideal the harder you will have to work to make up for it and the more likely you will be countered. Take some time to study great players and switch your attention from the MOVES to their STANCE/POSTURE THAT PRECEDES THE MOVES. You will see patterns that are easy to learn and easy to bring into your game and then the game itself may become a little easier for you.

Head position: Most humans are four limbed creatures - but grapplers must learn to use their head as a fifth limb in order to maximize their grappling potential. Your head is an excellent pushing device (and can even be used sometimes to pull). If you can get your forehead tucked into inside position it becomes a formidable barrier that will confound an opponents movement and position whilst setting up your own. One of the more common scenarios to begin implementing it into your game is seated butterfly guard. By tucking your forehead into an opponents collarbone you can negate his underhooks and create and maintain sufficient space to steal your own. This is just one simple example of using your head in grappling among myriad other uses both on the floor and on the feet. Make a serious study of how your head can give you an extra limb to dictate terms in a grappling exchange. Your opponents will always be trying to use your own head head as a weapon against yourself by controlling it as much as possible - take the initiative from them learning to use your head as a weapon that works in YOUR favor, not theirs.

Where is his energy going? When you get a grip upon an opponent there two possible reactions - the first is that simply doesn’t react. In this case go straight into your offensive move and win. By far the common reaction is to resist whatever force you apply to the opponent through your grip. If you pull, the majority of your opponents will pull back. If you push, the majority will push back. Sometimes this reaction manifests itself as movement, sometimes the opponent will be static - it does not matter - in either case there will be an energy in a given direction. LEARNING TO READ WHERE YOUR OPPONENTS ENERGY IS GOING AT ANY POINT OF TIME IN THE MATCH AS HE REACTS TO YOUR GRIPS IS ONE OF THE MOST CRUCIAL COMBAT SKILLS YOU CAN EVER DEVELOP. When you can read the direction their energy is going and quickly decide which move to apply that complements that direction - you can defeat opponents with relative ease. Most people decide FIRST what they want to do and get a grip that allows them to do it. That’s fine and works very well in many cases. However, the ARTFUL players get a grip and push and pull and THEN decide which move they will employ based not upon what THEY want, but rather upon what their opponent OFFERS. Learning to play with this mindset is one of your deepest goals in Jiu Jitsu and elevates you into the ranks of those artful players who seem to get more done with less effort. This is not something that comes quickly. Initially just okay with the skill of getting a grip and pushing and pulling and feel your opponents reaction every time you grip up. In time you will learn to smoothly apply a well chosen move to their reaction but you have to start somewhere, so start with the empty minded grip and push/pull. As your repertoire of moves increases so will your ability to correlate a move to their reaction.

Where should I start from open guard? One of the problems associated with open guard is the sheer number of options available to you as you play the position. You can be seated or supine, inside control or outside control, a large number of different grip variations, many different types of guard to play and a seemingly infinite number of moves. The number of options can soon expand into a dizzying number and in the heat of the action you can end of hesitating as you make choices. Whenever the choices seem to too confusing I recommend you use the cross collar, sleeve cuff and foot inside bicep guard you see here. It is in my opinion the single most versatile open guard and has exemplary defensive and offensive properties. It leads equally well into both positional sweeps and submissions on both kneeling and standing opponents. When it all seems confusing - USE CROSS COLLAR, CUFF AND BICEP GUARD AS YOUR DEFAULT OPTION and you can’t go wrong. The good news is that this form of open guard allows you to enter seamlessly into just about any other form of open guard so as your skill level grows you can keep using it as an entry into all the new guards you learn as you progress. If you are making open guard your field of study - make this one your first stop and it will give you a powerful and versatile start that will never let you down!

Um...Garry...you’ve trained brilliantly for this match...your technique looks razor sharp and you are in tremendous shape...but...um...you might want to close your zipper before you head out on the stage...

A test for yourself: Next time you are inactive due to injury or travel or isolation, engage in the following mental training. Watch people of different levels as they spar. Make it your job to anticipate what their next move will be. Try to reduce the time it takes to make the prediction. Ultimately you should be able to read even the smallest moves they make - a subtle shift in grip or stance - not just the big moves. Understand that the whole purpose of Jiu Jitsu at the higher levels is to FORCE AN OPPONENT DOWN A DIMINISHING DECISION TREE WHERE YOU KNOW ALL THE POSSIBLE DECISIONS HE CAN MAKE AHEAD OF TIME AND ARE THUS READY TO COUNTER EACH ONE AS THEY OCCUR UNTIL HE HAS BUT A SINGLE DECISION TO MAKE - Should I submit or let myself break/pass out? Learning to train your MIND to see the immediate future is probably the single best Jiu Jitsu exercise you can do whenever actual training is not a possibility. There is nothing esoteric or mysterious about it. Whenever you know the possible options you can make rational predictions of a future choice. Interestingly it is easier to do this exercise when watching experts rather than beginners since they tend to make more rational/sound decisions and are thus more predictable. Try it! I promise you will become a better physical Jiu Jitsu player as you work this critical mental skill.

The triangle - among the most remarkable of all techniques in martial arts: The triangle, which uses the power of the legs to strangle an opponent was one of the last great martial arts submission techniques to be invented. Most submissions go far far back into history. You can see drawings of strangleholds, arm locks and leg locks carved into walls and drawn in old manuscripts - but you won’t see a triangle. To the best of our knowledge, the triangle appears to have been discovered around 1913 in the old Japanese Kosen schools of judo. There are some likely candidates for the actual inventors but we can’t really be sure. Think about that. THAT MEANS MANKIND INVENTED POWERED FLIGHT, MACHINE GUNS, SUBMARINES, TELEPHONES MODERN ARTILLERY etc BEFORE WE INVENTED THE ABILITY TO STRANGLE SOMEONE WITH OUR LEGS!!! Every time you step on the mats you get a chance to use this pinnacle of martial arts ingenuity that took humans MILLENNIA to arrive upon! Take that opportunity every chance you get! And when you finish it, take a moment to thank those incredible old masters who thought outside the box and changed the grappling world with this incredible technique. (Bonus question for the history buffs out there - what are the implications of this for the history of Maeda and his teaching of the Gracie’s )

Where will you focus your connection from open guard? When you work from your back in open guard, it is crucial you form a solid connection to an opponent so that defensively he will find it difficult to create angles that lead into guard passes and offensively, you will be able to break his balance and attack with sweeps and submissions. One of the major choices you will make in forming this connection is whether you should entangle your legs into the opponents ARMS (spider guard and lasso guard) or LEGS (De La Riva, Reverse De La Riva, ashi garami, x guard etc) or employ a mixed strategy and entangle both arms AND legs (eg ashi garami on one side at legs and spider guard on the other side arm). All of them are tremendously effective and you can find many champions who specialize in one of these three choices. It is natural to favor one of the choices and develop it as a specialty, but don’t ignore the others. In truth the overall game is the same - form a strong connection using all four of your limbs and get the opponent out of balance as a precursor to your sweeps and submissions - they just employ different ways of doing it. Using all three entanglement strategies makes you a very tricky opponent and a versatile one - even if you are noticeably better better at one type of entanglement than the others. Understand also that it is easy and natural to go from one to another - when you do so you maximize your potential from open guard.

Happy New Year from NYC!! I wanted to wish you all the best for 2020 🤗😜😜🤗 It has been an amazing year with the squad having the most successful performance in ADCC history and Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon, Nicky Rod and Craig Jones releasing more instructional videos to show how their way of playing the game can become part of your training and push you towards the same game changing methods they employ so successfully on the big stage. We all have three duties in Jiu Jitsu - to make ourselves better, to make the people who train around us better and to make the sport itself better. I hope 2020 allows you to do just that! I hope you all have a crazy fun New Years Eve with lots of wild stories to tell on New Year’s Day 😜😜and make 2020 your beat year of progress and growth in all the aspects of life that you care about 🤗🤗 Have fun and train hard!

He who controls the head...the human body is essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything else hangs off that. As such, if you control the head, you control the movement of the rest of the body. Now when someone puts on a gi, that lapel is functions like a noose around the neck and head - so if you control THAT, then you control the head. So one of the best skills you can develop are good lapel/collar grips. From open guard, these collar grips, in particular the CROSS COLLAR grip, are your single best means of getting quick and powerful control of the head in ways that make a real difference to your effectiveness on the mat. Learning to attain, maintain and exploit the great value of this grip is a BIG part of your open guard journey. Use it whenever you can to enter and control open guard.

If you can get an opponents hands to the floor whilst working from open guard - the attacks come easy: One of the surest signs that the bottom guard player is in command when working against a top passer is when he can consistently snap the top players hands down to the mat as a result of breaking his balance. While this not does score in itself, it is a great set up to score either with sweeps or submissions. Consistently look to snap your opponents hands down to the mat when working from open guard and then launch your attacks in the time between his hands hitting the mat and the time he can recover back to his stance. Here I have chosen cross ashi garami as the attack from open guard, but in truth, when you can get hands to the mat, you can attack with pretty much whatever you want!

Filming the upcoming open guard video with BJJ Fanatics here in Boston!! Getting a solid five days of filming here in Boston for upcoming videos - it’s always a pleasure to come up to New England and work. It’s a beautiful train ride up and filming the videos is always a great way to get our approach bro the game out there to a wider audience. Always my belief was that knowledge translated into skill is the single most important determinant of the outcome of a match, more than strength, size, speed mental toughness etc (these other things are still very important but not as much as knowledge/skill). The videos are a great way to get that knowledge to a wider audience in a way that will give people insight into a rapidly changing game. Wishing you all the best from Boston!!

When you master both upper body grips to maintain chest to back contact and lower body hooks to maintain hip to back contact, you can follow an opponent through hell and back to get to your strangle!

The single biggest determinant of your success or failure from open guard will be your ability to break an opponents stance and balance (Kuzushi). If you can do this at will, you will be highly successful from open guard. If you can’t, even the simplest moves will be a struggle to apply and often subject to strong counters from a skilled opponent. I would rather have five moves from open guard plus the ability to break an opponents stance and balance at will than to have a hundred moves without that ability. ANYONE CAN APPLY THE MOVES OF OPEN GUARD ON AN UNRESISTING TRAINING PARTNER, BUT ONLY AN ATHLETE WHO CAN BREAK AN OPPONENTS STANCE AND BALANCE CAN APPLY THEM ON A FULLY RESISTING OPPONENT IN A COMPETITIVE MATCH. Make the study of Kuzushi your biggest concern when working from open guard - if you can break a mans stance - you can break the man!

When there are ten thousand possibilities the smart thing is to focus on a few good one: One of the great problems of open guard is that there are a vast number of possible guards you can employ, each with many grip variations and myriad different moves that are possible from each. You can rapidly get to a situation where the sheer number of options makes you LESS effective rather than more effective in sparring and competition. WHEN OPTIONS MULTIPLY, RESPONSE TIME TENDS TO INCREASE. This is not a good thing in combat sports. Accordingly it is wise to focus on a few things that you do very well rather than attempt to learn many things you perform in a mediocre fashion just because there is not sufficient time to master them all. The obvious question is - well then, which ones should i focus on? Part of the answer will be determined by your body type, part by your personality, but save some consideration for observation of high level competition and see WHICH MOVES OFTEN AND REPEATEDLY SCORE SUCCESSFULLY FOR A WIDE ARRAY OF BODY TYPES, WEIGHT CATEGORIES, BELT LEVELS, AGES AND RULE SETS. These are usually the ones you want to focus upon. Better to be extremely good at two such moves than average a twenty moves that rarely figure successfully in competition. Let the evidence of competition have a say in the direction of your training and you will soon have a focus upon a few proven techniques that really make a difference in your performance.

Technical skill, tempo and movement quality are far more important considerations than size when choosing training partners - we would all rather train with 100kg athlete who moves well than a 60kg klutz. Refine your movement and you will never have a hard time finding training partners.

Controlling the Action/reaction reflex is the single most artful aspect of Jiu Jitsu: It is not difficult to perform most of the moves of Jiu Jitsu in an unresisting drilling partner. It is much more difficult to apply them in a competitive sparring session against an opponent. As the skill level of the opponent rises so to does the degree of difficulty of applying moves. What will make the make the difference is your ability to get past his knowledge and ability to anticipate your moves and counter them. This is where Jiu Jitsu becomes truly artful. You want him to move a certain way and he knows that and so resists strongly. The only way for you to win is to use his defensive reactions in your favor. This is a lifetime study, but a great way to start this project is the simple rule of opposites so often mentioned by the old masters. IF YOU WANT AN OPPONENT TO MOVE AWAY FROM YOU - BEGIN BY PULLING HIM TOWARDS YOU. IF YOU WANT AN OPPONENT TO MOVE TOWARDS YOU, BEGIN MY PUSHING HIM AWAY FROM YOU. As your opponent resists the initial force, take him is the same direction as his resistance - which of course is where you really wanted him to go all along. Here, I want to knock a standing opponent backwards with a sweep from open guard. I begin with a pull on his arm courtesy of a two on one grip. He digs his heels into the mat and resists - NOW is the time to knock him backwards. Most of the impetus backwards actually comes from my opponents resistance to the initial pull. I just have to complete what he has started. Learn to think this way in all of your Jiu Jitsu and you will defeat people through artistry and skill rather than strength and power.

Better to have the floor on your back than an opponent on your back: The worst situation in a grappling match is to have an opponent on your back. From there he has many of the most high percentage submissions in the sport available to use join you whilst you have only a few very low percentage submissions to fire back with. He has a powerful and robust position that is very difficult to escape from when well applied. Thus we must do our best to avoid back exposure as much as possible. When it does happen that your back is exposed to a dangerous opponent, the safest general strategy it to GET YOUR UPPER BACK TO THE FLOOR. The logic is simple - if the FLOOR is on your back, then there won’t be space for an OPPONENT to be on your back. Accordingly most of the back escapes of Jiu Jitsu favor the strategy of upper back to the floor - this is the one that minimizes back exposure to an opponent. There are other strategies. You can stand up, threaten kimura etc etc and these can definitely work, but they do result in a degree of back exposure such that if they DON’T work, they can get you in deep trouble. So when you feel the danger of back exposure - try getting your upper back to the floor as a first reaction

If you can get both your opponents feet to leave the mat - he will be very hard pressed indeed to stop you scoring: Tomoe nage is not only a wonderful throw from standing position when using the gi, it is a truly superb sweep from open guard as well. Due to the fact that it fully uses the vast strength potential of the legs, it is truly one of the best moves to use against heavier, stronger opponents. The main thing is to break the opponents balance forward and get him up on his toes. The good news is that there are many forms of open guard that make this possible. Here I am using lasso guard to get the man up in his toes and in position to be swept overhead. Every Jiu Jitsu player needs a strong Tomoe nage attack both on the feet and on the floor. Some moves drift in and out of style - but Tomoe nage will always be among the main weapons of a ground grappler 😜😊

From open guard the game goes to the man who controls the head and shoulders: The old cliche in grappling is “he who controls the head controls the whole body.” There is a lot of truth to this. A big part of our approach to open guard is based around head control. When you can lock on to the head and one arm you can really subvert the opponents movement whilst at the same time setting up your favorite upper body attacks. Look how Nicky Ryan, young master of open guard, completely dominates his opponents head in a way that sets up strong sweep and submission opportunities on both sides. Whether you favor inside position (underhooks) or outside position (overhooks) use this principle of control whenever possible and watch your open guard game take off!

Attacking the back - Prioritize chest to back connection over the lower body hooks: When you get behind an opponent you SCORE when you hook both your legs into your opponents hips. This tends to create a mindset where most people prioritize the hooks - that’s natural since they are the means of scoring. In fact you are usually better off prioritizing the chest to back connection locked in place with your arms. AS LONG AS YOU HAVE THIS - YOU CAN ALWAYS GET THE HOOKS LATER. The upper body connection almost always proves more valuable in regaining back position, since most escapes involve getting the upper back to the floor. Solid Chest to back connection makes this extremely difficult and thus nullifies most escapes. Hooks by themselves do little to control an opponents movement and often allow escape. Here, Georges St Pierre has done a good job of retaining solid chest to back connection through his arms and thus can now choose when and how he can follow with his hooks to score and strangle.

Where would you go from here? You enter ashi garami - your opponent immediately begins to contest your foot position to weaken the hold - what would you do? Remember this - it’s easy to learn a move. It’s pretty easy to apply it successfully against untutored resistance - but it is difficult to apply a move against knowledgeable resistance. Unfortunately this difficult task of applying known moves against knowledgeable resistance is exactly what you will have to deal with for the rest of your time in Jiu Jitsu. The higher you go, the more this will become your biggest problem to overcome. It is absolutely crucial therefore, that for all your favorite moves, you have pre-planned ways to circumvent the more common lines of resistance as fluidly as river water moves around rocks and boulders on its path downstream. There won’t always be time to think and puzzle things through, so having the major routes worked out in advance is a big help. You already know what your favorite moves are - now you need to go further and know what the main forms of defense to them are and what you will do to bypass them. As you mature this can lead to long decision trees starting with each of your favorite moves and ending with what we can’t be sure - this is the path to victory.

It all begins with measure of distance: When you begin in open guard with an opponent in front of you, one of the first considerations in your assessment of what you need to do to get your game started on the right track is that of DISTANCE. If your opponent is nervously backing away, you must be able to CLOSE distance. If he is aggressively coming forward, you must be able to MAINTAIN or MANAGE distance. This requires skills of movement and framing. A common error is to REACH with arms and legs to close distance. Be wary of this as reaching limbs are easy to pass and submit. Use MOVEMENT rather than REACH to get to your opponent. Use your outstretched feet and knees as the fundamental measuring stick. If he is at the line of your feet you are ready for offense; if he is at the line of your knees, be ready for defense. Just as a good boxer is keenly aware of the importance of distance in fisticuffs, so too a good grappler is keenly award of the importance of distance in grappling.

There is ALWAYS a possibility right there in front of you: Once you lay your hands on someone in a ground grappling scenario there is ALWAYS some possibility for submission right there in front of you. It’s up to you to SEE that possibility and then ACT upon it. That’s why I Have my students focus upon a relatively small set of high percentage submissions (back strangles, strangles from front headlock, kimura, juji gatame armlocks, triangles and ashi garami based leg locks). When there are too many possibilities you will suffer from paralysis caused by over abundance of options. Too few and you won’t cover the entire body and thus miss golden opportunities. Here, Nicky Ryan finds himself in an awkward passing entanglement but immediately seizes the initiative by taking a kimura opportunity that arose as his opponent reached for a new grip. This takes him immediately from an awkward deadlock to a a powerful means of attack. You must train your mind to see these myriad opportunities that exist right there in front of you every time you come into close contact with an opponent. There are a thousand distractions and concerns as you grapple - victory often goes to the athlete who can cut through all that and see the shortest route to a finish.

It ain’t a pin if he’s out of balance: Pins are one of the foundational skills of Jiu Jitsu. There’s nothing better than a solid pin that sticks an opponents head and shoulders to the mat and shuts out his legs - it’s a great pathway to upper body submissions. Understand however, that a pin is only as good as the degree of control it confers upon an opponent. It’s worthless to be in a “dominant” pin such as the mounted position of you are not able to control an opponents movement. As such, when one finds oneself at the bottom of a pin in Jiu Jitsu, a good place to start your escape is with your opponents balance. ANY MOVEMENT THAT UNDERMINES YOUR OPPONENTS BALANCE AS HE PINS YOU IS MONEY IN THE BANK. Bridging, shrimping, kipping are the foundational body movements that unbalance the top player and create the space and movement that can totally destroy the value of the pin and lead to an escape. Look at this fine example of Garry Tonon off balancing an opponent from bottom mount. Like many of my students, Mr Tonon will often let an opponent into “dominant” position of the rule set suits such a strategy, knowing full well that he can easily create the kind of off balancing that makes the pin worthless and even a LIABILITY, as often there are excellent submission opportunities as a pin is broken. Here he effortlessly kips out of a mounted pin and I am sure you can guess - will soon go into a match winning heel hook from the easy entry into ashi garami from this situation. Constantly practice this critical skill of disturbing your opponents balance from the bottom of a pin - all your escapes will benefit.

Victory in Las Vegas!! Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones were on fire last night in Las Vegas at the Quintet Ultra grappling tournament. The show featured some very interesting match ups. Mr Ryan took on the fascinating MMA grappler from Russia, Sambo expert Aleksei Oleinik - master of the no gi Ezekiel stranglehold. He quickly entered the legs and back stepped into a nice leg lace. Normally we would finish with an inside heel hook from this position, but heel hooks were illegal in this tournament so he opted for a knee bar finish instead - an easy conversion from this extremely controlling and versatile position. Craig Jones took on old school Jiu Jitsu legend, Fredson Paixao - master of wristlocks. He showed the incredible gains he has made in back control/hand trapping training with the squad and quickly secured a fine stranglehold for the win! It is interesting and beneficial for us all to experiment with variations in rule sets as this forces us to emphasize different aspects of the game that we might normally pass over and as a result, continue to make technical progress. Ask yourself tonight what would you do if you were not allowed to use your favorite finishing move for the next week? What alternative would you play from that same position? I promise you that if you experiment with this you will be a more knowledgeable martial artist by the weeks end 😜🤗

Mastery of the hook sweep (sumi gaeshi) - an essential part of my approach to the game: Very often I am approached by people who have visited the blue basement and they recount their training experiences to me. A very common theme that I hear many many times is this - “Man, I was expecting everyone to be good at leg attacks and back attacks and all the other submissions - but the one thing that really caught me by surprise was how easily and often everyone swept me from butterfly guard.” There is a reason for this. I PUT AN EXTREMELY HEAVY EMPHASIS ON EXCELLENCE WITH THE HOOK SWEEP (SUMI GAESHI) IN ALL ITS MANY VARIATIONS AS THE BASIS OF OUR BOTTOM OPEN GUARD GAME. No other sweep is performed as often and in so many forms in my coaching program. It is equally effective gi or no gi. It Can be used from any grip, in both left and right directions, standing or on the floor and creates defensive reactions that set up all our favorite entries into lower body and upper body submissions. Development of a strong sumi gaeshi game is one of the first signs I look for when assessing the progress of a developing students bottom position skill level. All of my senior students excel in this move - no exceptions. There aren’t many moves that I tyrannically enforce upon my students, generally I liked to let them pick and choose their favorites past purple belt - but sumi gaeshi is one of them. Make sure you devote time to this classic and powerful move. It will benefit every aspect of your bottom game both position and submission.

When you can break your opponents stance you can dominate from anywhere - even underneath an opponent: One of the most essential principles of good Jiu Jitsu is this: EVERY ATTACK UPON YOUR OPPONENT, WHETHER IT BE A POSITIONAL ATTACK OR A SUBMISSION ATTACK, SHOULD BEGIN AS AN ATTACK UPON HIS STANCE. Your stance is the foundation of your strength and ability. If it is broken your effectiveness will be severely curtailed. Knowing this, you must make the undermining and breaking of your opponents stance your first priority. This is particularly important when working from bottom position. Use trips, blocks, foot sweeps etc to constantly break his balance and force him to base hands on the floor in a compromised stance. If you can do this all your attacks will be MUCH more successful. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a classic X guard to drop his opponents hands to the floor and break his stance. His opponent can do nothing offensive until he recovers his stance - and in that time Mr Ryan can launch attacks uncontested. This basic insight is the key to success in the sport. Remember always - your first target is your opponents stance - after that the other targets will be easy to hit

Freaking out isn’t going to help: It is natural when you find yourself in a bad situation in Jiu Jitsu to feel some degree of panic - no one likes losing, even in the gym, and so the intensity always goes up as the danger of losing increases. Now, as this feeling of foreboding starts to escalate into genuine concern, the danger of it degenerating into total panic increases. It’s at this point that one starts to see chaos break out. Students will start exploding in various directions in order to affect a breakout. This can definitely work in many cases at beginner level, since most beginners lack the ability to control and immobilize a wildly thrashing opponent. It can also work if you are bigger and stronger than an opponent. However, as size discrepancy decreases and skill levels rise, this will work less and less. If you were given a complex math problem, would it help you to solve it if you began by freaking out? No. In fact if we look at almost every daily problem we have to overcome, from flat tires, to navigating through an unfamiliar part of town, to paying bills over the phone, we see that it is almost never the case that wild emotional or physical reaction aid our ability to solve and overcome the problem. Jiu Jitsu is no different. Just as the solution to any complex math problem is best found with a calm mind that calmly and methodically searches for the solution, so too in Jiu Jitsu. Make your first reaction to a difficult hold in Jiu Jitsu be a grounding breath, and then a mental commitment to the idea of staying as calm as you can and THINKING your way out rather than FREAKING your way out. Look how calm Nicky Ryan as he works from a particularly tricky leg lock situation. This is the spirit you want to operate in whenever you find yourself on the defensive. This will ensure you prevail in all situations rather than just against smaller or less experienced opponents

The great challenge of open guard - reconciling your desire for offense with your need for defense: Open guard play is probably one of the most frustrating elements of Jiu Jitsu for most players. It offers almost limitless possibilities for attack with sweeps and submissions, but it also offers our opponent limitless opportunities for positional attacks of his own - guard passes. As we are thinking about our offensive possibilities it takes only a fraction of a second for an opponent to blast past our legs and in a flash we have gone from pondering offense to scrambling desperately for defense and preventing an opponent scoring with a guard pass. Everything we do from open guard has to be done with a sense of defensive responsibility. The main thing that prevents an opponent gaining the distance, angle and level change he requires to get past our legs is our connection to his body. If we are well connect to him, we will follow his movement easily as he tries to out flank our legs. If we lack sufficient connection he can pass your guard in a heartbeat and put you under great pressure. Whenever you begin to feel your connection to an opponent is failing, you must begin to shift from PULLING connection (offensive) to PUSHING connection (defensive) and thus create frames that prevents an opponent getting chest to chest contact and control of your head that will enable him to solidify a pass. Learning shift seamlessly from offensive grips to defensive frames as the second by second dynamic of the match unfolds is the key to reconciliation of your desire for offense and your need for defense from open guard. Here, Nicky Ryan shows excellent defensive responsibility as an opponent threatens to pass his legs. His frames are quickly set in place and this will prevent further advances long enough to recover the position of his legs and the integrity of his guard.

Victory in Texas!! Gordon Ryan won a great match here in Houston tonight against the great wrestling champion, Bo Nickal via stranglehold - as he predicted - using a well applied triangle from bottom position. Most of the match was spent on the feet in Mr Nickals domain. He showed his mastery of hand fighting and takedown defense against conventional takedowns. However, Mr Ryan was able to take him down three times in standing position with the scissor takedown - kani basami - and took it to the floor and scored a sweep from the ashi garami position (leg locks were not allowed in this match otherwise it would have been over with the first kani basami). Mr Nickal intelligently timed his first genuine takedown attempt until late in the match to minimize the time spent on the ground - Mr Ryan’s domain. With around three minutes left he performed a beautiful belly to back suplay and then had to survive three minutes on the floor. Unfortunately he was facing the best submission grappler on the planet and quickly got locked up in a triangle. As the triangle tightened he stood to try to pull out. Mr Ryan employed a classic squad dilemma - he attacked an arm lock from the triangle, forcing Mr Nickal to go forward to relieve pressure on the arm. Mr Nickal intelligently went forward with a heavy slam, hoping to loosen the triangle. Mr Ryan curled his body to reduce the impact and tightened the strangle as they landed getting a dramatic finish to a great match. It was great to see this cross over match between two great athletes from two separate, but closely related sports in a rule set that gave both a good chance. Congratulations to Gordon Ryan for another fine performance in what has been an incredible second half of the year after a disastrous start with a severe knee injury and surgery. Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Now it’s back to NYC to get everyone ready for more challenges! Wishing you all the best from Texas!

Weigh in completed in Houston Texas: Gordon Ryan weighed in with the great wrestler, Bo Nickal tonight here in Houston for their hybrid wrestling/Jiu jitsu match tomorrow night. This should be a fascinating encounter as both men are at the top of their respective sports and both have a dynamic and exciting attacking style. Both men will have to wrestle for the takedown (no guard pulling allowed) or at the least, employ a submission attack to take it to the floor. Leg lock finishes are not allowed and both athletes must engage on both floor and ground or risk DQ. Mr Nickal has an extremely impressive and dynamic wrestling game and we were told has done very well against very good Jiu Jitsu players in training. This should be a great match!! Really interesting and very different from the usual. Now it’s time to do some drills and get ready for the show! Wishing you all the best from Texas!

Plotting your next move: as much as we all aspire to have a high success rate for the performance of our favorite moves, the reality is that THE MAJORITY OF THE ATTEMPTED APPLICATIONS OF YOUR MOVES AGAINST SKILLED OPPONENTS WILL FAIL. That’s the bad news. The good news is that the general slow pace of ground grappling means that in most cases YOU WILL KNOW WHEN THEY ARE LIKELY TO FAIL BEFORE THEY ACTUALLY DO. As a result you can have a follow up move prepared to work even as the first fails. Here Garry Tonon has a good bite on his opponents heel, but the ashi garami control is lacking. As a result he is rapidly losing control of the knee - the benchmark of control for these cases. THIS THE TIME TO BE THINKING OF YOUR NEXT MOVE - BEFORE failure is complete, not AFTER. This will make you a dangerous combination fighter who can seamlessly go from attack to attack and ensnare even very good opponents, rather than a one shot at a time fighter who must rely on surprise or strength to catch people. Every time you find yourself on the cusp of failure with your moves, practice the mental skill of searching for an appropriate second attack BEFORE the total collapse of the first and watch your success rate double!

Don’t worry about the speed with which you move - concern yourself with the distance you have to cover: Very often I am asked by students if they are too slow to be effective in Jiu Jitsu. Certainly it’s an impressive thing to see an athlete with blazing speed in the mats. In truth however, most of the finest players in the sport work at a rather slow pace for the majority of the match and many more never really use speed at all in their game. Clearly then speed is not essential to success, though it definitely can be useful at times. Understand that because Jiu Jitsu is predominately a ground sport, speed will always be limited. A much more important consideration than top speed is the DISTANCE YOU HAVE TO COVER TO GET TO YOUR OBJECTIVES. If I have a speedy opponent who moves twice as fast as I do, but through inefficient positioning and course setting, always has to move twice as far to get to his objectives we will be working at effectively the same mat speed. Indeed, I will be able to sustain that mat speed longer since I am doing less work and may end up being faster as fatigue becomes a factor. The first step to becoming faster on the mats is to become more efficient at covering distance to get to an objective. THE MORE DIRECT YOUR PATH THE SOONER YOUR ARRIVAL TIME. Practice the skill of minimizing wasted motion in getting to the next position every time you move. Soon you will find yourself beating faster (but less efficient) opponents in the race to get to the next position!

Exciting news from Garry Tonon! This Friday @garrytonon and @bjj.fanatics will release Mr Tonon’s first instructional video EXIT THE SYSTEM. This will cover one of the most important elements of Jiu Jitsu - escape - in particular the link between submission holds and escapes. One of the most distinctive features of my coaching program is the heavy emphasis on escape skills. Only when you believe in your power to escape will commit fully to your attacks and hold nothing back. There is a reason why Garry Tonon is the most exciting grappler in the world - it’s because he has no fear of being held down and controlled. As a result he can take risks that would make anyone else hesitate. All of my senior students bare innovators who develop their own moves and variations that gives them a strong personal interpretation of my program. You can benefit enormously by learning escape skills from one of the absolute best escape artists in the world. Learn the crucial interface between defense and offense and watch your confidence on the mat rise as never before. My students are all truly excellent teachers - I teach them to teach as well as they compete - you will see this in the video. Georges St-Pierre nick named Garry Tonon “The slippery salmon” for a reason - he is almost impossible to pin down and control - learn his secrets and soon you will be too! 😜😜Get ready for the big launch Friday @bjj.fanatics

Shields up...wedges set...phasers set to stun...open fire!

Protect your position first, but keep your eyes open for the possibility of submission at all times: We humans are prone to tunnel vision, particularly in stressful situations. Very often we get to a good position and remember our mantra to protect the position first and everything else second and as a result, we blind ourselves to great opportunities to enter a submission hold that were there right in front of us. Look at this photo of Gordon Ryan - master of back attacks - attacking from his favorite position. His body has contoured perfectly to his opponents, forming a tight connection and his head and hip position will enable him to easily follow an opponents movement. However, notice that his eyes are focused entirely on the neck - the target of submission. So though his body is set upon maintaining position, his mind is set upon submission - indeed, he has unlocked his hands already to take advantage of the open neck he is looking so intently at and a few seconds later he will be locking in a powerful strangle. Condition yourself to think the same way. Let your body protect the position, but keep your mind focused like a laser on the next step - submission!

Big win for juggernaut Nicky Rod! Nick Rodriguez had a barn burning grappling match over the weekend with UFC legend Luke Rockhold. Mr Rockhold is one of the best grapplers in MMA. He is a superb athlete with great flexibility and strength along with excellent technique - I know numerous grappling specialists who were shocked at his abilities when they grappled him in the gym. Nicky Rod used his inimitable fusion of explosive wrestling and back attacks to get a well deserved win and show his continued development. He continues to impress everyone with the speed of his progress - his propensity to get to the back out of scrambles created by his wrestling skills makes him a very dangerous opponent even for the best out there. This coming week sees another fusion of wrestling and Jiu Jitsu skills as Gordon Ryan takes on the great American wrestler Bo Nickal in a hybrid Wrestling/Jiu Jitsu rules match in Houston Texas this weekend. It’s great to see the merging of the skills of these two great combat sports and the growth and development it can create!

Break them down to a hip: One of the distinguishing characteristics of the revolution in leg locking that the squad brought in was the heavy emphasis on leg locking from bottom position. In the old days the vast majority of leg lock entries were from top position. Indeed, leg locking was largely seen as an alternative to guard passing. This created a lot of naive criticisms of leg leg locking that seem almost quaint nowadays. Students were told that leg locks were a bad idea because if it didn’t work you would lose top position. Well - what if we entered from bottom position? Then there was no danger of positional loss - so that’s where I put my emphasis. There are MANY great entries from bottom position into an opponents legs - but be sure to realize that though your ENTRIES into the legs will be on a standing or kneeling opponent in your guard - be sure to knock your opponents down to their hips/buttocks (or at the very least one knee) before you start working for your FINISHES. It is quite difficult and risky to try finishing as a skilled opponent stands over you. Much safer to off balance him down to a hip first and THEN start working for the finish. Remember always that the magic of ashi garami is that it has a dual nature - IT IS JUST AS GOOD FOR OFF BALANCING/SWEEPING AS IT IS FOR BREAKING PURPOSES. Use BOTH aspects of ashi garami from bottom position and your success rate from under tough opponents will start climbing in the directions you want!

Let the other guy feel the stress: A common problem i observe is that of athletes doing a good job getting to a dominant position and then trying too hard too quickly to get a submission and losing control of the position they worked so hard to attain. Unless there is limited time left on the clock, relax, the other fellow should be the one in panic mode - not you. Use the superior position to recompose yourself, recharge your lungs if necessary and formulate a plan to finish. If at any point you feel the danger of escape - PROTECT THE POSITION FIRST AND WORRY ABOUT THE SUBMISSION SECOND - you can always come back to that later. Here, Garry Tonon anchors himself in place on the back at the ADCC World Champions after a long period in standing position fighting for a takedown. Now it’s time for him to take a little time and use the body triangle to both hold position and put his opponent under duress while he is relatively relaxed. Using this simple pattern of exertion to gain a position followed by active rest and recomposing in that position to gather resources into a final push for submission allowed him to secure the stranglehold soon after this photo was taken.

That look when you get to the Thanksgiving dinner table after Gordon Ryan and find the discarded bones of two turkeys, a cow, several chickens and something that could be anything from a fur seal to a small dolphin...all that’s left is an apple and some crumbs of stuffing...
Happy Thanksgiving to all of you! Wishing you all the best from NYC! 🇺🇸🇺🇸

A master of position must perfect chest to chest and chest to back pins, but a master of SUBMISSION must go behind this and actively seek LIMB ISOLATION as the basis of his craft: The basis of offense in traditional Jiu Jitsu is position. Typically this is understood in terms of getting past your opponents legs and pinning him down either chest to chest or chest to back. However, the ability to submit an opponent requires you to go further and isolate a limb - to draw a limb away from the torso and away from the other limb. Only then can you break an opponent. Ultimately this will require you to develop subtle methods of wedging around a limb and trapping it in place long enough to apply the various submission holds of Jiu Jitsu - but your first step is MINDSET. Don’t be satisfied with simply getting the chest to chest or chest to back positions. Train yourself to always think of going the extra step of LIMB ISOLATION after you get to a pin. Initially you will have some frustration here, as the act of isolating a limb often requires movement that can lessen control momentarily and result in an opponent escaping when performed poorly. However, only by persisting and developing this crucial skill will you make the jump from being a pinner to a finisher - the highest ideal of the sport. Look how Gordon Ryan uses an underhook to wedge an opponents arm in place and move his elbow away from form his torso to isolate and weaken the arm. He has moved beyond the safety of chest to chest into the world of isolating wedges that lead to the possibility of submission - this is why his finishing percentages are so high. With patience and practice - so too can yours.

“Danaher, next match coming up soon - should I start my warm up now?”
“No...no...not yet...I’m just just going to stand here and look extremely sinister for a few more minutes first...”

It natural to think that justice would decree that the skills you worked so hard to develop in the dojo would stay unblemished with you for a lifetime once you gained them - given that ownership came at such a steep price in sweat and effort. This is an illusion. Of all the things you own - your skills are the most perishable. Against an opponent of similar skill and experience - you are only as good as the last one hundred and fifty days of your training. Gaining skills is only the first battle - keeping them is a much longer and lonelier one.

Heading back to NYC! I’m sad to leave beautiful Hawaii - this small Island group has a very strong Jiu Jitsu community and is an absolute pleasure to visit. It reminds me a lot of the land of my upbringing - New Zealand - both housed deep in the heart of the mighty Pacific Ocean - with Ocean breeze, sun sets and maritime air that I never see in NYC. Now it’s time to return across the ocean to the big Apple. Some great upcoming projects with Gordon Ryan so it’s back to the basement where the body and mind are tested and the spirit challenged and work fulfills dreams. Wishing you all the best from Hawaii. To my long suffering students - let’s get ready for action! See you soon! 🤗😜

Victory in Hawaii!! Garry Tonon took on the great Davi Ramos, ADCC champion here in Honolulu tonight in an epic fifteen minute battle between two masters of submission. Both men came out firing their big guns - leg attacks, arm attacks and strangles - all in combinations. The match went from floor to standing and back again at a furious pace. Around the ten minute mark it was becoming clear that the pace was straining the bigger man and Gary Tonon began to take over. As time narrowed, Mr Tonon hit a beautiful go behind to take the back and locked in a full strangle hold just as time expired! It was an amazing match that showcased how pace, movement and tactical threat can exhaust bigger and stronger opponents - even those of the highest quality. Now it’s back to NYC to get Gordon Ryan ready to face the great Bo Nickals in a hybrid jiu jitsu/wrestling match that should be another spectacle!! Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Superb win for Craig Jones! International student extraordinaire Craig Jones won a beautiful submission victory over the very talented Polish grappling super star Adam Wardzinski with a flawless Kimura into side triangle (yoko sankaku) combination attack in Liverpool England. Mr Wardzinski has a very strong butterfly guard game, but Mr Jones bypassed that with a rolling kimura attack and capitalized upon his opponents defensive turn to seize a side triangle and take a good situation into a great situation. A second defensive turn created an inverted variation of the same side triangle that only served to make it tighter and the win was complete. Great work again by Mr Jones as he shows his ever increasing submission repertoire against some of the best Jiu Jitsu players in the world!

Maximizing connection: Grappling is the business of controlling the movement of a resisting human being who is actively trying to control you as you try to control him. The means of control is PHYSICAL CONNECTION TO AN OPPONENT. Understand that connection comes in DEGREES. You can be more or less connected to an opponent. The more connection - the more control. As such, when it’s time to control a limb to set up a submission, the onus is on you to make sure you maximize the contact and connection between his limb and your body. This will prevent the slippage and space that defeats so many submission attempts. You want focus upon getting the highest possible percentage of the surface area of his limb in contact with you and then to solidify that contact by setting wedges around that limb and using your hands and feet to set those wedges in place. Note how in this photo my hands work at the joints and my head provides supplemental wedging while my feet lock into the opponents legs - maximizing contact and locking it all in place to form a sound connection that will endure long enough even against strong resistance to get the job done

On the road again: This weekend in Honolulu, Garry Tonon takes on the great ADCC Champion Davi Ramos in Fight 2 Win grappling event. I am at JFK getting ready to fly out as we prepare for the big show this weekend. Lots of very interesting shows coming up as Gordon Ryan prepares to take on the great wrestling champion Bo Nickel in around two weeks and Nicky Rod takes in MMA great (and very talented grappler) Luke Rockhold. Keep an eye on these great match ups! Wishing you all the best from JFK Airport - keep learning - keep training - make every day an opportunity to get a little closer to your Jiu Jitsu goals!

Fascinating match: Gordon Ryan was scheduled to do a bout with the great Rodolfo Viera at the third coast grappling championships but Mr Viera ended up pulling out. So did his replacement Erbeth Santos. Now he will face one of the very best wrestlers in the world today - the great Bo Nickal - three time NCAA champion who is transitioning to International freestyle wrestling - winning the U23 World Championship. Mr Nickal also has a strong interest in grappling and MMA and asked for a match with Mr Ryan. Finding a rule set that gave something to both athletes was interesting. Mr Nickal is apparently not so familiar with leg locking - one of Mr Ryan’s strengths, so we agreed no leg locks. Obviously he is a truly gifted wrestler and his best chance of victory is through takedowns - if Mr Ryan simply sat down to guard position he could not use his best skill set - so Mr Ryan agreed to no guard pulling. Even so this match is still predominantly a Jiu Jitsu match - so Mr Ryan has offered to do a second match at a later date (probably after the Olympic Games of 2020 since Mr Nickals main focus next year is the Olympics) in which they do a match that is almost all standing grappling with little ground work so that both athletes get a match that is predominantly in their domain. This should be a really interesting cross over event between two athletes at the top of their respective sports that allows them to showcase the interface between grappling and wrestling. It’s just two weeks away now - Mr Ryan has been inactive due to a rib injury but is now back in training to get ready for what should be a really interesting match!

Every attack from guard position should begin as an attack upon your opponents posture and balance: To be effective from top position your opponent must work from a strong efficient posture and must be in balance. Your goal always is to take these two essential prerequisites away from him as soon and as often as possible. EVERY ATTACK YOU CAN MAKE FROM BOTTOM POSITION IS SIGNIFICANTLY EASIER WHEN YOUR OPPONENTS BALANCE AND POSTURE ARE BROKEN. You can break an opponents balance forwards and backwards and side to side. Develop the skill of kuzushi (off balancing/posture destruction) and make it the basis of your guard game. Here, I demonstrate the value of keeping your opponents head below his hips as he stands in a closed guard - making many of the major submissions and sweeps much easier. Practice and refine the skill of knocking your opponents hands, knees and hips down to the floor. As he tries to recover balance and stance your attacks will break through easily during that momentary distraction.

Great match up! This weekend in Honolulu Hawaii, Garry Tonon will take on the great ADCC Champion Davi Ramos at Fight2Win @f2wbjj in a fifteen minute match allowing all submissions. Mr Ramos won ADCC in highlight reel fashion and has superb upper body and lower body attacks. He is quite a bit bigger now than he was then, so the match will be contested at 185 pounds rather than the 170 pounds he won ADCC and UFC events. Mr Tonon has a long history of taking on bigger and stronger opponents but this will doubtless be the toughest grappling match up he has ever faced. Both athletes are focused on MMA now, but both are Jiu Jitsu centered MMA fighters so have kept their grappling skills high even as they made the transition. These are two of the most dynamic and exciting grapplers on the planet - keep your eyes out for this match!!

The majority of what we call elite performance is simply the degree to which some athletes take the fundamentals of our sport closer to the limits of their potential - the depth of your progress in Jiu Jitsu is entirely based upon the depth of your knowledge and the perfection of your expression of the fundamentals. Make the fundamentals your lifetime study and understand that you will never exhaust their potential even in ten lifetimes

The mount: The mounted position is, along with the rear mount, the highest scoring position in Jiu Jitsu. The reasoning behind this is that in a real fight with blows being thrown it is a devastating position from which to throw fists and elbows into a helpless pinned opponent. In grappling without strikes, I definitely prefer rear mount as it does not require strikes to opponent up a defensive opponent (I also slightly prefer rear mount even in MMA and self defense contexts too, but that’s a different topic and there are many people who would disagree with this opinion). Understand that when you first get into the mounted position and you are looking to establish initial control, you typically begin in a position with your hips over your opponents hips. This creates good stability and let’s you use your arms to post out wide on the floor for base. Realize however, that the hip over hip position whilst excellent from a stability viewpoint, will limit the number and type of submissions you can attack from mount. To expand your attacking arsenal from mount and start incorporating your legs into the attacks (armbars and triangles for example), You must now go the extra distance and start progressing up to your opponents chest and shoulders with your hips. In addition you will need ANGLE. Your body must be able to pivot around your opponents shoulders. Gaining the confidence to CLIMB UP FROM HIP OVER HIP TO HIP OVER CHEST and begin forming PERPENDICULAR ANGLE is the key to going from someone who can HOLD someone in the mounted position, to becoming an athlete who can FINISH someone from mounted position. It’s a difficult thing to learn as you have to sacrifice a stable and secure pin for a less stable and less secure alternative, but which enables you to attack far better. Here, Garry Tonon climbs high up on to the chest to get into a devastating mounted triangle position - the result of the position and angle he achieved- and can now go into a very strong submission attack. Getting to mount is great, but your route to mount mastery must involve moving HIGHER UP THE TORSO AND GETTING ANGLE.

Take your time with your back strangles: Most if the Jiu Jitsu is a battle against the clock. We have to make decisions and perform moves in less time than our opponent if we are to put him under the kind of decision/action pressure that breaks people and let’s us finish decisively. Strangling from the back is a different sort of affair. Unless there is limited time left in the match, you will generally get better results focusing on maintaining chest to back position and making sure you are securely hooked into both sides of his body first and only when these are preconditions met, switching focus towards the strangle. Understand that often position and control are partially lost as you attempt a strangle. Should this happen, STOP THE STRANGLE ATTEMPT AND RE-ESTABLISH CHEST TO BACK CONTACT AND CONTROL OF BOTH SIDES OF THE OPPONENTS BODY. Quite often there will be an extended period of time where you have to fight for position and control on multiple occasions until finally you get the strangle opportunity. This is normal - TAKE YOUR TIME. Nothing is more heart breaking that getting all the way to the back and losing the position due to over zealousness. Here, Craig Jones shows admirable poise and calm as he positions himself for a strangle. Note that he has established the two main prerequisites - chest to back position and is hooked into both sides of his opponents body (a leg on one side, arm on the other). You can see he is in no rush to strangle - there is no reason why he should be - WHEN YOU ARE IN A WINNING POSITION - LET THE POSITION DO THE WINNING FOR YOU. Let your position be the main focus and your strangle merely an afterthought.

“Yo Nicky...check out Spazzy McSpazz over there...he looks as stiff as a hard on overdosed on viagra that got hit by a f**king taser...”

Get outside your opponents elbows and you have a direct route to the back: There are many highways to an opponents back - all of them are important - but the simplest and most direct and the one you need to master first - is to get outside your opponents elbows. This can be done from standing, from top and from bottom. It can be done in many ways - arm drags, elbow posts, kata gatame etc. Make it a habit to constantly fight to get outside your opponents elbows and you will always find yourself in an advantageous angle that will give you access to the back. As an added bonus, if the opponent defends his back by squaring up to you, he will make himself vulnerable to many submissions performed from frontal positioning or attacks on the other side of his body - all because of that initial threat you created by clearing his elbow. The elbow will always be the clearest and simplest demarcation line between frontal and back positions. Remember always that the back is the single best attacking position in all of grappling - learn to navigate your way there from everywhere and by every means - but understand that beating the elbow will be the most direct path you can take. Here, Gordon Ryan - master of back attacks - beats the elbow of Lachlan Giles from a frontal mounted position and opens up a simple and direct avenue to the back that will result in a finish from back position at ADCC 2019.

You aren’t going to be the hammer every time - spend some practicing to be the nail: Jiu Jitsu is a sport with two main elements - OFFENSE and DEFENSE. Only by practicing BOTH will you reach your potential in the sport. Of course practicing offense is a lot more fun, but the fun ends abruptly when you run into a tough opponent who puts you in a defensive situation and you realize you haven’t trained for this at all and you don’t have the skills to hold him off. Set time every session to practice the crucial skill of defense. This sport is full of can crushers who look amazing going against easy opponents but who fold badly against studs. Only by regularly training the less pleasant aspects of the sport do you get the rare and wonderful ability to survive a bad situation against a talented opponent and fight back to victory.

Get ready for the next Gordon Ryan video!! Later this week @bjj.fanatics will release the new Gordon Ryan video MY EVOLUTION: YOUR REVOLUTION - 2019 ADCC WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS. This is an instructional video based upon one of the greatest grappling performances in history - double gold in just his second world championships at age twenty four. This video will feature actual footage of the his matches and provide incredible breakdowns of the action - the WHY and HOW of every move and decision he made - along with detailed expositions and explanations in the gym. On the surface it looks like the video is about a great grappler showing his moves - but it isn’t. The real subject of this video is not Gordon Ryan - it’s YOU. He describes his EVOLUTION from the most successful ADCC debut of all time in 2017 to one of the most dominant ADCC performances ever in 2019, resulting in double gold without a single point being scored on him and a seventy five percent submission rate. However, the real subject matter is the REVOLUTION that this can create in YOUR game. This is a master class in technique and tactics at the highest level by the best player in the game taught in ways that can make a concrete difference in your performance in a very short time. Watching this performance from the coaches chair was one of the greatest experiences of my life - now you get a chance to watch from the students chair and I promise you that you will be a significantly better Jiu Jitsu player as a result! Keep your eyes open for this drop later in the week and get ready to put a revolution in your performance! The game is changing quickly - stay current, keep learning from the best and start winning!

The remarkable powers of the cross lapel grip: There are no universal panaceas for the myriad problems and scenarios of Jiu Jitsu - we have to be adaptable and look for individual solutions to every problem. Nonetheless there are some moves and concepts etc that have incredibly wide applications and come as close to a panacea as we can get in this sport. One of them is the cross lapel grip. This is probably the single most effective and versatile grip we can employ from guard position and many top pin scenarios as well. It is a grip that gives excellent and immediate control of your opponents HEAD, arguably the most important part of the body to control. In addition it creates an immediate danger of STRANGULATION to harass, intimidate and even finish an opponent. It gives a bottom guard player good distance control for both offense and defense. Perhaps most important it enables a bottom player to constantly BREAK AN OPPONENTS POSTURE and thus create strong action/reaction attacks as an opponent tries to resist and recover. Experiment with different ways of holding the grip based upon what end you want to achieve. Learn to switch hands and grip and re grip side to side so as to lead actively into attacks rather than just holding on with a death grip without purpose. Create a sense of push/pull and action/reaction - this is the element that makes Jiu Jitsu interesting and artful rather than a slogging match. There is a reason why so many great athletes made this simple yet devastating grip the basis of their attacking grip game - make it part of yours too!!

Inside position: Jiu Jitsu is a game of control - my ideal is that it be in particular a game of control that leads to submission - nonetheless it all begins with control. The most commonly talked about means of control is POSITION. When people talk of position in Jiu Jitsu they typically are referring to TACTICAL position ie how the two athletes are positioned relative to each other as defined by the scoring system of the sport - side position, mount position, rear mount position etc. But there is a an entire different class of position that is just as important for control purposes - LIMB POSITION - ie how are my limbs positioned relative to my opponents limbs? The fundamental choice here is between OUTSIDE position (my limbs outside his limbs)and INSIDE position (my limbs positioned inside. Each has their good and bad points. When working from underneath a heavier opponent I generally recommend an emphasis on inside positioning. This makes it very difficult for an opponent to pin you by wedging his limbs around your torso and reinforcing those wedges with body weight for the simple reason that you are inside any wedge he can create. This enables you to create effective movement underneath an opponents body weight - the basis of being effective from bottom position. Here, Garry Tonon works from underneath an opponent and has secured all the inside real estate. His feet dominate the space between his opponents knees and both his arms are under hooked to out his elbows inside his opponents elbows. As a result, even though he carries his opponents weight, the inability of the opponent to form immobilizing wedges around him means he can move very effectively from here and launch into a wide array of upper body and lower body submissions. Don’t fear your opponents weight - fear his ability to create immobilizing wedges around you - and inside control is a powerful antidote to this danger that has the added benefit of facilitating your own attacks.

Dealing with the big men - get behind them: Probably the most common question i am asked is - how do i defeat people bigger and stronger than myself. Here is my general advice. When matches against bigger people MAINTAIN INSIDE POSITION UNDERNEATH THEM AND CARRYING THEIR WEIGHT. IN OFFENSIVE SITUATIONS, FAVOR LEG ATTACKS AND MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE - GET BEHIND THEM. Inside position is the key to managing greater body weight from underneath. The legs are the hardest thing for heavyweights to hide from a smaller and more agile player and once locked, a heel hook will break anyone regardless of size. Also, the bigger the foot, the longer the breaking lever and the less chance of slippage. And the back - i don’t care how big and strong they are - they can’t push or pull someone who is behind them - so get there soon and stay there to beat the big men! Nick Rodriguez is the biggest and strongest athlete in the blue basement by a landslide, but in ADCC World Championships he was rather small compared to some of his opponents. He took on the massively powerful two time ADCC Champion Orlando Sanchez in his second match - gameplan? GET BEHIND HIM! He did exactly that and got the win! So remember the basic strategy when fighting bigger, heavier and stronger people. Inside position when underneath, focus submissions on the legs and position on the back!

Lacing your opponents legs: A very distinctive part of our leg lock system is preference for using the principle of DOUBLE TROUBLE whenever possible. Double trouble is the general principle that whenever you go to attack one leg, whether it be with a leg lock, a takedown or a sweep, ninety percent of the resistance comes from the OTHER leg. One of my favorite manifestations of this principle and one which all my students excel at - is a leg lace from cross ashi garami that binds and opponents two legs together and offers a tremendous degrees of control that can be used to hold, sweep and break an opponent who is considerably bigger, stronger and more athletic than you. Understand that almost all expressions of human athleticism require the unified work of both legs. When you shackle a mans legs together you rob him of all athleticism immediately - and a leg lace from cross ashi garami does exactly that. Here, Garry Tonon shows the control that is possible from this devastating leg locking position as he goes hunting for the secondary leg to solidify his position. Look to utilize double trouble whenever you can - not just in leg kicking but across the board. You will be impressed how adherence to this principle can lower your workload whilst increasing your success rate.

“Danaher told me I’m way better than you were at my age.” “F**k you, you little f**k! If I get out of this triangle I’m gonna squash you flat.” “You won’t be getting out...”
Another day training in the basement 😂😂😂 photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Denial: All the techniques of Jiu Jitsu are divided into two camps. First there are the positive offensive movements which involve our attempts to impose our moves upon an opponent. Second, there are the negative defensive movements where we try to deny our opponents ability to impose his moves upon us. Excellence in Jiu Jitsu is about mastery of BOTH types of technique. A big part of our opponents ability to impose his moves upon us is bound up with his ability to get effective HANDLES upon us. If he can do so, then he can moves us around, disturb our balance, work to a dominant grip etc etc. Whenever you are in defensive situations then, BEGIN BY DENYING EFFECTIVE HANDLES ON YOUR BODY TO YOUR OPPONENT. There are certain points of the human body that give excellent handles to a skilled opponent - YOU MUST PROTECT THESE IMMEDIATELY WHEN PUT IN A COMPROMISED POSITION. learn to use your hands and elbows to cover up these handles early and you will soon find that subsequent defensive moves are MUCH easier than usual. Here, the inestimable Brian Glick shows his defensive master by covering one of the very best handles on the human body - the hip - with his elbows in order to deny his opponent, Nick Rodriguez, a dangerous back attack specialist, a solid purchase on his body that could lead to serious problems. The more you deny the main handles of the body to your opponent and the earlier you do it - the more effective your defensive game will be!

Closed guard instructional video release! I am very happy to announce the release today of the latest chapter of my GO FURTHER FASTER - BJJ FUNDAMENTALS instructional video series - CLOSED GUARD. Closed guard is invariably the first position that Jiu Jitsu students are taught when working bottom game. It always figures heavily in competition and gym sparring success in Jiu Jitsu at all levels and in all weight categories both with and without the gi. Many great athletes have excelled at it and made it the foundation of their bottom game. The high hip position it offers makes it capable of being a devastating attacking position from underneath if used well. The main theme of this video is built around the idea that ostensibly closed guard is a NEUTRAL position - but if we can maneuver an opponent into one of six easily attainable vulnerabilities within closed guard - we can convert it to a DOMINANT position even whilst underneath a tough and knowledgeable opponent - and that’s when the fun begins! Though I am mostly known as a coach of high level athletes and technical innovations - nothing pleases me more than teaching the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu - for without them none of the other material I teach would be effective. The fundamentals are the heart and soul of the game and closed guard is the most fundamental of the entire bottom game. Keep working your closed guard!! That’s one position that will never go out of style 😜 If you are interested in my video there is a link in my Instagram bio.

Victory in NYC!! Katelyn Chookagian won a unanimous decision with a spirited bout mostly fought in standing position where she took the first two rounds and kept her status as number one contender in her division here at UFC 244. Late in the third round she got a chance to show her developing ground skills with a nice ashi garami entrance starting from bottom half guard that forced a defensive reaction into an escape as time ran out. An excellent reward for a great camp between RGA in New York and Mark Henry in New Jersey. It was a pleasure working with Mark Henry and PJ McMahon in the corner and watching this talented young athlete duke it out here at the greatest fight palace of them all - Madison Square Garden in NYC! Hope you all enjoyed the show!! Lots more great fights going on tonight! The garden has a great atmosphere tonight - so much epic history of combat sports here - it’s wonderful to see MMA entrenched now as the leader among those combat sports!

If you can get past your opponent’s elbow while your hips are above his - you have his back every damn time! A simple default option that will greatly improve your effectiveness on the mat is to get outside your opponents elbow. If you can do this while your hips are higher than his - you will have exposed his back - the king of attacking positions. Make this simple sequence one of your go-to methods of generating effective offense. It costs you almost nothing and the potential rewards are great. There are a plethora of methods of getting past an elbow - arm drags, slide bys, duck unders, limp arms - they all work very well and they all get you easily to the best position in the sport from almost anywhere. Here, Gordon Ryan, master of back attacks slips outside an elbow and immediately starts climbing for height with his hips - generating immediate back exposure that takes him from a neutral position to the strongest position in the game in the blink of an eye.

Put some venom in it! Most of my job is getting performance increases in Jiu Jitsu athletes. By far the biggest part of that job is increasing skill levels and improving tactics. As such I put a high value on technical nuance and sophistication among the people I teach. This is reflected in class where praise is usually directed to the pupils making the gains in technical performance. Most of our sparring tends to be very controlled with a big emphasis on excellence of execution. Nonetheless when it’s time to shine on the big stage one has to go beyond technique and start talking about INTENTION. When you have to derive maximum performance from a given move there is an ineffable element that comes from the intensity of intention that you bring into the move. There is a BIG difference between sparring with someone who is calmly going through the mechanics of a heel hook versus someone who comes at you with the real intention of breaking your leg. Mental intention creates a unity of purpose in your body that creates a more powerful physical action. You don’t want to train all the time with this, since training is more about physical refinement, but it’s nice to add it into the mix periodically to see how much more more venom you can add to the moves you practice every day. Here, Garry Tonon puts some venom into an arm drag - a move he practices every day in a relaxed fashion, but the extra spice added here turns it into a powerful vortex that took his opponent to the mat in the blink of an eye. Technical perfection plus hard intention creates an unstoppable and intimidating move.

Who is on top of who? If you look at this picture it seems obvious that Jake Shields has top position on Gordon Ryan. A deeper look at closed guard reveals that in fact, the bottom players HIPS are actually on top of other fellows hips and legs. The top player certainly has UPPER BODY top position, but as long as the top player remains on his knees, the bottom player has LOWER BODY top position. This has tremendously important ramifications. It means that any sweep from this position will result not only in a reversal, but a reversal to MOUNT, since closed guard is simply an upside down mounted position. It also means that any submission you can apply from mount, can be applied from bottom closed guard. The major upper body submissions of Jiu Jitsu are NEUTRAL WITH REGARDS TOP OR BOTTOM POSITION - all they require is that your HIPS BE ABOVE YOUR OPPONENTS HIPS. As such closed guard is a potentially devastating position for upper body submissions whilst your opponent cannot even get started on upper body submissions until he gets his hips and legs out from under yours - a clear tactical advantage for the bottom player. In a grappling match (less so when striking is allowed), Never underestimate the power of top hip position - even when your opponent has the more superficial upper body top position. Learning to value the remarkable power of top hip position from closed guard bottom is a big part of your journey to develop a devastating bottom game in Jiu Jitsu.

The most readily available move in the sport - front headlock: Jiu Jitsu is a sport that prioritizes getting close to your opponent and getting to grips with him. As such there is a a lot of aggressive forward movement towards an opponent and a lot of level changing down to get under your opponents defensive arms and get a hold of him. This results in MANY opportunities to take a front headlock upon your opponent. In fact I would venture to say that front headlock is probably the single most available move/hold in Jiu Jitsu. It offers immediate control of the head - the most valuable part of the body to control when you want to restrain a powerful foe. It leads immediately into some of the best submissions in the sport - all guillotine variations and many kata gatame variations such as Darce and Anaconda strangles. In addition it leads naturally to the back - king of all attacking positions - along with many fine takedown opportunities. It is equally effective in both standing and ground grappling and it is equally effective as a defensive move and an offensive move. If you get into a serious grappling match with a good opponent for more than two minutes, I GUARANTEE at some point there will be an opportunity for a front headlock - it’s almost impossible to engage in grappling without either conceding the opportunity or being presented with the opportunity. As such you have two duties towards the front headlock. First, you should invest the time into developing a strong front headlock of your own. Second, you should have some strong and trusted defenses to the move given the very high likelihood you will have to fight out of it pretty much every time you grapple. Craig Jones took the time this year to vastly improve his front headlock skills in the blue basement and it showed at the ADCC World Championships where he used it extremely well en route to a silver medal with a seventy five percent submission rate! You must work this position and come to understand it’s incredible potential and value.

Failure and success: A moments reflect reveals that THE VAST MAJORITY OF SUBMISSION ATTEMPTS WE MAKE IN THE COURSE OF OUR JIU JITSU WILL END IN FAILURE. For every time we successfully apply a submission hold we typically fail more than ten times. It’s easy to get discouraged. It can even happen in the midst of a match. You have a favorite move - you try it several times and fail each time. It’s easy to say to yourself that this opponent is impervious to this form of attack and stop trying and move on. Understand that in most cases it is only the imperfections in your the application of the move that resulted in that failure - not the move itself or your opponents defenses. When you experience failure, don’t immediately assume this opponent can’t be beaten by this method. Instead, try to asses on the spot how good your attempt was and what deficiencies lead to the initial failure - so that when you attempt it again you are doing a better job. If we just repeat the first failed attempt, you can only expect a second failure. But if you quickly assess what made the initial attempt fail and change those elements on the second or third attempt - you have a great chance of getting the breakthrough even after several initial failures. Here, Garry Tonon unsuccessfully attempts a heel hook variation in his bronze medal bout at ADCC. It would have been easy to quit heel hooks and attempt other forms of attack. Rather than just give up on one of his strongest weapons, he assessed what was wrong the first time and came back with a better second heel hook that won him a medal! Never tell yourself “this isn’t working.” Rather, ask yourself, “why didn’t that last attempt work?” The former leads to defeatism, the latter to confidence and success.

Juniors on the warpath: Much of the focus of my posts is on the actions of my senior students as they provide an excellent example for you all in terms of long term training goals and performance increases. However, it is often the path of the juniors that is closer to most people’s daily experiences as many of you are fairly new to the sport and still in the early days of your journey. After all the attention on the seniors at the ADCC World Championships recently, this weekend some of the juniors stepped up at a local grappling competition - here is talented youngster Demian Anderson showing excellent form with leg entries from top and bottom position and showing how they can be used both for position advance and submission, using outside ashi garami as the means of controlling his opponents legs. Always remember that it was at this level that Garry, Eddie, Gordon and Nicky began five to seven years ago and grew from there. Keep working hard at whatever level you currently are - keep your mind on technique and tactics, your energy on your workouts and your vision on your dreams!

Closed guard - angle is everything: The closed guard is one of the most representative of classic Jiu Jitsu among of all the major positions. Even if you don’t favor it yourself, you can be assured that other people will often use it on you - so the more that you know about it the better - no exceptions. One of the main routes to success from bottom closed guard is ANGLE. It is difficult to perform any kind of successful offense without first getting misaligned with your opponent. You must make a habit of constantly misaligning yourself if your are to become a threat from bottom. Your opponent will seek to counter by re-aligning himself to you. In that action/reaction exchange of alignment vs misalignment if the game of closed guard. Your hips are the basis of the position and you want yours out an angle. This might be something as a small shift to one side that creates enough space to enter a triangle, or it could be a turn far beyond ninety degrees that enables you to spin and rise into an arm bar. In almost every case, some form of misalignment to an angle will be required to generate attacks. Remember always that there is a world difference between being on the back vs being FLAT on your back. It’s tough to be effective when you are flat on your back in bottom position - but the simple act of constantly shifting your hips from side to side and gaining angles big and small will help greatly to improve your offensive potential from this great position.

Time: Of all the critical factors that go into success in Jiu Jitsu the one that gets talked about the least and yet which probably ought to be talked about the most is the effect of time. There are three main ways in which time plays a decisive role in outcomes. The first is SPEED OF DECISION MAKING RELATIVE TO YOUR OPPONENT. Your job is to make better and faster decisions than the other fellow. If you can do this consistently you will almost always win. You want to solve the problems he creates for you faster than he can solve the problems you create for him. The second is the time lag between MAKING A DECISION AND ACTING UPON IT. We all constantly second guess and procrastinate. You don’t have to be the fastest man out there in a physical sense, but the faster you can go from DECISION to ACTION the better you will do. The world is full of people who know what they ought to do but delay pulling the trigger - that’s why failure is so prevalent. The third way in which time plays a role is more pertinent to competition. HOW MUCH TIME IS LEFT IN THE MATCH? This will heavily influence your choice of technique and tactics. Make sure you have techniques that are divided up by how much time it takes to execute them and there is considerable variation in this regard. Here, Gordon makes a quick time check on the clock as he enters a strong attacking position. This will determine our selection of technique - in this case, lots of time so a time consuming but very high percentage moves such as a rear strangle is appropriate - and in this case, an excellent path to victory.

Many people go out on the stage THINKING they are going to win - only a few go out KNOWING they are going to win. Your job is to train in such a manner that over time you become more like the latter and less like the former. Your first steps involve developing a clear understanding of all the means by which you could possibly lose a match and making it impossible for an opponent to make them happen. Once you know an opponent has no means of scoring on you - the act of winning becomes a lot easier.

A man out of balance is easy to attack: Attacking and scoring in Jiu Jitsu on someone your own level is never easy. Understand this: THE DEGREE OF DIFFICULTY ASSOCIATED WITH ATTACKING A SKILLED OPPONENT IS DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO THE STRENGTH OF HIS POSTURE AND BASE. If you can break his posture and base by upsetting his balance - the attacks come MUCH easier. Whenever you play bottom position, always seek to get gravity working in your favor by constantly attacking your opponents base of support. My favorite way of doing so is foot techniques - in particular foot sweeps (ashi waza). Well applied foot sweeps from bottom position can make your opponent miserable and make it very difficult for him to settle down into strong passing positions and at the same time, greatly facilitate your favorite attacks. Ideally you want to create a situation where he finds it very difficult to stand in front of you and is reduced to stumbling around like a drunk on roller skates while you are able to dart into your favorite moves. Here, Gordon Ryan uses foot sweeps to beautifully off balance a training partner. After the stumble there will be a momentary opportunity to go easily into attack and score. Take it and win!!

Unlocking the power of closed guard: Probably the single most iconic Jiu Jitsu position and the one that we all started with is closed guard. While mount and rear mount are the most dominant positions, there is nothing really surprising about their dominance. If a total grappling neophyte saw them he would intuit very easily that they are superior positions conferring great advantage to the player in the attacking position. But if that same neophyte saw a closed guard and you tried to tell him that the bottom closed guard player had a tactical advantage over the top player - he may well call you a fool - after all, he is in bottom position in a situation that looks more appropriate for the bedroom than winning fights. Yet the bottom player assuredly doesn’t have a tactical advantage in a grappling situation from bottom closed guard. As long as the guard is closed, the top player cannot engage in any serious positional or submission attacks. All he has are a few very low percentage options that are very likely to be strongly countered by a good bottom player. He cannot initiate any serious positional or submission offense until he first opens the guard. The bottom athlete on the other hand, can immediately begin attacking from closed guard with some of the best submission and positional attacks in the sport. There is a powerful asymmetry here between the top players inability to do much until he first opens the closed guard versus the bottom players ability to attack very strongly from the same situation. Learning to gain faith in this tactical advantage is a BIG part of your early development in bottom game Jiu Jitsu. In time you can make yourself a nightmare to anyone trapped inside your closed guard - to the point where opponents fear it almost as much as your mount or rear mount. That journey begins with understanding and trusting in the tactical asymmetry in attacking opportunity between top and bottom player in closed guard. It may not be obvious to the neophyte - but one day your ability to exploit this will identify you as an expert!

Fighting smaller people: One of the great themes of Jiu Jitsu is that of constantly developing your ability to OVERCOME GREATER STRENGTH WITH LESSER STRENGTH. As such much is written and talked about how to beat bigger opponents. In contrast, little is spoken about how to beat smaller opponents. The feeling is that bigger people ought to be able to beat smaller people just in virtue of being bigger. However, I’m sure you have all had the unpleasant experience of going up against a tricky smaller fighter and really struggling with the task. In the recent ADCC World championships open weight division exactly this scenario played out - 77kg division entrant Lachlan Giles had been beaten in his first match in his own weight division and went into the open weight as a heavy underdog as one of the smallest entrants. He used the classic weapons of the smaller athlete - inversion, inside positioning and off balancing to successfully attack three much larger heavyweights and win by submission - one of the outstanding performances of the event. Underestimating the smaller athlete resulted in three heavyweight world champions getting soundly defeated (lack of knowledge of the leg lock game was also an obvious factor). It was a valuable lesson to the Jiu Jitsu World - we cant ignore the question of how to take on smaller opponents. Gordon Ryan took on Mr Giles in the midst of his heavyweight blitz. We decided that the two best options would either finish him with counter leg locking as he appeared vulnerable to some strong counter opportunities and Mr Ryan has an extremely strong leg lock and counter leg lock game that the other heavyweights clearly lacked; or play a game based on the two biggest problems bigger athletes can create for smaller athletes - nullify the effects of the legs and inversion by stepping over a knee and getting chest to chest to maximize weight advantage and minimize movement from underneath, then get behind where height advantage creates tremendous control and submission opportunities through arm traps with body triangles. The second option arose first and here you see the result - but make sure you have a plan for ALL opponents big AND small

Pathways to the back: You all know how much emphasis I put on getting to the back. In a pure grappling match without strikes I value the back mount far more than the front mount EVEN THOUGH THEY SCORE THE SAME AMOUNT OF POINTS. As such, a big part of our coaching program is spent of developing pathways to the back from anywhere. All of my students excel in this, particularly the Ryan brothers. An interesting point about this notion of constantly seeking the back is that whilst it is mostly a physical skill, there is also a mental component insofar as you first have to identify the OPPORTUNITY. You have to train your eyes to see the opportunity before you actually pull out the move to realize that opportunity. The world is full of Jiu Jitsu students who know many moves to take the back, but who overlook myriad opportunities in live sparring and so never get to use those moves when it counts. I often preach to my students IF YOU CAN SEE THE BACK, YOU CAN TAKE THE BACK. While this is an oversimplification and there is more to the story than this, it does a good job of getting students to MENTALLY IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITIES to take the back - the single most important first step towards back mastery. Next time your are sparring keep those eyes of yours looking for the back and I promise you you will find yourself more often on your opponents back! Here, Gordon Ryan, master of identifying even the tiniest opportunity, goes from mental recognition and into physical action as he moves towards the back of yet another world champion opponent at the recent ADCC world championships en route to gold.

One of the surest ways to success in life is to identify an unacknowledged truth - something of value that is true, but which only a few people KNOW or ACKNOWLEDGE is true. For example, I knew many years ago that leg locks could be improved from their basic format and made into a system just as effective as traditional Jiu Jitsu upper body submission and position orthodoxy. When I taught that to the squad it gave them them a significant advantage that enabled them to effectively match up against athletes with far more overall experience than them and win. If everyone acknowledges the truth of a true idea, then it’s difficult to use it to advantage - but if an important idea is true AND YOU ARE THE ONLY ONE WHO BELIEVES IT TO BE THE CASE - THEN YOU CAN EASILY USE IT TO YOUR ADVANTAGE. A good example of this is one of my favorite moves - which I believe has always been massively undervalued in Jiu Jitsu. This is the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku). It is a truly devastating weapon, far more controlling than the more popular arm bars and strangles normally used in this position. From it you can apply a crushingly powerful strangle and many joint locks. It offers far more control than its alternatives and truly enables a smaller person to defeat a bigger person. All my senior students are masters of it - you should be too! Here, Gordon Ryan completely ties up and controls an opponent and now has his choice of which submission he will employ from here. Make a serious study of ushiro sankaku and take advantage of other people’s failure to see the value of this gold mine of submissions!

When the pressure is on - it’s good to have some weapons you truly believe in: Humans tend to be naturally risk averse. We generally tend to fear the risk of loss more than we cherish the prospect of gain. This tendency tends to become even stronger in high pressure situations. In Jiu Jitsu this will often result in athletes restricting themselves to only their most trusted moves when they are on the big stage. It is crucial for your development therefore, that you have a select arsenal of moves in which you have total trust. These are the guns that you will be willing to fire when the heat is on - all those other moves that you like and enjoy when you are rolling with your friends in the gym won’t do you any good now. At ADCC 2019 Garry Tonon fought for the bronze medal and took on the very talented and physically powerful Dante Leon, who had impressed everyone by defeating Jiu Jitsu legend Lucas Lepri in an earlier round. When it came time to attack, Mr Tonon went back to one of the most recognizable of the squad arsenal - outside heel hook from outside ashi garami - a move he has drilled and performed many thousands of times. Despite the tense nature of the match his confidence in the move, derived from so much practice and experience in its use and application, meant that there was not a second of hesitation and once again it was outside ashi garami heel hook for the win! You too, must develop a small but very strong subset of moves that are your most trusted weapons upon which you can call when the pressure is on you to perform. Your selection is an expression of your body and your personality so this is a deeply personal part of your development and no one else can tell what your selection will be - but select them over time you must, for when you are too nervous to try your other moves - these guns will still fire.

You’re never going to feel good about your training sessions - you’re never going to feel one hundred percent going into a match: We al have a dream that one day our Jiu Jitsu will feel unstoppable and that the efforts of training will be rewarded with constant progress to a point where you win every match without effort and that our bodies will strengthen with the training to the point we feel physically perfect. This is a pipe dream. Your body will always have issues and pains and in most cases you will have to face up to your challenges in a less than optimal physical state with nagging injuries and constant fatigue. In addition, understand that all your training partners are progressing at roughly the same rate as you and thus you will never have effortless victories in the gym. Every session will be a slog against the pains and fatigue inside your own body and the training partners who grow along side you and remain a severe test every single session. This photo of Gordon Ryan was taken one week before his dominant double gold performance at ADCC. It shows clearly the strain of a standard daily training session (one of three per day). If you saw how effortless many of his matches looked at the world championships you might think the training sessions were even more so - this picture tells a different story. ITS NEVER GOING TO BE AN EASY RIDE FOR YOU - don’t think in those terms. The only measure of worth is this - ARE YOU SLIGHTLY BETTER AT THE SKILLS YOU ARE WORKING ON WHEN YOU WENT TO SLEEP THAN WHEN YOU WOKE. No matter how tired and beat up you might feel after your workouts, THAT’S a realistic and worthwhile goal for each and every session.

People treat you differently when you are dangerous: A big theme in my coaching is that of PRECISION IN BREAKING MECHANICS. I insist to all of my students that they study deeply the dark arts of breaking limbs and strangulation. Remember always that it is the submission holds of Jiu Jitsu that make it dangerous. When you have powerful breaking mechanics and you can snap limbs like matchsticks your opponents treat you very differently from a strictly positional player. They start over reacting to threats and feints, they are reluctant to engage with you, they have to settle for a tactical game of score and run rather than really engage with you. Learning to master the precise details is not fun - you have to have it done to you to learn how to do it to others. You also have to be very responsible with it as you can’t afford to hurt training partners. But once you gain it, opponents will treat you with a respect that few are shown. Here, Gordon Ryan shows the punishing power of his heel hook. You can see the tension running through the leg and the reaction to the lock. Take time with a friend working on those all important mechanics. Experiment with how changes in your opponents position and body type require you to adapt the lock for maximum effect. There is a reason why all my senior students are feared for their breaking power. With training and experimentation, you can be too.

A key to confidence when you step out on to the mat - know yourself: The moment you step up to a challenge on the mats, whether it be just another sparring round at the dojo or a big competition; it’s natural to wonder about the abilities of your opponent. What are his best moves? What tactics will he employ? Will he be stronger or have better endurance than you? It good to pay some attention to your opponent, but don’t go too far down that route, as in truth there will never be any certainty about those questions until the match is over. Put your primary emphasis upon knowing YOURSELF. Know what you are good and what you’re not good at. Use that knowledge to develop a strong sense of identity - this is who i am and these are my strong points - and seek always to push the match in those directions. You can’t control who your opponent is or what his skills are - but you can definitely control who you are and what your skills will be. Any wishy washy thoughts of “what will I do out there?” Must be replaced with a strong sense of who your are technically and stylistically and the will to show that to the opponent. Knowledge of WHAT YOU ARE GOOD AT and a sense of WHAT YOU STAND FOR in Jiu Jitsu will give you the clarity of purpose you will need to rise to whatever occasion you find yourself in.

Amazing performance by the squad at ADCC 2019: There are four special prizes given out at every ADCC World Championships to recognize great achievements among the many athletes. Best fighter, best match, fastest/best submission and best takedown. Squad athletes won three out of four of those prizes. Gordon Ryan was unstoppable and easily win best fighter award. Garry Tonon has the performances of his life with best match for his barn burner with Renato Canuto and fastest submission over Edwin Najmi. Great to see the amazing performances of these athletes getting official recognition - congratulations to @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @garrytonon

Life isn’t fair - and neither should be your Jiu Jitsu: The whole point of Jiu Jitsu is to create an unfair advantage over your opponent - Jiu Jitsu is the art of making things as unfair in your favor as possible within the rules. The most well known and important means of creating an unfair playing field is POSITION. If you get a dominant position on an opponent from where you can attack him whilst he cannot attack you, that is clearly going to make for a much easier match for you. Of all the various positions in sport Jiu Jitsu, I favor the back above all, and make it the centerpiece of our positional training. A big theme of my teaching is to GO BEYOND POSITION as a means of creating advantage and start bringing in other elements that create STILL GREATER ADVANTAGE until the fight becomes completely unfair in your favor. Here, Gordon Ryan, a true master of creating unfair advantage from the back, goes far beyond positional advantage and ties up both of his opponents defensive arms whilst leaving one of his arms free to strangle. Such is the effect of the arm traps he is using that one hand proved to be sufficient to finish this strangle in the final of the ADCC world championships against a very tough opponent. Look always to go beyond position and constantly seek to enlarge and improve your understanding of advantage in Jiu Jitsu. Understand always that the entire sport is built upon this philosophy and that the deeper your understanding of how to get mechanical and tactical advantage over an opponent the easier and more impressive your Jiu Jitsu will appear.

Handicap yourself to improve your performance: When we think about performance improvement we typically think of giving ourselves every possible advantage. However, one of the best ways to improve your overall performance levels is to deliberately handicap yourself in training and take away your advantages so that you can build up other, weaker aspects of your game that will be of great benefit in the future. Take the example of Nick Rodriguez. He is built like a titan and moves like a leopard. On any given day in the basement there may be only two or three people even close to his size and no one with his overall physicality. If wanted, he could simply overwhelm 95% of his training partners in sparring on physicality alone. That however, would mean zero technical improvement over time - just the same workout and results every day until he got bored. Instead, he intelligently handicaps himself by starting in compromised positions and toned down the use of his explosive speed and strength so that he can practice the refinement of his technique and make technical progress. His intelligent approach to training paid off in the ADCC heavyweight division. In our training room he is always the biggest in the room - but in the heavyweight division his first opponent towered over him and outweighed him by around 30-40 pounds. His second opponent outweighed him by almost a hundred pounds. In his battle to the finals he had to defeat a Jiu Jitsu world champion and two former ADCC champions - all bigger or at least same size as he - an incredible task. If he had just run over all his smaller partners in the gym he never would have practiced the compromised positions you inevitably find yourself in against bigger more experienced opponents you will face in competition in your own weight category and probably would have lost; but his good training attitude gave him the competition skills he needed to get to the finals in one of the most impressive debut performances in ADCC history. Remember always - A GOOD HEAVYWEIGHT CAN GET A GREAT WORKOUT IN A ROOMFUL OF LIGHTWEIGHTS AND A GOOD BLACK BELT CAN GET A GREAT WORKOUT IN A ROOMFUL OF WHITE BELTS.

Fastest submission and best move of ADCC 2019: Garry Tonon made a huge impression on ADCC 2019 with the match of the tournament against Renato Canuto and the fast submission and best overall move of the tournament against another submission specialist world champion Edwin Najmi. Both men are masters of flying submissions from standing position and both are quick to pull the trigger on these powerful and spectacular moves. As soon as they came to grips with each other, the crowd sensed something was going to happen. Mr Tonon have Mr Najmi the over hook grip - a brilliant tactical ploy - as the over hook is the preferred no gi grip for Mr Najmi’s favorite flying submission - the triangle - and the under hook that Mr Tonon took us not generally considered an optimal grip for Mr Tonon’s favorite flying submission - kani basami (the scissor takedown into inside heel hook). Seeing the apparent grip dominance, Mr Najmi felt he was safe, but Mr Tonon had compensated for the inferior grip with side on body positioning that allowed him to enter even with a less than optimal grip. The second he jumped he was in hip to hip and feeding the heel to his armpit and following his opponents strong defensive roll to land a beautiful and controlled submission in the opening seconds. This was one of those magic moments where skill, tactics, subterfuge and artistry worked together to produce a truly beautiful expression of Jiu Jitsu that was at the same time, deadly functional. Most of the time in Jiu Jitsu our primary concern is function and effectiveness - but when artistry is combined with function, the results are truly impressive. If you ever have a friend who thinks grappling is slow and boring - show them this 😜😜

This is me after I just found out that I won the state lottery worth $250,000,000 and got lifetime sponsorships from Bugatti and Lamborghini and that the entire Rockettes lineup wants to give me blow jobs - maximum excitement and emotion...what a day

Um...Garry? I’m pretty sure I told you to SHOOT in for the takedown, not FLY in....
#thereisonlyonegarryfuckingtonon

My favorite moment of ADCC 2019: Most of the preparation and execution for World Championship competition is pretty stressful for everyone involved but every so often there are some fun moments that lighten things up. During the tense and tactical final of the absolute division, Gordon Ryan took on the great Marcus Buchecha Almeida, a ten time world champion and former ADCC champion and unquestionably one of the very greatest Jiu Jitsu athletes of all time. In addition to being among the best exponents of Jiu Jitsu in history, Mr Almeida is also one of the nicest people in the sport. In a sport often divided by team loyalty he is a joy to be around and share time with and possessed of a great and natural sense of humor. The match, as you would expect, was a very tight one. Mr Ryan had gotten off to a strong start in the first ten minutes with a beautiful sweep to mount during the time when points were not scored. It was the best move of the match thus far and a with greater activity level overall Mr Ryan seemed to be ahead as the match moved closer to the time limit. It was important for Mr Almeida to convey more action as he was in danger of a stalling call, but pressing forward too much meant entering the dangerous guard of Mr Ryan - Mr Almeida intelligently went into a heel hook as a means of conveying a sense aggression to the judges even though heel hooks are not really his specialty - a sound tactical move. The only problem was that it was Gordon Ryan, like all of my senior students, a master of leg locks and heel hooks in particular. Mr Ryan looked at him with a “are you really trying to heel hook ME?” look and turned to me coaching on the sideline and smiled. Everyone observing saw the humor of it and chuckled. Mr Almeida saw the humor in it too and shrugged and laughed and went right back on the attack. It was great to see even when two of the very best go at each other with everything they’ve got there can still be some humor and smiles among the action 😜🤗

Reflections on ADCC 2019 - the internationalization of grappling - Australia makes a statement: One of the great themes to emerge from the recent world championships in Anaheim California was the terrific performance of developing grappling countries. For most of its history the podiums of the world championships has been dominated by a single nation - Brazil. In time some great individuals emerged who won titles - mostly from the United States. This year two outstanding Australian athletes won medals and really impressed everyone with a very high submission rate over 75%! Craig Jones won silver in his weight category - the highest ever won by his nation. Lachlan Giles won bronze in the absolute division - a fantastic achievement for a 77kg grappler (I’m not sure but I think the only other person from 77kg to medal in absolute division was Marcelo Garcia - perhaps some of my readers can confirm/deny this). Craig Jones won every match via submission on his way to the final, showing great variation with three different submissions over three different parts of the body to reflect his rapidly growing versatility. Lachlan Giles hit three superb heel hook finishes on three MUCH bigger and stronger world champion opponents and brilliantly showcased the great ideal of Jiu Jitsu of lesser strength controlling and defeating greater strength. The work of these two young Australians is a clear statement - Jiu Jitsu belongs to the world. The future will see a growing internationalization that I think will be immensely helpful for its growth and development. If ADCC is to strengthen its role as the Olympics of grappling it must, as the Olympics does, reflect the work of the whole world. It was a wonderful thing to see Australia, a nation that has always punched far above its weight in sports representation, take the lead through these two brilliant athletes. Well done Craig and Lachlan and well done to the Australian grappling community who helped launch these two to the top of the grappling world. I am certain other developing grappling nations will follow this example and will soon see a truly international flavor to world championships in future years. 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺

Grip and attack: A common problem that many students run into once they start to develop favorite grips from which to launch their attacks is a natural tendency to get to a good grip and HESITATE, as though the grip will get better with time. GRIPS DON’T GET BETTER WITH TIME. Once you get your grip - ITS TIME TO GO! You don’t have to set a speed record, but you don’t want to procrastinate either. Grips almost always get worse with time as your opponent will invariably be trying to break free. So build a habit of getting to your grip and moving seamlessly into the appropriate attacks from that grip. Train the grip and attack reflex and you will soon be experiencing more success with your favorite moves.

Victory in Long Beach! Gordon won a smooth victory over Rousimar Palhares by quickly taking the back and controlling position until the end to cap off an amazing two week display of Jiu Jitsu after his double gold medal performance at ADCC World Championships. Now I am heading from the arena back to NYC - waiting for my Uber to LAX. It’s been an amazing time out here in California - so proud of the development of my incredible students and the interest and innovation they are creating in our sport. Now I will fly back on the red eye to arrive back in good old NYC! Looking forward to landing and heading straight back to teaching in the blue basement and seeing all my students again 😜😜 Wishing you all the best from California - thank you all as always for your support and interest in our approach to the game!

Big match today in Long Beach California - Rousimar Palhares vs Gordon Ryan: Two of the grappling worlds best submission experts will take on each other today. Rousimar Palhares is a renown leg lock expert - he is also a master of kimura and juji gatame arm locks. He is a silver medalist at ADCC and could easily have won the event if he decided to specialize in it ( he primarily focuses on MMA). Gordon Ryan is similarly known for his submission skill - so this match should be a great one. Everything kicks off early evening here in Long Beach - hope you all enjoy the show!

Find your special gift, work hard to develop it, believe in your ability to express it - the story of Nick Rodriguez: One of the most inspiring stories to come out of the ADCC World Championships is that of blue belt Nick Rodriguez. The young man from New Jersey was a former high school wrestler with an additional year of D3 college wrestling, took up Jiu Jitsu because he preferred the idea of a submission hold over a pin. Gordon Ryan brought him into the basement and he would travel four hours a day to get to class and learn. In preparation for ADCC the great question was how to take a raw talent with very limited experience in the sport and get him ready for championships level opponents. Obviously he was not going to win with pure Jiu Jitsu nor with pure wrestling. Step number one was to give him a cast iron defense to the biggest danger to a blue belt - submission holds. He soon became extremely difficult to control and finish. Next was the question of how he would win. In order to create a winner you need to give them a skill that they do better than their rivals - but how do you make a blue belt better than Champion black belts? The answer was not wrestling but rather the fascinating INTERFACE between wrestling and Jiu Jitsu where there is a world of possibilities in scrambles for a well prepared athlete to beat people he would ordinarily not be capable of beating. Mr Rodriguez developed an amazing ability to scramble to the back in the grey zone between takedowns and ground and between bottom position and standing position. Once that was allied with our back finishing system it created a monster who shocked the hell out of everyone in the gym - and then at ADCC - everyone in the grappling world! With a silver medal at the world championships in such a short time there is a valuable lesson here for all of us - start with a cast iron defense, then build an offense around your unique talents/skills that really works for you. Then go out there and ignore all the preconceptions people have about how long it takes to be competitive among the best - your skill level, not your years of training- determines the outcome

From breakout to breakthrough - the story of Craig Jones and two world championships: One of the most memorable breakout performances of the 2017 ADCC was that of Australian grappling icon, Craig Jones. He submitted two world champions on day one in spectacular style and really caught the grappling world’s attention. On day two however, all the athletes in his division were now aware of the danger and used positional tactics to shut down his game so that despite his spectacular start, he came away from the event without a medal. Mr Jones did exactly what he needed - he kept working hard on the elements he was good at (submissions), while adding large amounts of time to positional and standing training, all while maintaining a very busy competition schedule to practice the new skills under pressure. He even moved to New York to train full time with the squad to get ready for the big new test. Let me tell you something - it’s tough and difficult just get to ADCC. It’s even more difficult to have a great break out performance there among so many champions - but it’s FAR MORE difficult to break through everyone and get to the finals WHEN EVERYONE KNOWS WHO YOU ARE AND WHAT YOU DO AND HAS COUNTERS SET IN PLACE TO STOP YOU. That’s when you REALLY see how good someone is. Craig Jones came into ADCC as a grappling superstar rather than as an unknown. His hard work, intelligent career planning and training truly paid off. This time he showed he was still true to submission oriented game with three beautiful submissions that ranged over the whole body. He showed his new front headlock/guillotine game that he worked so hard on. His positional and standing game was vastly improved and he used the threat of that to make his submissions even more dangerous. The result? A silver medal that with just a few minor changes could easily have been gold. What a performance by the young man from down under, who showed how growth through intelligent planning and hard work can take your performance from good to great and pave the way for even better performances in the future. It was a great ADCC for him and Australian grappling (more on this soon) - congratulations Craig Jones! 🇦🇺

The remarkable achievement of Garry Tonon: Some athletes inspire in different ways. Garry Tonon has shifted his focus away from grappling over the last two years towards MMA. However, when team mate Ethan Crelinsten got injured and Nicky Ryan had to drop from 77kg down to 66kg a month before the event, Mr Tonon immediately volunteered to take his place. Mr Tonon has always been among the most exciting grapplers on earth and in this ADCC he cemented that reputation in spectacular fashion. I always thought the best and most exciting grappling match I would ever see was Garry Tonon vs Rousimar Palhares - but Garry Tonon vs Renato Canuto in the second round of ADCC 2019 May have Just eclipsed that. Both athletes are fireballs and they went at each at maximum force in what was clearly the match of the tournament. Interestingly there was neither a point or a submission scored in the match - yet it was pure excitement from start to finish. The next day against Champion JT Torres Mr Tonon showed his remarkable ability to escape bad position and then turn it into advantage with a beautiful escape from back and into an equally beautiful locked knee bar - with just a few more seconds on the clock victory would have been his - but it was not to be - at world championships level, sometimes the difference between victory and defeat is despairingly close. Then in the bronze medal match Mr Tonon went up against the formidable Dante Leon and went back to the squads roots to win via heel hook from outside ashi garami to take his first ADCC medal - ironically at a time when it is no longer his focus! In open weight Mr Tonon had another chance to awe the crowd against the extremely talented Edwin Najime. Both men are masters of spectacular flying submissions. Mr Tonon fired first with a beautiful flying heel hook entry - kani basami - and then locked out an equally beautiful inside heel hook for another incredible win. This man is simply a human highlight reel and a pleasure and a privilege to watch. Thank you for showing the world that great Jiu Jitsu can be beautiful Jiu Jitsu and that even at championship level artistic flourish that captures our imagination is possible

The ideal of Jiu Jitsu: My understanding of Jiu Jitsu never waivers from this - JIU JITSU IS THE ART AND SCIENCE OF CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. The closer you stay true to this ideal, the more impressive your game will be. The further you stray from it, the less people will want to follow your example. The appeal of the greatest athletes in the sport is not just that they win, but HOW they win - and nothing catches our admiration more than the decisive and clean mature of victory by submission. The soul of wrestling is the pin, The soul of judo is the the ippon throw - but the soul of Jiu Jitsu is submission. Every move, tactic, strategy and concept that I teach goes in that direction. I am proud to see my students express that ideal every time they go out on the stage. Encouraging my Jiu Jitsu ideal of control leading to submission isn’t about rule sets - it’s about mind set - make that ideal your goal and take the time to learn how to enact it and the soul of Jiu Jitsu will become part of your soul as an athlete.

The incredible achievement of Gordon Ryan: This weekend at the ADCC World Championships Gordon Ryan won both his weight division and absolute to take double gold medals. After competing only twice in ADCC he has three gold medals and a silver and is only 24 years old. With six out of eight matches finished by submission (and a seventh where a submission was just seconds away as the match ended) this was an incredibly dominating performance that exemplified our philosophy of control leading to submission. What was truly remarkable about this performance is that it came after a severe knee injury early in the year that required major surgery. The camp for the event started twelve weeks ago. Gordon Ryan began with everyone else but could not do any standing grappling and I restricted him to only the most low impact training. Our understanding was that he would do the camp alongside the others but in a very low powered fashion with the assumption that he would not actually do the event but rather aim to compete around December. For most of the camp he really struggled and had some days where he did not shine at all. Finally four weeks before ADCC he started to look comfortable. Three weeks out he had one session where he looked like the old Gordon Ryan. Two weeks out he looked BETTER than the old Gordon Ryan. Then after a great end to the camp - the night before the competition he got food poisoning!! There was real doubt about whether he would be able to compete again! He actually weighed in very light for both days but the nausea settled and the rest of the story you know - complete domination. Let this camp be a light to those who think problems, injuries and obstacles are destroying their chances. Problems can hold you back, but time and industry can build the hope and belief that can overcome them all. Well done Mr Ryan. Twelve weeks ago i was a skeptic, but like everyone else In the Anaheim convention center and around the world - you made me a believer.

Thank you: It was a tremendous weekend for our team at the ADCC World Championships in California this weekend. Getting a team ready is a big enterprise and requires input from many people and I wanted to thank some of the major players in that team project. First, my sensei Renzo Gracie who took me from white belt to black belt in Jiu Jitsu and who gives us a gym to train out of in NYC along with the entire staff of the gym who let us focus on preparation and cutting edge Jiu Jitsu performance. To all of my students at the academy who make so many sacrifices in time and effort to create a training room that elevates the level of all who enter and stay and who create an environment that can build champions and advance the sport. To the competitive athletes who have the courage and drive to step out on to the stage and give life to the ideas and concepts I teach - you give my theories and philosophy life - without you I would just a man tinkering in a basement - I owe you guys everything. To @BJJ.fanatics for giving me an outlet through video to convey my ideas to a broader audience through my growing army of video students. I am so happy that you can get to see the very things I teach to you all unfold in the same way you learn them on the biggest stage before your eyes. To all of my followers on social media. Thank you for your interest and support on this crazy journey of growth and improvement towards an unattainable ideal in the sport we all love. To the team and staff at ADCC particularly @Mo jassim80 who took the world championships to an entirely new level and left everyone thinking that one day this sport could be HUGE and impressed everyone with a professionally run show that no one will forget. To @flograppling for taking that show to the internet and making it something the world could watch rather than just the spectators. Wishing you all the best and once again - thank you all.

Victory in LA!! A huge congratulations to squad athletes @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyrod247 @craigjonesbjj @garrytonon @nickyryanbjj @tazagarami for an incredible weekends work at the ADCC World Championships here in Anaheim California. The squad put on the most successful team performance in ADCC history with five medals and the most impressive individual performance by Gordon Ryan with double gold medals in weight and absolute divisions. These young men trained so hard for the big show and out on a truly amazing performance. A huge thank you to ADCC organizers and staff who put on the best show in the events history to a packed audience. The crowd was amazing and we are very proud to have a chance to show our philosophy of Jiu Jitsu at such a great show. Thank you all for your support and interest in what we do. Wishing you all the best from Anaheim!!

Strong first day for the squad at the ADCC World Championships: In Jiu Jitsu as in life, no one cares how you start - they only care about how you finish - that’s why we don’t put too much emphasis on the first day’s results - nonetheless it was a strong start for the squad on Day One with four out of five athletes through to the semi finals. There were some incredible matches today that I am sure will have people talking for quite a while. We are all heading back to prepare for a big day tomorrow. As always thank you so much for your support and following our athletes and our philosophies. Hope you all enjoyed the show! Back in action tomorrow 😜😜

The squad checks in: All squad members successfully weighed in this morning at the ADCC World Championships in Anaheim California for the first of three weigh ins over the course of the event. We will go for a final light workout later and then go out to a wild nightclub and party with strippers and drug dealers and rappers until dawn as final preparation for the event #viproomprepsucka

Counting down: Final days now before the ADCC World Championships here in Anaheim California. The nature of training now is very different from earlier in the camp. Now it’s about tactics rehearsals and general movement and weight management rather than hard sparring. Here, Gordon Ryan and the squad go through our pre match drills. Keeping an eye on intensity levels is important now - it’s analogous to the difference between SHARPENING the edge of a knife - where the idea is to remove metal and change its edge geometry to a narrower edge - vs POLISHING the edge of a knife - a less radical action where the edge is gently smoothed down to make a refined cut. All the athletes here in Anaheim are in this polishing phase now. Today and tomorrow the process will go into the final phase of weight management - never a fun experience 😜😜 Wishing you all the best from California!

First training session for the squad in LA: Getting acclimated on the West Coast, Garry Tonon, Nick Rodriguez and Gordon Ryan get a light workout in preparation for the big show this weekend in Anaheim. It’s getting close now so nothing crazy - drills and light positional sparring at @pointofimpactmma Now its back to the hotel for dinner and plotting 😜😜 wishing you all the best from California!

In a cab heading through Manhattan to JFK - ADCC Bound: Training Camp is over and the squad heads to California for the biggest grappling show of them all - The ADCC World Championships in Anaheim. Everyone has trained hard and given their all - now it’s time for final preparation and weight cutting. As always it’s a game of doing everything you can to prepare everyone to the best of your knowledge but ultimately the athletes will always have to overcome unforeseen challenges and problems on the stage. ADCC is always a special event. The international flavor with the different approaches and schools of thought makes for a truly fascinating experience for both athletes and spectators. This year has an insane level of talent from all over the world. There are many grappling legends in the mix and also many extremely talented unknowns who are fully capable of surprising everyone. As always - I’m running late 😜😜😂😂 Get ready for the greatest grappling show on earth!

Fifty percent of Jiu Jitsu is DENYING YOUR OPPONENT THE SAME THINGS YOU AIM TO DO TO HIM. We all practice as much as possible the things we want to do to our opponent - but at least fifty percent of your time should be spent in those skills of denial - of STOPPING HIM FROM DOING WHAT HE WANTS. I love to see my students practice offense - but I make damn sure they never neglect their defense because we all have a natural tendency to under emphasize it. So get out there and practice your skills of denial - the better your opponents get - the more you will need them!

Closing distance: The whole game in Jiu Jitsu or indeed, any grappling art, is to get close and come to grips with your opponent. The act of getting close enough to establish contact - CLOSING THE DISTANCE - is a skill like any other in Jiu Jitsu and must be practiced and developed. Unfortunately most people just assume that the opponent will engage in grappling and move forward rather lackadaisically and complacently reach out to grab an opponent with about as much technique and tactics as they employ reaching for a milk shake. In a competitive match you will have to fight just to establish basic contact with a skilled opponent. You must have a method of closing distance and getting to advantageous grips. Understand this - ATHLETES WHO START WELL GENERALLY FINISH WELL. Here, Gordon Ryan approaches an opponent in a seated guard. He has barely established contact but you can see he has already taken some considerable advantages even at this early stage. Don’t just approach and grab - APPROACH WITH A PLAN TO SECURE EARLY ADVANTAGE THAT WILL FACILITATE GETTING TO EVEN BIGGER ADVANTAGES.

Capturing the head: The human body is essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything hangs off that - so when you control the head you control everything else by default. As such, we must put a very high priority on capturing the head whenever we can. THE WHOLE POSITIONAL GAME OF JIU JITSU IS DESIGNED TO GET US PAST OUR OPPONENTS LOWER BODY UP TO THE MID BODY AND THEN PROGRESS UP UNTIL WE CAPTURE THE HEAD. Most of the time we capture the head with our arms, but you can do it in very impressive ways with your LEGS also - via the TRIANGLE (sankaku). Here, Nicky Ryan locks on a devastating side triangle (Yoko Sankaku) which will give tremendous head control that can nail down to the floor even the toughest opponents and offer a great stranglehold at the same time. Remember always the GOAL of the positional game - HEAD CONTROL. Whenever you have the opportunity to control the head - take it - and control of the rest of the body will be your reward.

Getting under an opponent’s center of gravity: A key skill is grappling is that of LIFTING AN OPPONENT OFF THE MAT. This is done for many reasons. In Jiu Jitsu but is mostly done from bottom position to set up sweeps and lower body submissions. Understand that you will never be able to lift people bigger and heavier than yourself until you master GETTING UNDER THEIR CENTER OF GRAVITY. only when you can under their center of gravity will you be able to lift them easily off the mat and into the move you seek to perform. In standing grappling this usually entails SINKING YOUR HIPS UNDER THEIRS WITH A LEVEL CHANGE. In ground grappling bottom position it usually entails SCOOTING YOUR HIPS DEEP UNDER THEIR HIPS. When you do this you can lift even very big opponents. When you don’t, you will be unable to lift even a lightweight. If you want to make a name for yourself as a dangerous attacker from bottom position, Practice scooting under and lifting daily and soon you will be attacking with much greater effect!

I am very pleased to announce I will be teaching a seminar at @5starmartialarts at the dojo of my old friend and comrade Shawn Williams at 6:30pm Wednesday September 25 at 4201 Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles. Contact @5starmartialarts for details and booking! This will be the week of preparation for ADCC world championships so it should be an exciting time in LA! Hope to see you there! 🤗🤗

Putting things together: Nothing gets the breakthrough better than COMBINED ATTACKS. Defending one submission is tough, defending a well applied combination of submissions is hell - that is why I always try to create thorough SYSTEMS around the most high percentage submission holds - so that as one attack gets foiled another can take its place. Best of all however, is when you can LINK ONE SUBMISSION SYSTEM WITH OTHERS. Now it becomes extremely difficult to stop an unfolding attack that is expressing combinations both WITHIN a system and BETWEEN systems. Here, talented junior Damien Anderson does exactly that at the recent Pan American Championships. Switching quickly and efficiently between positional pressure and Kimura and Back systems creates a chain of attack that quickly outpaces his opponent’s ability to defend to get the breakthrough.

Brothers in arms: Gordon and Nicky Ryan getting ready for ADCC World Championships in Anaheim California. Getting close now. Building a training camp to a peak is a delicate balancing act but having two studs like these in the room makes things a lot easier

The amazing story of Doug Pelinkovic: Often I am asked the questions, “I started Jiu Jitsu in my thirties - can I get to a good level?” “I work a busy job and have a family - can I get to a good level? “I never competed - can I get to a level where I can be competitive with champions?” Doug Pelinkovic is one of my senior black belts. He never competed until last year - his first ever Jiu Jitsu competition was the IBJJF world championships masters - he won gold in his weight division. This weekend he went into his third ever competition at the IBJJF Pan American games and win double gold - his weight division and open weight - almost all by submission. This despite being a highly successful Real Estate developer with wife and three sons and one of the busiest people I know. He did not start Jiu Jitsu until his thirties. I don’t have faith in many things - but one thing in which I have an unshakable faith is THE ABILITY OF HARD WORKING, HIGHLY MOTIVATED PEOPLE WITH A PLAN AND THE DISCIPLINE TO STICK WITH IT AND THE WISDOM TO MODIFY IT IF NECESSARY TO ACHIEVE AN EXTRAORDINARY LEVEL OF SKILL AND ACHIEVEMENT IN THEIR DOMAIN. Mr Pelinkovic is a great inspiration to all of us with this remarkable achievement over the weekend - a lesson to all of us as to what is possible when we stop telling ourselves why can’t do something and start telling ourselves why we CAN. Double gold in one of the toughest tournaments of the Jiu Jitsu calendar year in just his third ever competition - and best of all - where was he this morning at 6am after his big double victory? On his way to the basement for the morning class to help the ADCC team get ready. And where will he be tonight after a long day of work in the office? On the mat with me at his Bronx Jiu jitsu school for the late night workout. Extraordinary work ethics create extraordinary results - thank you for the inspiration Mr Pelinkovic 😊😊

Big congratulations to Keenan Cornelius - Open Weight No Gi Pan American Champion! Outstanding performance by Mr Cornelius yesterday to take gold at one of the years toughest competitions - The IBJJF Pan Ams No Gi in the toughest category - Open Weight - here in NYC. Mr Cornelius has been training hard in the basement with the squad here in New York in preparation for ADCC and wanted to test some of the new tricks and how they merge with his own highly developed game. He had some great submission victories along the way! Thanks also to Gordon Ryan for excellent cornering work - these two are training partners every day in the blue basement so know each other’s game well. Mr Cornelius is among the finest grapplers on the planet - it’s a testimony to his drive and desire to master a craft that he still seeks to add more to his already deeply impressive game and test it out in the toughest environments. Impressive work!

Take a breather: Probably one of the more commonly asked questions I get is - how can can increase my endurance during sparring? All kinds of people advocate all kinds of methods of improving endurance. In truth I see little carry over from increased cardiovascular training to mat endurance for athletes who are already close to their ideal weight. Obviously if you are well overweight some simple cardiovascular exercise that results in losing weight and improving fitness will be a big benefit. However, if you are already in good shape and still getting tired, chances are that the problem is more one of EFFICIENCY IN ENERGY EXPENDITURE than of a need for greater cardiovascular capacity. A simple insight that can have immediate beneficial effects on your endurance during sparring is LEARNING TO TAKE SMALL BREAKS IN THE ACTION as you spar. You don’t need to go one hundred percent at all times. Good players follow a pattern of hard work - rest - hard work - rest. This allows them to perform a task, get closer to a goal and then recuperate so as to repeat this pattern until the final goal is achieved. Jiu Jitsu is a positional game and there are many positions that offer a chance to take a brief rest and get your breathing and heart rate under control. Learn to identify safe zones where you can take a short break without great risk as you climb the ladder of position to your goal. Here, Nicky Ryan takes a short break in half guard top after a hectic scramble - this will enable him to re- energize for the next task of passing half guard.

Legs are like sex partners - two is always better than one: Controlling one leg in ashi garami is good, but your opponent will always use his other leg to defend the one you have trapped. That is why I always distinguish between the primary leg (the one trapped inside your ashi garami) and the secondary leg (your opponent’s other leg). Whenever possible you want to control BOTH legs as this will severely impact your opponent’s ability to use one leg to defend the other. In addition it creates an immediate SHACKLING effect where your opponent feels as though his two ankle are shackled together in a way that robs him of any athletic ability. This makes the task of CONTROL much easier - but it creates a problem for the act of BREAKING, as now you cannot attack both legs simultaneously, but rather you must release the secondary to attack the primary. This gives an opponent a window of opportunity to escape. LEARNING TO CLOSE THAT WINDOW TO THE GREATEST DEGREE POSSIBLE WHILST ACKNOWLEDGING THAT IT CAN NEVER BE TOTALLY CLOSED is the heart and soul of high percentage leg locking and a subject for a lifetime of study and refinement. Here, Garry Tonon ties up both primary and secondary legs and is planning on the transition back to the break

Know thyself: A big part of success both short term and long term comes from knowing your own game well. In the short term self knowledge helps you win today because you know what you’re good and where you have weaknesses - so that when you take on a tough opponent you play mostly with what you do well and avoid what you do poorly. In the long term, self knowledge will direct your training regimen. By identifying your weaknesses you can devote extra training time to them with the goal of making your current weaknesses into future strengths. So whether for today or tomorrow - self knowledge is a critical part of your success. We all look in the mirror once a day to check our physical appearance - how often do you look in your Jiu Jitsu mirror and take a hard look at yourself - do it more often and do it with more care and you will be better equip for the challenges of today and the future.

Shields up Captain...The human body is a rather delicate thing - but there are certain parts of our body that are quite robust. The elbows/forearms and the knees/shins are two fine examples. Both are exceptionally tough and can take a real beating with no ill effects. When it’s time to create a robust shield between you and your opponent - MAKE YOUR ELBOWS/FOREARMS AND KNEES/SHINS THE BASIS OF YOUR SHIELD. You can hold back anything your opponent can throw at you with these shields set in place and do so without suffering and be in good shape to counterattack. Learn to use your body in such a way that the tough parts of the body protect the delicate parts of the body and Jiu Jitsu will be a much more pleasant experience for you. Your shins and forearms are your shields in this sport. Just as ancient soldiers used their shields to protect themselves until they could launch their offense, so too you must do the same. Here, Nicky Ryan makes good use of his shins to hold off a spirited passing attempt.

Adversity and horror test a nations strength and fortitude
Memory and remembrance reveal a nations soul and spirit
NYC September 11, 2001
Gone but never forgotten 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Creation and destruction of space: Most of Jiu Jitsu is fought on the ground - as much the major dynamic between the two athletes plays out in TOP and BOTTOM position. It is crucial to understand that the top and bottom athletes have diametrically opposes general goals. From the top players perspective the whole game is to ELIMINATE SPACE between himself and his opponent. By getting past the legs and using gravity getting in close and tight is the best way to control movement and dominate the bottom player. From the bottom players perspective, the whole game is to CREATE AND MAINTAIN SPACE so that he can move under the body weight of the top player and launch effective attacks from bottom position. All attacks require MOVEMENT and movement is only possible from bottom position when there is space between you and the top player. This basic demand for the creation and destruction of space is the heart and soul of the ground grappling game. Here, Nicky Ryan works to eliminate space as the top passing player, while the inestimable Brian Glick uses frames and level changes to maintain space underneath. Learning to understand the nuances that underlie this classic battle between top and bottom player is a huge part of your development in Jiu Jitsu.

Using your head: The phrase “using your head” usually means to use your intelligence to perform a task better - that’s a wonderful ideal that you should use at every opportunity - but in this instance I’m talking about using your actual head (not brain) to perform tasks in grappling. Your head is an incredibly important means of PUSHING an opponent. When you use it is often frees up your hands to perform other tasks. You must actively seek to use your head whenever possible to move and control an opponent. A very big part of this sport is the PUSH/PULL DYNAMIC that underlies much of the game. Most people only push and pull with their hands and feet - give yourself a fifth pushing limb by actively using your head and you will have a big advantage over your four limbed opponent’s - now THAT’S Using your head! 😜😜

Aim high: The single biggest obstacle to the learning and improving process is LOW EXPECTATIONS AND STANDARDS AMONG THOSE SEEKING IMPROVEMENT. A huge part of realizing your potential in Jiu Jitsu and indeed anything else in life, is your ability to form a culture of high standards and great expectations around yourself. Days where you exhibit a “that’s good enough” mentality are days wasted. Always ask the better question - “is my performance of this technique good enough to win a world championship.” Just that switch in mindset from “is this good enough to get by?” to “is this good enough to work on a world champion?” Will immediately drive you to better performance of that move. THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS HIGHER PERFORMANCE AGAINST OTHERS IS HIGHER STANDARDS AND EXPECTATIONS WITHIN YOURSELF. Make a habit of comparing yourself to ever greater standards and you will soon see improvement in your technique

The foundations of your game and Learning new skills: The fastest learners of my approach to the game are invariably those who have a STRONGLY DEVELOPED FOUNDATION OF BJJ SKILL. So often students come to me and ask to learn advanced systems that i teach but lack overall competence in foundational skills and so struggle to learn the additional skills. Having a strong set of foundational skills makes the act of adding on new skills very easy on most cases. The body movement, conceptual understanding and sensitivity that comes with learning the sports foundations translate extremely well into the more exotic elements of the game at higher levels. So keep working hard on your fundamentals - there’s never too much practicing and refining the core movements and skills of the sport. Time spent this way will dramatically shorten the time taken to add on new skills later. Here, Keenan Cornelius, already extremely strong in foundational skills of back control, has an easy time adapting to the back system details we teach and getting them operational in a short time frame. Once you are secure in your foundations, you can do the same

I am very happy to announce the release of the latest installment of the GO FURTHER FASTER Jiu Jitsu fundamentals instructional videos series: HALF GUARD. BJJ Fanatics will be selling it and you can also use the link in my Instagram Bio. Half guard is one of the most important skill sets to develop and allows athletes of all body types and ages to work effectively from bottom position. Many forms of guard require a certain body type or movement quality, but half guard by its very nature allows shorter, slower athletes to form effective connections to an opponent and most importantly, GET UNDER THEIR OPPONENTS CENTER OF GRAVITY so that they can create tremendous instability and start sweeping even very tough adversaries. Check it out and see if it can help you get closer to your Jiu Jitsu goals!

Battles won and battles lost: When working from half Guard it’s important to understand that there are two major battles being fought, often at the same time - a battle for upper body grip dominance and a battle for lower body leg connection, balance and distance. It is very important to understand - YOU CAN LOSE ONE OF THOSE BATTLES AND STILL BE EFFECTIVE - BUT YOU CANT LOSE BOTH. Here, I have clearly lost the upper body battle. The athlete on top has secured far side underhook and cross face and so can pin my head and shoulders to the mat. Now the onus is on me to recognize that that battle is lost and start looking to win the lower body battle. The safest way to do this is via the most fundamental move in Jiu Jitsu - the elbow escape - IF YOU CAN WIN THAT LOWER BODY BATTLE YOU CAN TURN THE WHOLE SITUATION AROUND AND TURN YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY GRIPS INTO A LIABILITY. Learning to identify the two battles, the relationship between them and how to surrender one if the situation demands it and focus on the other is a big part of your development in the very important bottom half guard game.

Knowing your destination is half the battle: When you look at an average Jiu Jitsu match around half of the time is spent in what appears to be a hopeless tangle of limbs is in crazy inverted and back to front orientations that seemingly have little to do with combat. Yet in less than a second any one of those bizarre positions can be converted into a position that can result in broken limbs or devastating strangles. Some people do a better job of converting those strangle entanglements into winning positions than others - why? Probably the most important reason is that THEY HAVE A CLEAR SENSE OF WHERE THEY WANT TO GET TO which they can call upon in even the most confusing upside down, rolling double inversion and NAVIGATE THEIR WAY TOA FINISHING HOLD OR PIN. This is why you must develop a few favorite positions that become so hard wired in your consciousness that you can find your way to them from anywhere, anytime any place. Just as even the most confused and disoriented drunk somehow always finds his way home - so too a good Jiu Jitsu player will always find his way back to his favorite holds and pins and prevail among chaos. Keep experimenting until you find your natural favorite submission hold or pin that seems to fit you like a glove and practice until you can see a way to it from everywhere.

Guard passing and leg locks: A common sentiment in Jiu jitsu is that leg locks and guard passing are like oil and water - they don’t mix and you either do one of the other when on top and confronted by an opponent’s guard. This is absolutely not the case. Guard passing and leg locks actually compliment each other extremely well. The threat of leg locks often causes an opponent to play very cautiously with his legs and leg positioning making guard passing considerably easier. The threat of guard passing often causes an opponent to reach injudiciously with their legs and become very vulnerable to leg locks. The pressure and threat of one facilitates the success of the other. WHEN PLAYING ONE GAME DON’T BLIND YOURSELF TO THE OPPORTUNITY FOR THE OTHER. Here, Garry Tonon switches back into the legs after a hard passing exchange.

Distance control and half guard: One of the great problems associated with the use of half guard is that of DISTANCE CONTROL. Your opponent in top position will usually be looking to get right chest to chest contact and control your head and shoulders. If he can do so you will have almost no means of controlling the distance between yourself and your opponent for the simple reason that you will have no means of PUSHING WITH YOUR LEGS TO CREATE SPACE. Once an opponent get to half guard chest to chest, your legs can only PULL. One way to combat this problem is the use of an initial knee shield using the knee of your top leg positioned at the hip or sternum. This gives you what you need to control distance - the ability to use a leg to push and create space. This can be used to halt your opponent’s initial forward drive, and then to give your the space needed to come up with an underhook around your opponent’s waist that will create an attacking half guard position where your opponent will not be able to establish control over your head and shoulders. Used well, that knee shield can give you the attacking half guard you seek rather than strong passing position on top that your opponent seeks. As a general rule I like to position my knee shield at the hip when working without the gi, and at the sternum when I can reinforce it with my collar grip with the gi. Play around with the knee shield as a means of initially controlling distance so you can get the half guard positioning YOU want rather than the one your OPPONENT wants!

ADCC Camp: The squad is getting ready for the ADCC world submission grappling championships coming up in around three weeks in California. There have been some adjustments. Sadly, Ethan Crelinsten will be unable to go after qualifying by winning US trials due to an injury suffered during a positional sparring session. Accordingly, Nicky Ryan will go down to 66kg. Garry Tonon will take his place at 77kg, joining teammate Oliver Taza at that weight. Craig Jones will enter at 88kg. Gordon Ryan will enter at 99kg, Keenan Cornelius has joined the camp and will also compete at 99kg. Nick Rodriguez will enter at plus 99kg. ADCC Camp is a grueling affair. Everyone is training hard and working on the unique demands of this great tournament. It’s amazing to think how young all these athletes are and how they have the potential to do many more of these events as they continue to grow in knowledge and skill. Here they are battling it out on the mats - more again tomorrow 😜😜

Half guard and connection: One of the distinguishing characteristics of a tight half guard with an under hook wrapped tight around your opponent’s waist is the tremendous degree of CONNECTION it gives you to your opponent. Interestingly, this connection is easy even when your opponent is significantly taller and bigger than yourself. Contrast this with other guards - day closed guard - if you have short legs and your opponent has a thick midsection, it can be tough just to maintain a closed guard. In half guard you only have to get your legs around one leg, rather than his waist or shoulders, so making that tight connection is easy, even when there is a big height or overall size difference. Moreover, the very nature of the connection places you DIRECTLY UNDER YOUR OPPONENT’S CENTER OF GRAVITY so even time you turn left or fight it have a big effect on an opponent’s balance, making it a superb sweeping position. Because there is so much physical connection your body weight functions like an anchor upon your opponent’s body and dramatically SLOWS THE PACE OF THE MATCH DOWN as long as you maintain the position. This can be a real advantage when matched against a younger, faster, athletically gifted opponent, so half guard perfect for older or slower athletes who do better when the pace is taken down a notch or two. So if you are looking for a means of increasing your effectiveness from bottom position but feel that your mobility, age or body type may be a hinderance, look into half Guard as a possible solution to your problems. Many fine athletes have built a career around this great position - perhaps you can be one of them 😜😜

“Nicky...tell me that’s not the worst f**king excuse for an arm bar you ever saw in your f**king life...I could train a homeless crackhead with a missing foot and no fingers to do a better f**king arm bar than that...”

Give a little to gain a lot: Sometimes when beginners get a good position on an opponent they hold on so tight that the opponent cannot move at all. That’s not wrong - it’s a good thing to be able to immobilize an opponent. However, very often it is a good thing to allow your pinned opponent a little movement in a direction that can take you from a GOOD pin to a GREAT pin. Your opponent must move in order to escape. Oftentimes you can funnel their movement in directions that benefit you rather than him and make big positional gains as a result. Here, Nicky Ryan has released a little pressure to allow an opponent to begin moving into an elbow escape, but of course it’s a trap. The movement has created back exposure and a quick change of grips from Mr Ryan now creates a situation where he goes from good to great and gets a free ride to his favorite attacking position on the back. Next time you get a good position, experiment with releasing pressure in beneficial ways. You may well find that you too, can gain a lot by giving a little

The curious case of half guard: Here’s an odd thing - many of the most respected Jiu Jitsu authorities claim that getting to top half guard is one of the very best guard passing strategies in the sport and so advocate forcing your way to half guard as a superior passing strategy. Just as many respected Jiu Jitsu authorities claim that bottom half guard is one of the premier sweeping positions in the sport and so advocate actively getting to half guard whenever playing bottom position so that you can sweep an opponent. How can this be? How can the same position be seen as both the most desirable top position and at the same time the most desirable bottom position for the respective athletes? I am part of this seeming contradiction myself. I always encourage my students to actively work to get to half guard whenever they can and exploit its strengths as a passing position. Yet I also claim that bottom half guard is a great position to play for sweeps and submissions. How can you have it both ways? Much of the answer is bound up with THE CONTROL (or lack of) OF THE BOTTOM PLAYERS HEAD AND SHOULDERS. If the top player can pin the bottom players head and shoulders (usually through some variation of under hooks and crossfaces) then yes, it’s a superior passing position. If not, and the bottom player can move his head and shoulders as he pleases (usually by getting his own under hook to deny head and shoulder control to his opponent), then it becomes a very fine sweeping position for the bottom athlete. This fundamental element of control or denial of control of the bottom athletes head and shoulders determines much of the action in half guard. All the other battles you will face in this position, distance control, Kuzushi/balance, grip etc are most fought over either getting control of the bottom athletes head and shoulders or actively seeking to deny that control - depending on whether you are on top or bottom. Here, Georges St-Pierre looks to bolt down the head and shoulders of Gordon Ryan from top half guard. See in this light you can see how one position can be both the path to heaven and hell depending upon the outcome of the crucial battle for head and shoulders

Leg locks in MMA: So often I hear people say leg locks are ineffective in MMA. The very same criticisms (that you can lose position or get struck while attempting them or that the opponent could simply not submit and take a break and keep going) all apply to many other moves, but for some reason leg locks get singled out. Leg locks are no different from any other move. Done well, they can win you many fights, done poorly they get get you in trouble. As with any other technique it’s success or failure will come down to the precision and the context in which you apply it. Here is a very nice application of an inverted entry into the legs that culminates in a classic squad style outside ashi garami heel hook finish by @king_gozali son of @haimgozali This father and son MMA duo often come to NYC and train with myself and Gordon Ryan in leg kicking skills. It shows here as young Avi gets the fastest submission in Bellator Fighting Championship history with a spectacular heel hook! Focus on your technical prowess and develop wisdom in your tactical decisions and you will be delighted to learn that many moves that some disparage can be made a very effective part of your arsenal

One Jiu Jitsu - two paths: Two great combat athletes who took two very different paths with their Jiu Jitsu training work out next to each other. Keenan Cornelius works out next to Georges St-Pierre on a crowded mat in class today. One of the great features of Jiu Jitsu is the way the same techniques can be used in very different ways in very different arenas to get you to your own unique goals. Mr Cornelius took his Jiu Jitsu training towards grappling, Mr St-Pierre took it towards MMA - both became great champions in their respective domains. It fascinating to see such different athletes learning and performing the same moves but knowing each will have to find ways to apply them in very different contexts. Jiu Jitsu is a very malleable art that gives us a lot a choice in how we apply it. The foundations of the sport are broad enough that two entirely different careers can be lived while learning similarly next to each other just through adaption and the addition of other skills.

Hand control: The vast majority of moves in Jiu Jitsu require the use of the hands to form effective connection to an opponent so that the various moves can be performed. As primates, humans are hand-centric animals in all things - Jiu Jitsu included. As such, if we can control our opponent’s hands we can do a lot to shut down his offense. When you take on a dangerous gripper, make sure you pay attention to the possibility of shutting down his game by controlling his hands whenever possible. Just be sure that you do not do it in a way that makes you a negative player whose only concern is stopping the other fellow doing what he wants to do. Always take the action back in the positive direction of offense. So once you establish hand control - go into your attacks rather than just aim to frustrate an opponent’s offense at the hands. Here, Craig Jones does a fine job of thwarting a potential bodylock and is now switching to possible counter attacks - I am sure you can see some offensive possibilities starting to emerge out of the initial hand fight - Mr Jones certainly does!

Untying a knot: Have you ever had the experience of trying to untie a big and complicated knot? Sometimes there can come a point where you just get so frustrated that you just pull aimlessly on the two ends of rope knowing that it will only serve to make the knot tighter. Many of the situations you will face in Jiu Jitsu have a similar nature. Sometimes it’s so tempting just to yank and pull and push, even when the better part of us knows that it will have no effect. Learning to overcome our impulses and have the discipline to exercise the PROBLEM SOLVING side of our mind rather than the impulsive emotional side is a big step towards maturity in Jiu Jitsu. Next time you feel that urge to just apply force without a plan, stop yourself ask yourself the two critical questions you must address in these situations. WHAT IS THE PROBLEM I AM CONFRONTED BY? And WHAT WOULD CONSTITUTE A SOLUTION TO IT. Remember - it’s training - you can always stop and puzzle it out. Then the next time that knot ties up your game you will have the satisfaction of picking it apart and taking a straight line to victory.

Working for an angle: A foundational principle of Jiu Jitsu is to always seek some form of preliminary advantage prior to attacking. One of the best forms of advantage is ANGLE. If you can get away from being directly in front of opponents and instead get to the flanks, you will find a lot more success with many of your attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan works for angle from bottom closed guard. Constantly look to get your head off line and hips out to the side - often it will help to use an arm to grip inside your opponent’s leg and manually pull yourself around to an angle. Now it will be difficult for an opponent to use his weight and top position to control you - Indeed, if he tries to use weight this may even make things worse for him. Don’t settle for being held directly in front of opponents - work immediately for angle. Your opponent will have react to this threat - if he doesn’t you will have an immediate advantage - as he reacts you will find your attacking opportunities. Experiment tomorrow with making your first move every time from bottom closed guard just a simple shift to an angle and be prepared to work from there towards victory.

If you can extend a limb - you can break a limb: Good Jiu Jitsu players are always very wary of keeping their elbows and knees close to their torso. This makes it very difficult to apply joint locks to them. If you could get those elbows and knees moving out and away from the torso - the submissions would come a lot easier. One of the very best ways to do this from bottom position is Kuzushi (off balancing). We humans are hard wired to prioritize balance - so when we lose balance we get distracted from all other concerns as we try to right ourselves. That’s all the opportunity you need to enter into your joint locks. When working from bottom position - ATTACK HIS BALANCE FIRST AND HIS LIMBS SECOND and watch your success rate increase.

When the arms can’t get the breakthrough you seek - let your legs do the work: A fundamental feature of the human body is the discrepancy between our upper body which is weak and tires quickly, and our lower body which is strong and possesses remarkable endurance. So often we grapple predominantly with the upper body because it feels more coordinated and responsive than our untutored lower bodies. When attacking the back it’s good to take advantage of the precise movement and dexterity of the arms to apply our strangles. However, if our opponent has strong defensive hand fighting skills we often get shut out. That’s when it’s time for you to bring in the power of the legs. The best method is that of utilizing the incredible power of the triangle - USHIRO SANKAKU. This will quickly overwhelm your opponent’s hand defenses and often give you the victory.

In the majority of cases it is not so much any one submission attack that determines the outcome but rather YOUR ABILITY TO MAINTAIN A POSITION THAT ALLOWS YOU TO MAKE MULTIPLE SUBMISSION ATTACKS THAT CREATE WITHERING PRESSURE THAT BREAKS AN OPPONENT DOWN UNTIL THE FINAL SUBMISSION ATTEMPT GETS THE BREAKTHROUGH. This is the meaning behind “position before submission.” Here, Gordon Ryan gets close with a strangle - it’s not quite there - but as long as he can hold his position - it doesn’t matter as he can always renew the attack later - and each successive attack has a higher chance of breaking through as your opponent fatigues and must take greater and greater risks to make an escape. Remember always that the greatest submission hold of them all is PRESSURE OVER TIME and that the basis of pressure in Jiu Jitsu is position.

Attack their balance first and the real attacks become easy: There is nothing more difficult than trying to attack an opponent set in a strong defensive stance - his body feels like an impenetrable fortress and your attacks bounce harmlessly off. THE EFFECTIVENESS OF AN OPPONENTS DEFENSE IS DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO THE EXCELLENCE OF HIS STANCE - If you can break his stance you can attack with a high probability of success. The best way to break his stance is to challenge his balance. Generating Kuzushi (off balancing ) is this the key to successful attacks from bottom position. Break your attacks into two stages. Deliberately attack his balance to subvert his stance. Then launch your real attack as he is trying to recover balance and has no stance to protect himself. Breaking of balance does not have to be big, sometimes a small momentary twitch is enough. Anything big enough to cause a momentary reaction or adjustment will do the trick. Then go immediately into your real attack before he recovers. Here, Craig Jones, in the midst of his ADCC preparation camp in the blue basement does an excellent job of upsetting his opponent’s balance - this will make his follow up attack easy

I should be focused on the action...ADCC is getting close after all and it’s a well applied leg lace that’s getting pretty darned tight...but I just can’t get my eyes of that mustache...it...it’s...magnificent

Gordon Ryan comes back to the big stage: Great to see Gordon Ryan back center stage at @kinekticgrappling team event last night representing @bjj.fanatics It’s been a long hard road back after a severe knee injury leading to surgery and a long layoff. He is still far from one hundred percent but the rule set of this event allowed him to play a more passive sitting game (easier on the knee than a standing wrestling rule set) so he wanted to get out there and compete again. The event began with @lachlan_giles singlehandedly eliminating one team who did not appear to have kept up with the leg lock revolution in the sport over the last seven years. Then it was on the to the tougher team in the second round led by @sonnench Nick Rodriguez @nickyrod247 showed his developing submission skills with a nice heel hook win, then @gordonlovesjiujitsu stepped in and finished off the remaining three opponents in short order to finish a crushing victory for @bjj.fanatics Now we have to see if Mr Ryan will be ready for the pressures of ADCC competition - the opponents will be the best in the world and the rule set demands much more standing grappling and you have to compete over two days - we shall have to see if his knee is ready for that kind of pressure yet - one thing is for sure - no one has put in more work to get ready against the odds than Mr Ryan and I’m certain that if anyone can do it - it’s him. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Stop movement first - break second: Ever tried to hit a moving target with a punch? You quickly learn it’s a lot a harder than hitting a stationary one. So too in grappling. Breaking or strangling a moving opponent is usually significantly more difficult than one who has been immobilized. So take your time to first focus on IMMOBILIZATION and only when that has been satisfactorily achieved, switch to the task of breaking/strangling. There is a reason why some submission holds have a higher success rate than others - its most due to the ability of that hold to immobilize an opponent. The juji gatame arm bar being used here by Georges St-Pierre uses your legs to pin your opponent’s head and shoulders and as such makes it quite easy to pin even very strong opponents. That’s one of the main reasons why it is the most successful of all the arm locks in competition. So when it’s time to okay the submission game - divide your task in two. Focus first on restricting your opponents movement. Only then go on to the subsequent task of finishing. You may not be able to do it every time, but when you can you will be impressed by the results.

Do you know the future? What if I told you that Jiu Jitsu gave you the ability to see into the future? Would you think I had lost my mind (actually you have thought that already 😂😜)? In fact it does - to a limited extent. If an opponent stands in front of me there is very little i can tell you about what his future actions will be since I have no physical control over him. However, when you put your opponent into a controlling hold, the manner in which you hold and control him greatly limits his movement options and you can often make very accurate predictions about his future movements as long as you have that measure of control over him. It is this limited insight into the future that makes genuine control possible. When you know ahead of time what your opponent will do, combat becomes a LOT easier. For all your favorite holds and locks, you must have the main defensive responses mapped out and your reactions to those responses figured out shared of time. As your knowledge of his limited options and your responses to this options becomes more elaborate you are starting to construct a systematic approach to Jiu Jitsu that will enable you to control an opponent surprisingly easily. Here I have a secure ashi garami variation locked in place that limit an opponent to just a few defensive movements that I know well and each of which can be countered the second they are employed. As options are eliminated over time an opponent can be restricted to fewer and fewer options until they simply run out and submission is the result. This is the kind of approach you ought to aspire to in Jiu Jitsu

If you want to make a strong man feel weak - get his hand behind his back: There are lots of strong people out there - but no one feels strong when their hand(s) are pinned behind their back. Whenever working against strong people it is crucial to create conditions where your opponent works from some kind of mechanical disadvantage and you from advantage. So for example, if you wrestle his arms with your legs, you will have an advantage, if your get behind him you have a big mechanical and tactical advantage. One of the best is to get your opponent’s hand behind his back. Probably the most well known application of this principle is the use of Kimura - a fine means of both controlling and submitting opponents. Once you get the hand behind the back - keep it there until the job is done. Here, Craig Jones does a good job of exactly that as he goes through training and preparation for ADCC 2019 in the blue basement. While there are many effective ways to utilize Kimura even with the hand in front, all the most devastating arm breaking finishes and controls rely upon getting the hand behind the back as early as possible and keeping it there. The difference in strength in an arm between situations where the hand is in front of the torso versus behind the back is huge. Anytime you get a chance to put that hand into a position of weakness behind the back - take it - and soon you will be taking arms as trophies

Take some heat off your submissions and see what happens: In a competitive setting you want to make sure all your submissions take effect as quickly and completely as possible so as to ensure a decisive and convincing end to the match. In the gym however, I often encourage my students to leave a little slack in their submissions so that their training partner can employ an escape - you then must counter that escape and work back into either a reapplication of the original submission or a switch to a new one. As you gain in skill and confidence you can extend this process further and further until you can work with elaborate chains of submission attacks upon even multiple escape attempts. Just as a cat plays with a mouse in order to practice its hunting skills - it’s a good thing periodically to play with your opponent whilst locked into a submission. Don’t worry if he escapes occasionally - that’s all part of the fun. Training in this way will prepare you for elite opponents who have very well developed escape skills and it is unlikely the first submission attempt will get the breakthrough. In this situations the skill of flowing from one submission attack to another on an artfully defending opponent will be of great value to you. Here, talented junior Damien Anderson releases just enough pressure on a juji gatame arm bar to be able to maintain the threat, determine the direction of his opponent’s movement and set up subsequent attacks - great training.

Practicing offense is fun - but it’s the practice of defense that will determine how well you do against strong opposition: The sport of Jiu jitsu is evenly divided between offensive and defensive skills. It’s natural to want to focus more on the former as it is generally more fun and glamorous. Be aware however, that it will be your mastery of defense that will prove the more important when you come up against very good opponents who will be attacking you at least as much as you attack them (and in many cases - a lot more). While defense may not be as sexy as offense - those are the skills you will draw upon in a crises - and let me tell you - when you go against someone your own level or better - Jiu Jitsu is very much a sport of crises management. Make you you devote AT LEAST fifty percent of your training/development time to defensive skills. Those skills may not be as much fun to train but whatever unhappiness that training time may cause you is nothing compared with the unhappiness of losing a bout due to underdeveloped defensive skills. Balance your training time accordingly.

A relaxed body moves better and moves longer than a tense one: Jiu Jitsu is a competitive combat sport - so its only natural that you should physically tense up when the action begins. Be aware however that excessive physical tension is a potential pitfall that has sent many of us into early exhaustion and failure. Keeping a loose and relaxed demeanor whilst grappling in a competitive match is a difficult thing to do. Moreover, we can’t be loose all the time. There are times when maximal tension may be needed to finish a move. In addition we don’t want to be so loose that you flop around ineffectively. Finding the right amount of tension vs relaxation at the appropriate times is a long term study. Understand however, that it’s an IMPORTANT study, as your ability to relax when you can will be a BIG part of what determines your endurance levels in long tough matches - much more so than your cardiovascular fitness level. Start out by learning to relax yourself whenever you disengage with your opponent. Then start to expand upon this by learning to relax when caught in a pin or inferior position. Then try to get more relaxed even in the neutral positions so that you spend the majority of a match in a relatively relaxed demeanor. Soon you will notice your ability to move fluidly in response to your opponent’s movements improves, along with the length of time you can engage with a tough opponent. Look how relaxed Nicky Ryan looks as he enters a training partners open guard - getting to that level of relaxation in sparring takes time, but the potential benefits make the effort worthwhile

ADCC Camp continues: “You! In the red rash guard! That was literally the worst ashi garami entry in the two thousand year history of grappling. You two look like a drunk lobotomized orangutan trying to f**k a three legged donkey - start again!” 😂😂

He who controls the hands controls the beginning of every exchange: In the vast majority of grappling encounters ENGAGEMENT WITH THE OPPONENT BEGINS WITH THE HANDS. As such, if we can dominate our opponent’s hands as we first engage with them in a given scenario, we will have a significant advantage for the rest of the ensuing action. Make a habit of fighting to control your opponent’s hands and you will soon it is much harder for opponents to control and attack you. This advance pertains to some scenarios more than others. For example, escaping a mounted pin is not really dependent upon hand control and so it is much less important here; but other scenarios, such as defending and escaping rear mounts, are very much dependent upon good control of your opponent’s hands. Identify the scenarios where hand control is crucial and experiment with different grips and strategies to dominate your opponents hands - you will be impressed by how often this strengthens your initial defense and offense.

Unity is strength: It amazing how often we sabotage our own attempts to succeed. In Jiu Jitsu the most common form of self sabotage is poor application of our physical strength in which one part of our own body fights against the efforts of another part of our own body. ITS HARD ENOUGH TO FIGHT ANOTHER PERSON WITHOUT HAVING TO FIGHT YOURSELF AS WELL! Make sure that when you go to apply your strength into a move that you body works in unison rather than in opposition. Look at this beautiful application of the juji gatame arm bar by Garry Tonon. Note that both his legs point in the same direction, working in harmony in the best direction for success. If your feet point in different directions in this situation you are beginning to make the efforts of one leg clash with another and power begins to be diffused or lost. You can learn a LOT about how to make your whole body work harmoniously during drilling. Don’t just robotically perform the moves - CONSTANTLY EXPERIMENT WITH YOUR APPLICATION OF FORCE AND DISCOVER HOW YOUR BODY CAN BEST WORK AS A HARMONIOUS UNIT TOWARDS A COMMON GOAL. You will soon see benefits in both success rate and endurance on the mat.

Sometimes the real focus of the problem isn’t what you think: Very often in the sport of Jiu jitsu seems obvious what the problem you are confronted with as you grapple ; but deeper analysis reveals that it was something quite different. Let’s use the arm bar (juji gatame) as an example. On the surface juji gatame is all about your opponent’s ELBOW, as ultimately your goal is to be able to apply breaking pressure to the elbow joint that forces my opponent to either submit or face the consequences. Once you begin studying juji gatame however, it becomes clear that central problem you are confronted with is that of HOW WILL YOU CONTROL YOUR OPPONENTS HEAD AND SHOULDERS WITH YOUR LEGS as you will never able to apply breaking pressure to the elbow until the head and shoulders are pinned by your legs. Once you change your focus from the elbow to the head the move becomes much more successful until you come to see the final step of juji gatame - breaking the elbow - as little more than an afterthought. Your initial battle is always that of your legs versus your opponent’s head and shoulders. It is of the greatest importance that you take all your favorite moves and analyze them in this fashion. Constantly ask yourself what the primary problems for that move are - you will be surprised how often what are commonly thought of as the primary problems are really secondary problems and the real issue are quite different from what many believe.

When the action starts - have a plan of attack: It is very difficult to impose yourself upon the outcomes if you simply drift into the action when sparring starts. While you can never predict the entirety of any given match - YOU CAN ALMOST ALWAYS PREDICT THE OPENING SEQUENCES OF A MATCH BASED UPON YOUR RESPECTIVE STANCES AND MOTION. What happens in those opening sequences will often have real effects for the duration of the match - so impose yourself in the opening exchanges - KNOW WHAT YOU WANT AND HAVE A PLAN TO GET IT. Base that plan on your strongest moves, and then ask yourself what kinds of grip, stance, position etc you need to make them work and come out ready to impose those upon your opponent.

Myopia - one of the biggest problems I see developing submission grapplers run into is the problem of MYOPIA. We see an opportunity for a given submission hold and we lock ourselves into tunnel vision that only lets us see one possibility for attack. When you fight skilled opponents it is extremely unlikely that every attempt you make at a submission will succeed - on the contrary, the majority will fail. It is crucial therefore, that you develop early the habit of SEEING BEYOND THE INITIAL ATTACK AND ASK YOURSELF EVEN AS YOU ARE SOING YOUR UTMOST WITH THAT INITIAL ATTACK “WHAT WILL I MOVE ONTO IF THIS ATTACK SHOULD FAIL?” Only by training yourself to constantly ask this question and see beyond the move you are currently attempting can you make yourself move from attack to attack in combinations that even the toughest and most skilled opponents will struggle to keep up with. A WELL APPLIED SUBMISSION HOLD WILL NEVER BE AS DANGEROUS AS A WELL APPLIED SEQUENCE OF SUBMISSION HOLDS. Here, Craig Jones is working hard with a nice sequence of submissions beginning with an initial Kimura lock but can branch out easily towards both upper and lower body submissions. Your body already knows the submissions - now train your mind to see beyond the present one and on to the future ones. Once you replace myopia with long distance vision you will become a far more dangerous adversary to your opponents.

Every move has components - work hard on the components: Very often I have students tell me that that find a given move that they want to learn extremely difficult to perform and wonder if they should simply quit that move and go on to something else. Remember always that every move in the sport is made up of a components. Simple moves have fewer components and complex ones have more. Whenever you are struggling with a move - BREAK IT DOWN INTO ITS COMPONENTS AND FOCUS ON MASTERING EACH COMPONENT INDIVIDUALLY AS A MEANS OF ULTIMATELY MASTERING THE MOVE WHEN YOU FINALLY STRING ALL OF THE COMPONENTS TOGETHER. Using this method you will keep a sense of progress that will keep you practicing and allow you to get around any temporary feelings of failure. Here, talented junior squad member Nick Rodriguez works a component of an entry into cross ashi garami that will finish in our favorite leg locking position - inside sankaku - it can be a tough one when you begin, but breaking the move down into its components always helps the learning process. Even if you cannot currently perform the whole move to your satisfaction - you can often walk away from a training session with a sense of satisfaction and progress if you master a component of that move - knowing you are step closer to your goal.

Testing the limits of your game: We all have our limitations. What determines your level is just your capacity to find and expand those limits over time. Determining where those limits are currently set is the result of testing yourself in hard training - but expanding those limits is a question of spending time at the edge of your current skill level. It’s never a comfortable place to be and very often you go further than you can handle and fall - but it’s only there that growth occurs. Here, Gordon Ryan tests the limits of his defense with Georges St-Pierre. When you can stop worry about RESULTS of training today and instead start worrying about the EFFECTS of training five years from now - your growth will really begin.

Keep your body warm, your mind calculating and your heart cold: Everyone has their own mental approach to Jiu Jitsu and in truth I have seen great champions with every possible mindset from extreme fear to extreme confidence - so I don’t believe it’s possible to say there is any one correct way to mentally enter a match. I will say this however, if your inclination is, as mine is, to see Jiu Jitsu as first and foremost a game of knowledge and decisions and problem solving - then I recommend to keep yourself in an emotionally neutral and cold blooded state. Why? Because we do our calculations and problem solving best in a psychologically calm state. Imagine trying to solve a complex math problem whilst angry and agitated and you will get a sense of what I mean. Better to wait an hour, calm down and focus and then solve the problem. So if you favor a knowledge based/problem solving approach to Jiu Jitsu, train yourself to work in a state of relative calm. If you prefer a more intuitive, combative approach, it may well be better to go in hot blooded - champions have arisen from both - but know your own game and base your mental preparation upon that.

Drilling as an ideal: We spend a lot of time drilling - there is a simple question that fascinates me - IS IT WORTH IT? Is it possible that we would be better off just sparring the entire workout instead. I usually have about 1/2 - 2/3 of my workouts as drilling and 1/2 - 1/3 sparring - is it possible that all that is a waste of time and we would be better off just 100% sparring? I have many reasons why I am a strong advocate of drilling as an essential part of a daily Jiu Jitsu workout and why I believe it translates into faster progress for most (not all) students. One of the simplest is the argument that WE ALL NEED AN IDEAL TOWARDS WHICH WE AIM OURSELVES. If we have a strong mental ideal IT CAN HELP PULL OUR PHYSICAL BODY CLOSER TO THAT MENTAL IDEAL - EVEN IF WE NEVER REACH IT. We all know that in most cases we look a lot smoother and more competent when we drill a move on a cooperative training partner than we ever do in a live sparring situation against a competitive opponent. Drills let us get close to the IDEAL of what we OUGHT to look and feel like when we perform a given move - an elusive ideal to strive for. We know very well it won’t look that smooth and clean in a competitive match - BUT THE HIGHER OUR STANDARDS IN DRILLING, THE HIGHER OUR PERFORMANCE IN A MATCH. This is one of many reasons why I favor drills as a substantial part of your overall training time - the ratio may change depending on circumstances sometimes drills are only 1/4 of the workout, but always they are there. I do believe that different people need different ratios and that there are some who do better almost exclusively with sparring and for whom drilling does little good; but for the vast majority drilling technique in some way (obviously there are many types of drills) is a key part of faster progress. Here, Georges St-Pierre gets close to an ideal front triangle (omote sankaku) as a way of improving performance when we switch to live sparring.

Indirect attacks: When you first begin studying Jiu Jitsu you learn your first basic attacks - an arm bar from guard, a strangle from the back, a guillotine etc. In beginners class you see an opportunity and you try to apply the move. You do DIRECTLY to the move from observing the opportunity. As your opponent’s learn the same moves you are learning, they soon learn the warning signs that you are entering into a move and they start reacting defensively to frustrate you. Because you are going directly to the move, this is easy for them to do. This is when the great law of KNOWLEDGE AND ATTACK comes into play. THE MORE DEFENSIVE KNOWLEDGE AND SKILL YOUR OPPONENT POSSESSES, THE MORE YOU MUST EMPLOY INDIRECT ATTACKS TO DISGUISE YOUR REAL INTENTIONS TO A KNOWLEDGEABLE OPPONENT AND BREAK THROUGH THEIR DEFENSE VIA MISDIRECTION. You must learn to get your opponent reacting to false attacks/direction in order to break through with real attacks. THE LESS SOPHISTICATED YOUR OPPONENT - THE MORE DIRECT YOUR ATTACKS OUGHT TO BE. THE MORE SOPHISTICATED YOUR OPPONENT, THE MORE INDIRECT YOUR ATTACKS SHOULD BE. So if I am attacking someone with great lower body defense and I want the right leg, I may well fake an attack to the neck, as he reacts to the fake, go into another fake attack to the left arm, as an the opponent skillfully reacts to this, enter into the REAL attack on the right leg that I wanted all along. Moving in this way i am much more likely to break through sophisticated defenses than simple direct attacks. Making a habit of housing your favorite attacks in the context of INDIRECT approaches will greatly raise your success rate against talented opponents

The default principle: A critical part of your pathway to strangulation mastery is understanding and enacting the DEFAULT PRINCIPLE. This is the idea that you must constantly be alert for a strangle opportunity every time you get in position to do so. All you need to attack with a strangle from the back is a separation between your opponent’s chin and his chest greater than the width of your wrist - if you see that - GO FOR THE STRANGLE! If not - engage in hand fighting to trap arms and force an opening. You will be amazed how often strangles will present themselves to you on a platter if you are simply mindful of the conditions of opportunity. So often I see athletes on the back with the neck wide open and they are locking their own hands or fumbling for an opponent’s hands when victory is right there in front of them. When the opportunity is there - STOP WHATEVER YOU ARE DOING AND GO BACK IMMEDIATELY TO THE DEFAULT OPTION - SINK THE STRANGLE! Here, blue belt phenom @nickyrod247 uses a variation of the default principle (going over the jaw rather than under) with devastating effect. Remember always that the mind leads the body so applying this default principle is always first the mental act of recognition of opportunity followed by the physical act of strangulation - so train your mind to stay alert and immediately identify opportunities when they arise.

Aussie Invasion: The squad is in preparation for ADCC 2019 and a big part of the team is our Australian friends spearheaded by @craigjonesbjj @izaakmichellbjj and @ethanthomasmma Though I was born in the United States, I was raised in New Zealand and my family lives in Australia - one of my regrets in life is that I was never in a position to help grappling as much in Australasia as I was here - so having these Aussies here in the basement full time is a great way to atone for this 🤗😜🤗 Here they after a great day of training - a true cast of characters who represent Australia’s incredible sports heritage in the world of grappling. 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺

Let the incredible power of combinations take your game to a new level: Imagine you knew literally nothing about punching. You found a competent boxing coach and in your first lesson he taught you one punch - a basic jab to the head. At the end of your first class you are excited to have a little knowledge of one punch. In your second class he teaches you another punch - a straight rear hand to the head. Now you are pleased to know a little about two punches. On your way home you reflect on your progress and wonder how many punching attacks you could use on an opponent. You know TWO punches, but you can throw FOUR attacks off just this tiny amount of knowledge you have. You know two moves - jab and rear straight - but you can use them in four ways - jab, rear straight, jab followed by rear straight and rear straight followed by jab. So you in your second class you DOUBLED the number of punches you knew, but QUADRUPLED the number of different blows you could throw by doing so. THIS IS THE MAGIC OF COMBINATION ATTACKS IN A NUTSHELL. Even a small number of moves can be worked together in combinations to create limitless combinations that opponents will find extremely difficult to stop. Now add a few more moves, double jab, jab to the body, rear straight to the body - and suddenly the number of different striking attacks rises EXPONENTIALLY as the combinations of a few similar moves creates massive numbers of potential attacks that even very skilled opponents will really struggle to keep up with. EXACTLY THE SAME LESSON APPLIES TO GRAPPLING. My students have some the highest finishing rates in Jiu Jitsu, yet Ninety percent of our finishes come from combining just six submissions holds. You must learn to make the incredible potential power of COMBINED ATTACKS work in your favor. Don’t just drill and spar with single attacks in mind but always ask what will be your follow up if this should prove insufficient - start with it as a mental habit and then it will become a physical habit that will greatly improve your success rates.

Step outside of yourself and observe your game: One of the most factors in your progress in Jiu Jitsu is SELF KNOWLEDGE. If you can make an honest and accurate assessment of your current skills set then you can plan accurately what you need to improve and add to it to become the athlete you want to be. It is difficult to this, especially when you first begin the sport - you simply don’t have the knowledge yet to accurately assess your level and what else needs to be learned. In time however, you will learn the skill of SELF ASSESSMENT. Let me tell you that this skill is crucial for your progress. One of my primary functions as a coach is to ASSESS MY ATHLETES AND MAKE DECISIONS WHAT THEY NEED TO CHANGE TO GET TO IMPROVE THEIR PERFORMANCE. If you have an outside pair of eyes to do this for you - wonderful - it will be a great benefit. If you don’t - you will have to learn to do it yourself. Start writing down the things you believe you do well against your peers. Compare this with a list of things you think would make you perform better and write down the reasons WHY you think those additions are well suited to you as an individual and will be good additions to your current skill set. Now write down the skills you think are necessary but which you perform poorly. Compare and contrast the lists of skills that you do well and those which you perform poorly. What is the correlation between the two? Searching yourself in this way can teach you a lot about yourself and your current game - and the more you know about that, THE MORE YOU CAN MAKE BENEFICIAL CHANGES. Keep an eye on the game, keep an eye on your role models - but don’t forget to keep an eye on yourself...

We all have our favorites: A huge part of your progress comes from acquiring and developing your FAVORITE MOVES (tokui-waza). These are the moves that suite your body type and personality more than any others and with which you show early promise. Remember you are involved in a sport where A PERFECT APPLICATION OF ONE MOVE WILL WIN A MATCH, BUT THE IMPERFECT APPLICATION OF A HUNDRED MOVES WON’T DO A DAMN THING. When you acquire some favorites that seem to work for you - preferably high percentage moves - DEVOTE A BIG PART OF YOUR TRAINING TIME TO ENLARGE AND PERFECT YOUR UNDERSTANDING AND PERFORMANCE OF THISE MOVES. How good you get at those favorite moves will determine how good you get at the sport overall. Only once you have some heavy hitting main weapons can you branch off those main attacks to add new directions to your game. Let your opponent react to your main weapons and defeat him on his reactions to the strong initial threat - that is the pattern of good Jiu Jitsu for most people. Here, Georges St-Pierre works one of his grappling tokui-waza - Kimura. It is the mainstay of his submission offense and the move from most of his other grappling attacks branch off. What are yours? Are you happy with them? What would you like to add in the future?

You can’t close all the doors...and neither can your opponent: A big part of what makes Jiu Jitsu so fascinating, so frustrating and so uplifting; is the fact that our job is to shut down our opponent’s ability to move - TO CLOSE ALL THE DOORWAYS TO ESCAPE SO TO SAY. So if an opponent is using an under hook to escape, we can close that door by pommelling in our own under hook. If he is turning his head inwards to begin an elbow escape we might close that door with a strong cross face - and so it goes on - the better we get at Jiu Jitsu, the better we get and closing off all the routes to escape - closing each door as our opponent tries to open them. Understand however, that you can only shut so many doors at once - YOU CAN NEVER SHUT THEM ALL SIMULTANEOUSLY. As you focus on shutting down one area, ANOTHER DOOR MUST OPEN SOMEWHERE ELSE. This means that NO MEANS OF CONTROL IN JIU JITSU CAN EVER BE COMPLETE. The ramifications of this are deep. It means first, that we must move on from control and actual FINISH opponents, because you can never hold a skilled opponent for ever as eventually they will find an open door. Second, if you are the one being controlled, NEVER LOSE HOPE. There is an open door there somewhere no matter how hopeless the situation might seem - you just have to find it. This simple insight of the impossibility of closing all the doors of escape is both a source of frustration and hope. Frustration because you can never completely shut down an opponent’s ability to escape your control (and so the onus is on you to go forward without delay to the finish). Hope, because no matter how shackled you might feel, you always know that somewhere there is an open door for you to walk through.

Getting good at offense quickly - learn to get to the back - the remarkable case of Nick Rodríguez: So often I am asked how one can improve more rapidly in Jiu Jitsu. Well, there is no avoiding the mastery of fundamentals, especially the skills of escape and guard retention as the necessities for fast progress. Nonetheless, I can give you some simple advice for faster progress and results in one part of your game - offense. Devote a LOT of your training time mastering the various routes to your opponents back. The back is the single most dominant finishing position in the sport. If you want to boost your finishing rates in a hurry - focus on getting there quickly and efficiently. There are many routes to the back - you can go under the arms, around the arms, through the legs, over the back and shoulders etc - and once you get there your opponent is one hundred percent defensive. Nick Rodríguez is a blue belt with around a years training. This weekend he went into a crazy tournament where he took on four opponents (four against one) including a black belt and brown belt and beat all four. His favorite tactic for getting finishes against people with far more experience than him? You guessed it -TAKE THE BACK. He is a legend in the blue basement for a quote he gave us one day as we talked after class “If I can get behind an opponent and lock my stranglehold anywhere below his eyebrows - it’s done!” 😂😂 Make a point of training your pathways to the back. I am certain you can hasten your progress if you do.

Set the wedges, levers and fulcrums first - apply force second: One of the most common mistakes I see among developing grapplers is a tendency to get the opportunity for a submission and jump in with maximum force as soon as they enter the submission hold. This usually results in large amounts of energy expenditure and is a quick route to exhaustion and frustration. Take a little time to set your immobilizing wedges and your breaking fulcrums and make sure to seize the longest lever you can and only then apply your force. You will immediately see results. The submission holds of Jiu Jitsu are devastating when properly set, but feeble when poorly set. Get it right first - then your application of force will almost always get the results you seek. Remember that with submission holds it’s not how fast you get there that counts, but rather, what effects you can generate ONCE you get there. So give yourself a little time to adjust, a little time to refine and you will generate a LOT more force through the proper use of lever and fulcrum than you ever could through muscular exertion. Here, Gordon Ryan has set his wedges and fulcrums superbly and the result is another devastating leg lock - and another win. Follow the same philosophy and you can do the same

If you look at all the champions of Jiu Jitsu for the last twenty five years - a clear idea emerges - NO ONE BODY TYPE OR PERSONALITY TYPE DOMINATES THE SPORT. You see tremendous variation among the champions. The beauty of Jiu Jitsu and indeed, all combat sports is that they allow every one of us regardless of our physical or psychological type to find our own path to excellence. I have seen tall, short, thick and thin athletes become champions. I have seen both the nervous and the fearless, the confident and the anxiety ridden get to the top. Your job is to find one path among the myriad options that Jiu Jitsu offers that works for you - if you can and you can work hard to master it, you can achieve great things

When working arm bars from underneath a strongly resisting opponent - get your hips pointing in the same direction your opponent is facing: The juji gatame arm bar from guard is among the most popular and effective moves in the sport. Using it well is very instructive for many other skills as well. An important general principle in combat sports is to avoid head to head confrontations that pit your strength directly against that of an opponent - this approach will never allow you to defeat stronger opponents. The idea is to seek to align your forces with his as much as possible so that you DEFLECT and REDIRECT force rather than CONFRONT IT HEAD ON. In the case of the classic arm bar from guard, a good way to ensure you do this is to go beyond a ninety degree pivot when in the arm bar position. Get your hips pointing forward in the same direction your opponent is facing (or at least as close as you can). In this way your legs and hips will push in the same direction as your opponent’s defensive downward/forward stacking force. This addition of your force to his will enable you to easily off balance him from bottom. An opponent out of balance is easily attacked and finished or toppled over into a more compromised position from where you can renew the attack. Whenever you find your arm bar attack from guard stopped by your opponent’s defensive reaction - TAKE THE EXTRA TIME TO LINE UP YOUR HIPS WITH HIS DIRECTION AND APPLY THE FORCE OF YOUR LEGS IN CONCERT WITH HIS. Your success rate will greatly increase and his defensive reaction will aid you rather than stop you.

When attacking with ashi garami - make your first movement hip to hip: The single most common cause of failure for all submission attacks is too much space between the points of connection between your body and your opponent’s - leg locking from ashi garami is no exception. I always counsel my students when attacking with ashi garami based leg locks - make your first movement a scoot of your hips to your opponent’s hips - everything else comes after this. NO OTHER ADJUSTMENT OR COMPENSATION YOU CAN MAKE CAN ATONE FOR FAILURE TO CLOSE DISTANCE AND CONNECT PROPERLY - so make that your first priority. Here, Garry Tonon has done a fine job of getting close and staying close despite strong resistance. This makes all subsequent actions towards a break easier and more efficient - resulting in a perfect lock and victory.

Direction of force: Every move in Jiu Jitsu requires the application of force. The single biggest determinant of how successful that application of force will be is the DIRECTION you apply the force. SMALLER FORCES APPLIED IN THE APPROPRIATE DIRECTION WILL ALWAYS OUTPERFORM BIGGER FORCES APPLIED IN FAULTY DIRECTIONS. For all your favorite moves, study the optimal directions to apply forces when performing those moves. Understand that those directions can change mid-move and you may well have to make adjustments on the fly. Here I am demonstrating an INCORRECT direction of force for a popular pinning move or of front headlock (can you see why it is incorrect? What would be a better direction?) Knowing the difference between sound and unsound direction of force will often make the difference between success and failure. Next time on the mat you feel your application of force get stopped by a tough opponent - EXPERIMENT WITH CHANGES IN DIRECTION - sometimes even a small change will make a big difference. When you do you will have taken a big step towards the Jiu Jitsu ideal of GETTING MORE DONE WITH LESS EFFORT.

Daylight: The main means by which we immobilize opponents in Jiu Jitsu is to place wedges around their body and reinforce these wedges with weight (if we are on top) locked limbs (closed wedges) or muscular tension. A big factor in how effective these immobilizing wedge will be is the degree of connection between them and your opponent. The saying I always use is this - IF YOU CAN SEE DAYLIGHT BETWEEN YOUR WEDGES AND HIS BODY - YOU ARE MAKING HIS ESCAPE EASY. Whenever you go to lock an opponent down - look for daylight (space) around your limbs and his body. Try always to fit your body tightly into his - space is your enemy here. Make your body initially soft and flexible so that you can contour your body around his and there is no daylight between you and him. Then when it is time to apply to move puts tension through your body long enough to get the job done. This is an easy thing for a camera to reveal or a friend to see - often you can see it in yourself from your own perspective - WHENEVER YOU SEE IT - ELIMINATE IT - because it is the downfall of many an attempted move.

Varying your intensity levels: A truly vital skill in grappling is that of learning to VARY YOUR LEVELS OF PHYSICAL INTENSITY ACCORDING TO THE DEMANDS OF THE SITUATION YOU ARE IN. Probably the single most common problem I see in beginning students is an inability to change and regulate the intensity of their physical effort - they just go at maximum intensity the whole match. The inevitable result is that that quickly tire and fade. The other extreme is athletes who play so loose that when it’s time to pull the trigger and hit a move, are so loose that it is simply ineffective. Somewhere in between these extremes is the happy medium you seek. As a general price of advice - only employ maximal muscle contractions in short bursts and only when actually looking to perform a given move. At other times stay in a state of relaxed focus. Not that even in those short bursts of maximal muscular exertion - KEEP BREATHING and don’t use muscular strength to compensate for positional errors - get your body in good position first and THEN apply your strength. In this way you can play a hard physical game without exhausting yourself to a point where you become ineffective. Look at this picture. Georges St-Pierre has gotten into a potential finishing position and is thus ready to apply some serious force - the strain shows. Next to him Gordon Ryan has gotten to a dominant position but does not yet have a finishing hold in place and so takes on a very relaxed demeanor. The contrast between them is striking and instructive - one situation demands muscular tension and exertion, the other allows relaxation on the understanding that this will preserve your strength for a time when it is needed. KEEP MONITORING YOU STRENGTH/TENSION OUTPUT AS YOU ENGAGE YOUR OPPONENT. Know when to be tight and when to be loose and you will defeat many opponents on endurance alone and the rest by having the physicality in reserve to finish that potential match winning move.

Each of the main main moves of Jiu Jitsu has its own special character - learn to understand that character and you will go far: There is no question that certain moves in Jiu Jitsu have prominence among the countless moves of the sport. Some are what we often call “high percentage” That is, they work repeatedly across all body types, personalities, weight categories, ages, both sexes, at all belt levels. So for example, in every tournament you will see examples of high percentage moves such as single leg, double leg, elbow escape, guillotines, juji gatame arm bar, triangles, Kimura etc. These high percentage moves must be the basis of your game. Understand that all of these moves have their own character. They are strong in some ways, weak in others. They have good points and bad points. Developing a deep relationship with each of these moves is a huge part of your Jiu Jitsu journey. Just as you have your favorite friends and you understand the character of each very well, so that you have a friend who you know is probably not the best one to bring with you to the museum, but is your go too for back up in a bar brawl, another who is rather boring but perfect as a study partner before a big exam etc. you associate each friend with an appropriate context and they can help you through life - so too with your Jiu Jitsu moves. Each will do well and help you in a certain context and poorly in others. Your job is to understand the moves so well that you know not only the move - BUT THE CONTEXT IN WHICH TO APPLY THEM. Know your favorite moves as intimately as your closest friends, understand their good and bad points and they will never let you down

Orientation: Our goal is always control that leads to submission. Once you get a submission hold locked on, the defensive reactions from your opponent can be very strong indeed - after all, nobody wants to be the guy that tapped out. One of the more common defensive reactions to some of the major submission holds are turning or spinning escapes. These have an immediate effect - you will have to follow an opponent through three hundred and sixty degrees of rotation (sometimes several times) and STILL BE ABLE TO ACHIEVE THE BREAK OF STRANGLE AT ANY TIME DURING THAT ROTATION. As such, you must train yourself to be able to finish REGARDLESS OF THE ORIENTATION YOU FIND YOURSELF IN. We usually train our submission holds only in conventional or standard orientations, but the reality is that in a competitive match you will have to finish in many unconventional orientations. For all your favorite submissions make your You practice your finishes through a full three hundred and sixty degrees so that you don’t have any surprises when it’s time to finish upside down or back to front in a match. Here, Nicky Ryan follows an opponent through two complete turns and into a third and finishes on an unconventional side with a different form of ashi control against a strongly resisting opponent - the result of practicing finishing from anywhere in dynamic movement.

The magic of cross collar grips: In all aspects of Jiu Jitsu - THE BEGINNING OF CONTROL IS GRIP. When you go to grip an opponent you have a vast array of options, particularly when using the gi. Understand that each of the major grips offers a different type of control. Arguably the most important form of control is HEAD CONTROL. This is due to the basic nature of the human body. We humans are essentially a skull connected to a spine and everything hangs off that - so if you control the head - you control everything else by default. The gi is a rope around your opponent’s neck and offers a tremendous degree of indirect head control. As such, you want to take advantage of it as much as possible. When you first begin your Jiu jitsu journey I often recommend to use the cross lapel grip as your DEFAULT GRIP in most neutral positions on the ground (in standing situations straight collar grips are usually preferred) - if you are ever unsure where or how to grip in neutral positions, just go cross collar and in the majority of cases it will work well. As you gain in gripping expertise you will learn that gripping higher or lower can have important effects and that strangulation can be added to control. Take time to study the incredible potential of this foundational grip - it’s value will extend throughout your entire time in jiujitsu.

Climb - don’t jump: When we go to engage our opponent we must have a goal in mind - usually it is one of our favorite attacking positions. Now you don’t get given your favorite attacking positions for free - you have to EARN them. Often I see people trying to jump immediately to their favorite grips/positions. This can work on occasion, especially against opponents who don’t know your game and who you can thus surprise. However, once your tricks are shown and the surprise lost, you won’t get there anymore. The best way to get to your favorite attacking positions is to CLIMB THE BODY AND WORK YOUR WAY REMORSELESSLY TOWARDS THEM. Start with the part of your opponent’s body that is closest to you - usually his hands/wrists - and work up the arms to the torso/legs. The general pattern is that YOU START WITH THE EXTREMITIES AND WORK YOUR WAY TO THE CENTER OF MASS/TORSO. Avoid skipping steps especially when the opponent is skilled. CLIMB HIS BODY AS YOU WOULD A ROPE - WE DON’T JUMP TO THE TOP OF THE ROPE BUT CLIMB HAND BY HAND TO THE TOP. This approach will give you great connection and control - the hallmarks of good Jiu Jitsu. Make it your modus operandi and watch your performance improve!

The battle for space: In Jiu Jitsu the aims/goals of the top athlete are usually diametrically opposed to this of the bottom athlete. The goal of the athlete in top position is typically to CLOSE DISTANCE, GET TIGHT TO HIS OPPONENT AND RESTRICT SPACE. There is a reason for this. Almost all the bottom moves of Jiu Jitsu require some amount of space between you and your opponent to work - take away that space and you shut the bottom man down into a totally defensive game. The athlete on bottom wants the opposite - he must constantly fight to CREATE AND MAINTAIN SPACE so that he can play effective offense from underneath. The number one weapon for the bottom athlete is this war over space is the use of FRAMES - positioning your limbs as braces to hold an opponent at distance long enough to thwart his attempts to smother and pin you. Understanding and implementing the constant battle between the bottom athletes attempts to use frames and the top athletes attempts to negate them is a big part of your development. Your ability to improvise frames with your hands, forearms, elbows and your ability to combine these with appropriate body movements are the basis of one of the most crucial skills in the sport - GUARD RETENTION. The interplay between you ability to FRAME WITH YOUR ARMS and RECOVER WITH YOUR LEGS will determine your ability to retain guard and an aggressive passer. Here, Craig Jones and Gordon Ryan battle over frames in the blue basement - the outcome of this battle will almost always determine the outcome of the battle overall.

The foundation of your game: The essential nature of Jiu Jitsu is that it is built around the idea that your first responsibility is to REMOVE THE DANGER OF THE WORST CASE SCENARIO. The worst case scenario is always that of an opponent getting past your legs and into superior upper body pins from where he can pick and choose his attacks whilst you can do nothing in return. As such, the foundation of your Jiu Jitsu journey must always be the two skills of GETTING OUT OF PINS and STOPPING SOMEONE GETTING PAST YOUR LEGS AND PINNING YOU. Thus it is the skills of PIN ESCAPES and GUARD RETENTION that you must master first. Without these prerequisites all the other skills of Jiu Jitsu are of little practical value. You may have a fine arm bar or triangle, but if your opponent brushes past your guard and pins you you simply will never get a chance to use it. Even worse, if you know you struggle to get out of pins or your guard is easy to pass, you will stop YOURSELF from using your arm bar and triangle for fear of the risk of getting pinned if it does not work. So whenever beginner students or students with a confidence issue (afraid to pull the trigger when opportunity presents itself) come to me for advice on what they should focus on first, my answer is almost always - PIN ESCAPES and GUARD RETENTION. These two skills will be the foundation upon which you can build a game that can take you far. Without them the best you will achieve is a hit and miss Jiu Jitsu and as your opponent’s get better - far more misses than hits. As long as they can’t pass your guard you will always be capable of offense from bottom position. Ironically it is your defensive skills that will determine the reach and extent of your offensive skills. Take pride in being UNPINNABLE and UNPASSABLE (impassable) - only then will you be able to achieve your final goal of attacks that are UNSTOPPABLE

Guard retention instructional video released! The second installment of the BJJ FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER - GUARD RETENTION video has been released today. The guard position is the foundation of the entire bottom game in Jiu Jitsu. Given that there will always be times when we find ourselves underneath bigger, stronger and more aggressive opponents (or opponents who simply have more developed takedown skills than ourselves) it is prudent to spend at least half of your training time in bottom position. If you are a beginner or smaller it is wise to spend even more time than this as the likelihood of being in bottom position is even greater. The first two skills you need to master in Jiu Jitsu are PIN ESCAPES - because when you begin you will inevitably be pinned in inferior position by your more experienced opponents - and GUARD RETENTION - because if they can’t get past your legs and pin you they are going to find it extremely difficult to control you and finish you. They will never be able to get to the preferred top pins or behind you from where most of the best finishes occur. The guard is both your sword and shield when in bottom position. You need to be able to GET TO IT by escaping pins and KEEP IT through retention skills. If you can do so OPPONENTS WONT BE ABLE TO CONTROL YOU AND YOU WILL BE ABLE TO CONSTANTLY ATTACK THEM FROM UNDERNEATH - and that’s how bottom game must be played. So never neglect your training of pin escapes and guard retention - those two skills have saved more Jiu Jitsu players from losing situations and created more winning opportunities from underneath tough opponents than all the others put together. If you are interested in my instructional video the link in is my Instagram bio or you can order at @bjj.fanatics 😊

Getting it right: The sport of Jiu Jitsu is one of the most technically demanding in all of sports. A submission that was 99% correct fails as badly as one that was 5% correct. There is a lot of heartache over moves that got close - but failed. Interestingly, the cause of failure is usually something very small. That is why such a premium is put upon small technical details in Jiu Jitsu because they are the difference between almost winning (but losing) and winning. IN A SKILL WHERE THERE IS ONLY SUCCESS AND FAILURE AND ANYTHING LESS THAT COMPLETE SUCCESS IS FAILURE - EVERYTHING DOWN TO THE SMALLEST DETAILS HAS TO BE CORRECT. The number of high percentage submissions in Jiu Jitsu is small - I really only focus on twenty, and most of my time is spent on only six systems of submissions which form the core of our arsenal - the course of your study must focus on the DEPTH of your knowledge of a few moves. So work hard to amass those match winning details. When a fleeting opportunity arises before you against a tough opponent they will be the difference between triumph and frustration

Knowing what you are fighting against is half the battle - Guard Retention: There are few skills in Jiu Jitsu that are more important for success than guard retention. If someone passes your guard you are now one hundred percent defensive and you won’t be able to get back on the offense until you recover your guard. In a short time limit match this may mean that half the match time is lost based on that one mistake. Moreover, now your opponent is ahead on points and no longer feels compelled to engage and as a consequence you will have to push the action to catch up - never easy on an opponent who is not engaging. Guard retention is among the more difficult skills to teach to students. I always like to begin by clearly outlining what an opponent actually has to do to pass your guard. In fact it is not an easy process. He must complete five sequential steps
1 - Break whatever grip/connection you have to him sufficiently to be able to move independently of you
2 - get an angle
3 - close distance and bypass your legs and get past the line of your hips
4 - lower his level to get chest to chest (or in some cases knee to stomach)
5 - hold you in a pin with one shoulder to the floor for three seconds That’s a lot of work! Your job as the athlete retaining guard is to fight each one of those sequential steps as they occur. THE FURTHER INTO THE SEQUENCE YOUR OPPONENT GETS THE MORE DIFFICULT THE TASK OF RETENTION BECOMES AND THE MORE RISK YOU WILL HAVE TO TAKE TO PREVENT THE PASS. By breaking down the act of passing into these sequential steps, students can more easily identify what they must do to stop an opponent and when they ought to be applying a given defense. Once your retention game has a sense of DIRECTION you can take away the mad scramble elements that often detract from many beginning athletes attempts at guard retention and skillfully hold off even a determined passer - and when you can HOLD a guard, you can ATTACK and FINISH from guard - and that’s what Jiu Jitsu bottom position is all about!

Craig Jones Kimura: Craig Jones was victorious last night at @kasaigrappling July 4th event. He won with a beautiful interplay of Kimura and back attacks. He has been working hard in the blue basement this last month and next week the ADCC 2019 camp begins and he will join the squad for the full camp in preparation. Kimura is among the most fascinating holds in grappling. It functions in the grappling game in a way similar to the knight on the chess board. Just as the knight moves in a very different manner from all the other pieces on the board and can thus be used in very unique ways to deliver attacks that no other piece can attempt, so too, Kimura enables unconventional attacks. Any time an opponent reaches for you from underneath Kimura is possible. It is one of the few upper body moves you can reliably employ whilst still engaged in an opponent’s guard - as the squad has shown many times - an once locked, you branch off in many directions - the back being a squad favorite 😜 Well done Mr Jones! This weekend he takes on UFC heavyweight behemoth Anthony Rumble Johnson in a very interesting match up then he and the squad juniors team up for world championship preparation

Happy 4th of July!! Wishing you all the best! Remember always the deepest lesson of our nations birth - NEVER UNDERESTIMATE WHAT A FEW FREETHINKERS WITH A VISION, A PLAN AND THE DRIVE AND COURAGE TO ENACT IT, CAN DO. They started with nothing and started a revolution that changed the world forever - you can use the same attitude and revolutionize who you are and change yourself forever...🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

The Iron Law of Speed vs Control: When we go to engage with an opponent, a basic choice have to make is THE SPEED OF OUR OWN MOVEMENT vs THE CONTROL WE HAVE OVER OUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT. There is an iron rule that comes into play here that has deep ramifications for our game. You have to make a choice between speed and control - You cannot have both at the same time. The more you emphasize the speed of your own movements the less you will be able to control the movements of your opponent. Since Jiu Jitsu is a sport that primarily emphasize control above all else - it is typically a slow paced game in comparison to other grappling sports such as wrestling and judo. Note that all the fastest moves of Jiu Jitsu, for example a flying arm bar, are among the least controlling and need speed and surprise to get the win before our opponent can react defensively. The slowest moves of Jiu Jitsu - the dominant pins - where minutes can go by with very little movement are the most controlling. This iron law of speed and control is something you must ponder when building your own game. Both can be highly successful. It is also quite possible to use both at different times and in different contexts. For example, standing position is inherently less controlling than ground positions and thus speed plays a much greater role in success for most athletes. You might play a speed based game standing but a control based game on the floor. Both speed and control are wonderful attributes for combat athletes to develop - but learning to understand their relationship and how that relationship will impact your game is a big part of your Jiu Jitsu journey.

When strangleholds and joint locks join forces: The submission holds of Jiu Jitsu are broadly divided into JOINT LOCKS and STRANGLES. The former are an attack upon your opponent’s body, the latter an attack upon your opponent’s consciousness. Both are devastating weapons. There are a few occasions when you can bridge the divide and make them work together as one. Arguably the best example of this is the triangle (sankaku). Anytime you lock up a triangle of any type upon an opponent you always have the option of adding a lock to your opponent’s wrist, elbow or shoulder as well. The effects of this can be devastating as typically the defenses to the strangle tend to open you up to the joint locks and vice versa, so that the opponent is given the devils choice between getting strangled vs getting broken. Here, triangle master Gordon Ryan shows a fine example of a front triangle (omote sankaku) combined with an arm lock action (juji gatame) to create a terrible predicament for his opponent. Look for this every time you attack with triangles of all types and begin to exploit the potential of both strangles and joint locks at the same time!

Two different approaches to submission: I have always taught Jiu Jitsu as the art and science of control that leads to submission. When it is time to enter into submissions, understand that there are two general methods. The first is to emphasize SPEED OF ENTRY. The idea is to catch your opponent in a moment of vulnerability PRIOR TO HIS ABILITY TO SET UP STRONG DEFENSES. The second is to get to a completed dominant position first, your opponent recognizes the danger of the position and sets up strong defensive apparatus in response to the threat, and you employ a STEP BY STEP DISMANTLING OF HIS DEFENSES TO GET THE BREAKTHROUGH. The first relies upon your ability to sense OPPORTUNITY and have the speed to get to the prize before your opponent can construct defenses. The second relies upon your KNOWLEDGE OF THE MAJOR COUNTERS TO YOUR THREAT AND YOUR ABILITY TO OVERCOME THEM. If you wish to maximize your potential in the use of submission holds - you must gain expertise in both methods. The dynamic nature of sparring and competition will provide you with many opportunities to use the first method and snatch submissions in the midst of the action. As you develop strong positional skills you will get opportunities to also employ the second approach. Note that the first approach relies mostly upon your PERCEPTION. YOU MUST TRAIN YOURSELF TO SEE OPPORTUNITY AND ACT IMMEDIATELY UPON IT. The second relies more upon knowledge of PROCEDURE and a methodical dismantling of defensive structures. The best students are always those who can double their chances by using both with equal efficacy. Here, Nicky Ryan employs a methodical step by step approach using our back attack system, but as you have seen so often, he also excels at snatching strangles in the midst of scrambles. Play them both and watch your submission game take a jump forward !

Guard retention: One of the most exciting aspects of learning Jiu Jitsu is that of developing strong attacks with submissions and sweeps/reversals from bottom guard positions. Most people believe that in any combat situation a person in top position will have an advantage over an opponent underneath them. It is very eye opening to a beginner to see how powerful certain bottom guard positions can be if used well. However, EVEN THE BEST ATTACKING ABILITIES FROM BOTTOM POSITION WILL BE OF LITTLE VALUE IF YOU CANNOT MAINTAIN A GUARD POSITION LONG ENOUGH TO ACTUALLY PUT THEM INTO OPERATION. The bottom game of Jiu Jitsu is entirely predicated on the idea that you must be able to engage your opponent with your LEGS (Guard) If you are to be effective. If your opponent quickly passes your legs you can’t do anything from underneath until you recover your legs back between yourself and your adversary. As long as you have connection of your legs to your opponent or least alignment of your legs with your opponent, you can play an offensive game from bottom, but the moment he passes your guard, you are 100% defensive. As such, the ability to hold a guard position for extended periods of time against resistance is the single most important skill in building a foundation for offense from bottom position. While it may not have the sex appeal of submissions and sweeps, you won’t be submitting or sweeping anyone from underneath if they pass your legs - so when it comes to developing bottom guard skills - EVERYTHING STARTS WITH RETENTION. Only when you have that skill will you be able to constantly attack and play an offensive game from bottom position. AS LONG AS YOU HAVE YOUR LEGS/ HIPS POSITIONED BETWEEN YOURSELF AND YOUR OPPONENT YOU ARE A THREAT TO HIM - AS SOON AS HE PASSES YOUR GUARD YOU ARE NOTHING TO HIM BUT A TARGET. Work hard on those unglamorous but essential retention skills - they will provide more value to your bottom game than any other and create a foundation upon which you can build a truly impressive set of bottom offense skills

The greatest vulnerability of the human body - the back: The human body is entirely set up to deal with threats directly in front of it. The further around the body you go, the less well it can deal with any threat. That is why ANGLE is such a cherished commodity in all combat sports. The ultimate angle is to be directly behind someone. There are many ways to get an advantageous angle - in grappling sports probably the most successful route is to get control of, and then move outside of, your opponent’s ELBOW. While there are other very effective routes to the back, it is probably fair to say that domination of the elbow is the royal route to the back in grappling sports. Learning to get control of an opponent’s elbow when you are in any dominant or even neutral position, and getting a position outside of it, is a great thing in Jiu Jitsu, as you now have a clear path to the back. SHOW ME ANY NEUTRAL POSITION IN JIU-JITSU AND I WILL SHOW YOU A POSITION WHERE, IF YOU COULD SLIDE OUTSIDE YOUR OPPONENTS ELBOW, IT WOULD NO LONGER BE NEUTRAL BUT DOMINANT. learn to look for elbow control at all times and look to use that control positively get getting your body outside and past your opponent’s elbows and I promise you that you will soon be scoring more back points than you ever did previously. Here, Nicky Ryan, young master of the back, climbs skillfully around an opponent’s elbow from bottom guard. Guard is a neutral position - but once the elbow is beaten it becomes highly advantageous. Just a few seconds after this photo was taken he had successfully applied a strangle.

Start with head and hands: One of the most important concepts of grappling is that of CONNECTION. Only when you form some sort of physical connection to an opponent can you begin the process of controlling an opponent’s movement in ways that lead to submission (there are some ways to affect an opponent’s movement without touching them (feints, motion etc) but this is a different set of skills). Note immediate a general rule - THE MORE CONNECTION YOU HAVE WITH AN OPPONENT THE GREATER DEGREE OF CONTROL IS POSSIBLE. So as a general rule as we grapple an opponent we are constantly seeking to get good position with greater amounts of body contact in order to maximize control. However, this process of seeking greater connection must have a starting point - and the vast majority of cases, CONNECTION BEGINS WITH THE HEAD AND HANDS. Good head position and strong hand fighting skills are a BIG part of success and one which you must start practicing until they become instinctual. Your head and hands are the basis of your defense in grappling and if you can gain some sort of advantage with them it will start your offensive cycles that can lead to victory. SET YOUR HEAD AND HANDS PROPERLY AND THE REST OF YOUR BODY WILL HAVE A MUCH EASIER TIME GETTING ADVANTAGEOUS CONNECTION.

When you have strong submissions in your arsenal - as long as you have a heartbeat and time on the clock - you’ve always got a chance: One of The greatest things about submissions is that they can turn an entire match around in a moment. Regardless of what has transpired already in a match - no matter how far behind you are on the scoreboard - a submission overcomes everything and can give you the win. One of the greatest favors you can ever do yourself is thus to train deeply in submission skill. It will be your equivalent of a KO punch. Submissions make you dangerous and at a deeper level, they create a sense in you that you always a chance of victory no matter what. Here, blue belt junior Nathalia Santoro finds herself down 9-4 in a wild match with just seconds on the clock. Training with back master Gordon Ryan pays off as she locks in a strangle on the buzzer to take a great win. Nothing gets us through adversity better than a sense of hope - and strong submissions create a very strong sense of hope indeed because they are the one weapon that can instantly overturn the entire narrative of a match so far and give you victory out of defeat.

What comes next? If you can count on one thing for the rest of your time in Jiu jitsu it is this - every opponent you face will strive to resist every attack you make upon them. ACTIVE INTELLIGENT RESISTANCE is the fundamental feature of all combat sports and what makes them so challenging, so frustrating, so rewarding - and so effective. How well you do in Jiu Jitsu will come down to one thing - HOW WELL DO YOU DEAL WITH YOUR OPPONENTS RESISTANCE IN COMPETITIVE SITUATIONS? A great first step is to begin with a question. For all your favorite moves, list the most common responses (usually a very manageable number) and list a strong follow-up move to enter into when your opponent stymies the initial move. Just this simple act will greatly improve your performance on the mat. NEVER THINK IN TERMS OF SINGLE ATTACKS BUT ALWAYS THINK IN TERMS OF CLUSTERS OF ATTACKS so that as resistance escalates you can automatically go around that resistance into a follow up attack. Look at this photo of talented squad junior Frankie Rosenthal beginning to lose control of a nice initial triangle attack - where would you go from here? How long did it take you to formulate an answer to the question? Your two answers to these questions will say a lot about your current ability to deal with resistance and go on to victory.

The hardest skill for beginning students to learn - Guard retention: There are many skills that a student first beginning Jiu Jitsu must start to learn. While none of them are easy to apply on a resisting opponent, there is one that always seems to be especially difficult - this is the skill of maintaining your guard (keeping your legs between you and your opponent) as your opponent works to pass your guard (get past your legs and into an upper body pin). Nothing really prepares you for this. While some physical attributes such as flexibility help to a degree, they won’t allow a beginner to hold off a more advanced training partner for even a respectable amount of time. This is not good news, as THE ENTIRE BOTTOM GAME OF JIU JITSU IS BASED AROUND YOU ABILITY TO GET TO GUARD AND STAY THERE LONG ENOUGH TO MAKE EFFECTIVE ATTACKS. I always felt that guard retention was probably the most poorly taught subject matter in Jiu Jitsu. Too often people with excellent guard retention are seen as physically talented, as though physical attributes were the main reason why they were good at guard retention, rather than having a sound game plan and set of skills, tactics and knowledge that made them effective. So what can we do to improve this situation? I believe the first big step in the right direction is to begin teaching guard retention in a way that reflects the way the game is actually played. Guard PASSING is among the fastest and most dynamic aspects of BJJ. There are constant feints, push/pull action/reaction movements, switching sides, combined attacks etc. In this fast moving atmosphere where you can go from being safe and comfortable and then one second later be in total crisis mode with an opponent almost past your guard, it pays to have a guard retention methodology that reflects this dynamic nature. As such, I greatly favor a conceptual approach that gives useful, broadly applicable rules of behavior in response to guard passing threats that are loose and flexible enough to be workable in fast changing and chaotic situations. This is a big topic and I will be coming back to it quite often as it will determine how successful you are in bottom position on the mat

The versatility of front headlock position: one of the most commonly occurring positions in all of submission grappling is the front headlock/guillotine position. From feet to floor, top or bottom there are so many ways to enter into this position whether as a reaction to an opponent’s move, or as a proactive entry that we initiate ourselves that it is almost inevitable that it will occur on multiple occasions in the course of a match. As such, it must be part of your game. The good news is that there are many fine stranglehold’s that can be done from there - many guillotine and kata gatame variations - all of which can turn a match in your favor in a very short time frame. Here, developing junior @drewthewickd_mma uses a nice sequence that begins as an arm in guillotine and transitions to a high elbow guillotine attack from top position as the changing circumstances of the scenario unfold. This ability to get quickly to a controlling front headlock and then use that control to move through all the many potential strangleholds from there is a truly valuable combat skill that you can use every day you train.

Thinking versus unthinking action: In combat sports there is often a need for very swift action and no time for thinking. So for example, if an opponent quickly shoots in for a takedown there is often no time to assess the situation and make a reasoned decision as to how to respond. In cases like this you must train to develop HABITS that kick in without thought the moment the danger arises. Automatic action is thus always a big part of combat sports and you must train yourself to develop good habits that you will automatically apply should the situation arise. Then there are many other situations where there is a considerable amount of time to respond to a tricky situation that you have gotten into. In these situations, reasoned problem solving thought is the way to go. Here you can take the time to avoid a rushed and ill considered action and think things through to solve a puzzle. As a general rule, the demand for quick and automatic reaction with good reaction speed is mostly seen in standing position where the overall pace and the speed of the major techniques is high. In ground grappling the pace slows considerably and there is often time to figure out solutions to problems as you grapple. Your training must reflect this. Develop good habits in response to the faster moves of the sport so that you can reflexively perform the correct response to a quick attack with no need for slow thinking. Drill these counters until they become automatic. When response time is a priority those habits built through repetition will be worth their weight in gold. When you are tangled up down on the floor, go the opposite route - take the time to slow things down and engage conscious thought to problem solve. Using both these approaches in the appropriate contexts will be of great benefit to your performance on the mat.

Amazing night for the juniors! Last night some of the junior students went out to compete at @riseinvitational and at @thirdcoastgrappling @frankrosenthal11 won a fine victory to retain his Rise title. @katerinaleontyeva has to tremendous submission victories, one via heel hook and one via high elbow guillotine to show her developing mastery of leg and front headlock systems. @drewthewickd_mma won with a savage guillotine that rendered his opponent unconscious - I’ve always said that when people visit the basement the thing that shocks them the most is the effectiveness of my students front headlock/guillotine attacks - everyone expects them to be good at legs and back attacks - but the power of their attacks from front headlock is a nasty surprise. Meanwhile, down south @heysonnyy won a thriller via stranglehold in the last second of the match to show the progress of the junior female squad members. Also incredible coaching work by @garrytonon and @gordonlovesjiujitsu who used their own competition experience to help the juniors through the same types of challenges they faced years ago at a similar point in their own careers. Amazing work!! The submission rate in their matches is extraordinarily high - a great testimony to their hard work and progress and a great example for all of my readers to follow. SET YOUR GOALS HIGH, SET YOUR DEMANDS UPON YOURSELF FOR EXCELLENCE IN TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT EVEN HIGHER - STICK TO THE PROGRAM AS LONG AS IT GARNERS GOOD RESULTS AND MAKE CHANGES IF IT DOES NOT - AND SOON YOU WILL BE HAVING SIMILAR SUCCESS 😊😊

Making resistance work FOR you rather than AGAINST you: The fundamental feature of all combat sports is working in a competitive setting against a resisting opponent who is actively trying to defeat you as you try to defeat him. This means that every move you attempt upon him will be met with strong resistance. The natural tendency we all have when we encounter strong resistance is to TRY HARDER and if that fails, QUIT THE MOVE. Learning to go beyond this “try harder/quit” approach is one of the biggest developmental stapes you will have to take. Many never take this step and leave the sport frustrated and disappointed. You must learn to start seeing RESISTANCE AS OPPORTUNITY rather than as a barrier. Every act of resistance has a DIRECTION OF FORCE. When you can read that direction of force you can start to use it to your advantage by adding a second move that goes in the SAME DIRECTION AS YOUR OPPONENTS RESISTANCE. This creates a spectacular effect where your opponent’s strong resistance suddenly compliments your new move and an effortless follow up occurs. Here, Gordon Ryan goes hard to his right for a sweep variation I invented many years ago to allow powerful sweeps out of underhooks and arm lock attacks. His opponent, Dillon Danis has done a good job of setting his hips against the strong right side attack, but as a result will be easy to move back the other way. Gordon Ryan did exactly that - elevating left to enter into a cross ashi garami heel hook - unfortunately time ran out before the heel hook could be finished but the lesson remains. For all your favorite attacks you must be able to launch a strong initial attack that creates a big defensive reaction and then have a small set of complimentary moves in the opposite direction that will enable you to flow WITH resistance and get resistance working FOR you instead of AGAINST you.

Every match or fight you will ever be in, from the greatest to the least important, from your daily training matches to a world championship final - will be a STORY - like any story it has a beginning, middle and end - the great question will always be: will you simply be a CHARACTER in that story? Or the AUTHOR of it? Jiu Jitsu gives you the ability to IMPOSE A PLOT LINE on every match you partake in. You know the script. Top position plot line? Takedown, pass the guard, work through a hierarchy of pins that create sufficient pressure to get to the end - submission. Bottom plot line? Get your legs between you and your opponent, keep them there long enough to attack and either finish with a submission from underneath or sweep him over and get on top and switch to top position plot line. JIU JITSU CAN ALLOW YOU TO BE THE AUTHOR OF THE SCRIPT OF EVERY MATCH IN WHICH YOU PARTAKE. Before a match or fight even begins it gives you a great script with which to work - it becomes your job to impose it upon the characters and setting in which you find yourself.

The Greatest Of All Time: What an amazing thing to see my old friend Roger Gracie here in the blue basement teaching a seminar here tonight! Mr Gracie is teaching all week here in the New York area. The only seminar not yet completely sold out is the Big Saturday seminar at the new Upper West Side RGA @renzogracieuws Check with them for a spot because it will sell out quickly! Mr Gracie was unquestionably the greatest Jiu Jitsu competitor of all time and is also a truly superb teacher - he gives incredible insight into his seemingly simple, yet very deep and unstoppable game. The days when Roger Gracie would come to class here during his MMA career and during build ups to big grappling events were some of the best memories I have over my career and it’s incredible to see how he has created himself into a truly great teacher with a great school in London. If you want to see what the best looks like up close - see if you can get a space in his remaining seminars!

BJJ Fanatics @BJJ.fanatics just released a fun video free on YouTube that Bernardo Faria, Gordon Ryan and I made giving a general overview of Jiu Jitsu as a systematic approach to unarmed combat. It’s always fun working with these guys and talking about the sport and martial art we all love. Check it out - see if you like it. Perhaps it will give you a slightly clearer view of what we aim towards in a way that will make it easier to see for yourself or to explain to friends and family who have no knowledge of the sport.

The best ideas in life are simple: When you first come into Jiu Jitsu it is natural to get a little overwhelmed at the seemingly endless number of moves and variations of those moves. It can seem an impossible task to learn them all and become even proficient in them, forget about master them. Always remember that the underlying PRINCIPLES and CONCEPTS of Jiu Jitsu are much much fewer in number and very simple to understand. Jiu Jitsu is divided between a TOP GAME (when we play on top of our opponent) and a BOTTOM GAME (when we play underneath an opponent). When it comes time to play bottom game the central directive of Jiu Jitsu is very simple - ALWAYS SEEK TO KEEP YOUR LEGS/HIPS BETWEEN YOU AND YOUR OPPONENT TO MAXIMIZE YOUR OFFENSIVE AND DEFENSIVE POTENTIAL - IF YOUR OPPONENT GETS PAST YOUR LEGS, RECOVER LEG POSITION FIRST BEFORE YOU ATTEMPT ANYTHING ELSE. That is the whole bottom game of Jiu Jitsu in a nutshell. All the myriad techniques and tactics you will learn over the years in bottom position are just an expression of that statement. The reason for this is also simple. It is based upon a fundamental truth of the human body. HUMANS ARE MASSIVELY STRONGER IN THE LEGS/HIPS THAN THEY ARE IN THE UPPER BODY. This fundamental strength/endurance asymmetry between our upper and lower body provides the SINGLE GREATEST HOPE FOR SMALLER/ WEAKER PEOPLE TO DEFEAT BIGGER/STRONGER OPPONENTS IN UNARMED SINGLE COMBAT. If you can wrestle with your legs against a bigger persons upper body the inherent upper body/lower body asymmetry can be used to advantage as your legs/hips will be stronger and possess more endurance than his upper body. That is why your two first skills in Jiu Jitsu must always be the ability to recover your legs back between your opponent (ie to escape a pin) and the ability to prevent someone ever getting past your legs in the first place (Guard retention). Those two skills are the basis of the bottom position in Jiu Jitsu - everything else presupposes them.

“To hell with all this highfalutin crap Danaher...skill development, systems, the interface of offense and defense...I’m tired of it all...from now on I’m just doing bicep curls and I’ll crush everyone in the room...”

I learned this one from Captain F**king Kirk...Just wrapped up an awesome weekend in Boston filming with Bernardo Faria and the team from @bjj.fanatics for an upcoming video as part of the BJJ FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER series. Today we filmed positional attacks from various guard situations. Among the most useful and instructive are sweeps derived from the beautiful Tomoe - Nage throw. Once your opponent’s feet and hands leave the ground very few people will be able to stop you dropping them wherever you feel like - once you lift a man - you own him and where and how hard he lands is up to you. Tomoe nage is a fine example of a lifting sweep that is equally effective down on the mat and on your feet. On the bus now heading back in the rain five hours to New York City - quite a collection of characters on the bus 😂😂 smells like a 10th Planet seminar in here! 😂😂😉 Not sure if you can get high from passive inhalation but I think I’m about to find out 😂😂 Hopefully I’ll be sober for teaching duty tomorrow in the basement! 😂😂 Happy Father’s Day to all of you!

Don’t forget your legs! It’s very in Jiu Jitsu to get tunnel vision as we close in on a favorite attack. This is natural and not entirely a bad a thing - focus and relentless pursuit of a goal often creates success. Sometimes however, that focus on a narrow possibility blinds us to easier or better options that are right in front of us. A classic example often occurs with the most high percentage submission in the sport - the rear strangle. Because it is such a great submission it’s natural to focus entirely upon it when we get behind people. As long as our chest is locked to an opponent’s scapula that’s all good - but should an opponent start sliding down lower towards our stomach, start thinking about the other great strangle option from the back that ought to be used much more - the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) - where we can utilize the tremendous power of the legs to impart truly impressive strangulation pressure. Here, Nicky Ryan drills the transition from arm strangle to leg strangle - and as a bonus will also now have opportunities to add various joint locks into the action as he does so. Keep your options open - as much as we all love arm strangles, don’t ignore the great effectiveness of leg strangles.

There is always an opening somewhere: So often when we go against a skilled opponent it seems he leaves no openings for an attack and we get locked into a defensive mode that almost ensures eventual defeat. You must have confidence in the notion that THE HUMAN BODY IS CONSTRUCTED IN SUCH A WAY IT CANNOT DEFEND ITS ENTIRE LENGTH AND BREADTH AT THE SAME TIME. If resources are allocated by an opponent to defend one area of the body THIS CAN ONLY BE DONE BY TAKING DEFENSIVE RESOURCES AWAY FROM OTHER AREAS. You must have confidence in this. Our job is always to see where the openings are - they may not be big and they may not be obvious and they may not last long - but they are there to the observant and the watchful. The key idea is to present a STRONG INITIAL THREAT that makes an opponent divert defense to one area and then play from there. Here, Georges St-Pierre takes on one of his toughest rivals, Tiago Alves. Mr Alves has done an excellent job of defending his head, but could only do so by exposing his body - which Mr St-Pierre has immediately taken advantage of. This kind of thinking runs through all combat sports. Don’t let tunnel vision reduce your attacking effectiveness. Always keep your eyes searching for the inevitable openings around the whole body as you begin an initial attack and you will soon be breaching defenses that once seemed impregnable.

Defensive responsibility: It is crucial for your development to understand the golden rule of defensive responsibility: ALL GOOD OFFENSE HAS DEFENSE BUILT INTO IT, AND ALL GOOD DEFENSE HAS OFFENSE BUILT INTO IT. It is of the greatest importance than whenever you engage in offense, you must maintain your defensive integrity. Here, Nicky Ryan puts himself in a fine position to begin devastating attacks to his opponent’s legs - but he makes sure first to position his own feet and legs in a fashion where counter attacks are unlikely to succeed. Avoid putting yourself in situations where your opponent can come back hard at you as you attempt to attack him. Always look to be DEFENSIVELY SOUND even when pressing home your favorite attacks. Good opponents will always counter your attacks - your job as you press home your attacks is to give them as few openings for those counters as possible. Start analyzing all your favorite attacks and then list all the main counters to them - then ask yourself the million dollar question - what can I do when using these attacks to reduce the effect of these counters? Working in this fashion will help your offense immeasurably

Your finishing rate is heavily influenced by your entering rate: when we think of what it is that makes some people finish a move successfully on many occasions we typically think it is due to that athletes excellence in mechanical efficiency. Because his performance of the move is mechanically strong, he succeeds with it often. There is certainly a lot of truth to this idea - superior mechanical execution of a move will definitely raise the number of times you succeed with it. However, there is another very important factor that determines the number of finishes you get with a given move - how many times per match you get yourself in a position to attempt it. It’s very simple - other things being equal, the more times you get to attempt a move, the more times you will end up finishing it. As such, you must start becoming systematic about your entries into your favorite moves. What are the main types of entry? How do they compliment and interact with each other? Under what circumstances do we apply each? For example, when entering legs for ashi garami based keg kicks from bottom position the three most important categories of entry will always be ELEVATION METHODS, INVERSION METHODS (pictured here) and ROLLING METHODS. Each of these three methods has sub variations within it and each can lead into three main versions of ashi garami. Once you start looking into entries in this manner you will see that it is a huge and fascinating topic. Moreover, it is a vital topic, as the more you can enter into potential match winning opportunities - the more potential there is for victory

Grey zones: When we begin Jiu Jitsu we are immediately given a clear sense of good and bad position that make a lot of sense and which is easy to understand. The good positions all involve getting your opponent’s legs and controlling him from front on top or behind either underneath or on top of him. In these situations everything is black and white. A position that is good for me is bad for the other guy and vice versa. Once you go deeper into the sport you find that the vast majority of your time is spent in ambiguous positional grey zones where neither athlete has a definite advantage and you always feel that you are half a second away from some kind of positional profit or loss. It can be of great help in these situations to have some general guidelines, heuristic rules that give you some sense of direction in these grey areas. They should be precise enough to give directions but vague enough to give you flexibility and adaptability for chaotic situations. Look at this photo with Garry Tonon at work. What simple rules would you offer the bottom athlete? What pithy advice would you offer the top athlete? How general is that advice? Could you apply to yourself tomorrow in training and profit from its use? As helpful as the basic positional rules of Jiu Jitsu are, you must start the journey of going beyond them into the grey zones - the answers are never as certain but the potential rewards are huge.

Near misses: We all want to succeed with every submission hold we attempt - but always understand that no matter how good you get, if you are grappling someone your own level THE MAJORITY OF YOUR SUBMISSION ATTEMPTS WILL BE UNSUCCESSFUL. This is not said to discourage you - it is simply being realistic. Just as no boxer expects to hit with every punch he throws against a skilled opponent, so too, we should not expect to break through with every submission attempt he make. The question is - how will we react to this observation? Should we hold back next time we make an attempt at a submission hold so as to save some energy knowing that it is statistically more likely that our attempt will fail than it is to succeed? Absolutely not. That is the pathway to guaranteed failure for ALL of your attempts rather than most of them. What it means is that WE MUST HAVE A PLAN OF OPERATIONS SET IN PLACE AHEAD OF TIME SO THAT WE CAN MOVE CONSTRUCTIVELY FORWARD AFTER A FAILED ATTEMPT. So give everything you have into your attempts until you feel that it is destined to fail - and then switch all your effort into the follow up. It is very important that you have your follow ups well rehearsed - whether it be another submission hold, a positional move or a pull away to neutral. Never take a negative mindset to submission failure - don’t see it as failure, but rather an opportunity to attack in a different way, for every defensive action on the part of your opponent to an initial move will always render him vulnerable to a follow up move.

Will it work in a fight? I am often asked whether or not certain techniques of Jiu Jitsu will work in a fight, whether MMA or a street altercation. Some techniques of Jiu Jitsu such as say, worm guard, really do require a specific type of clothing (something very close to a Jiu Jitsu uniform) and are thus not applicable to MMA and highly unlikely to ever apply to street fight situation. Nonetheless there are many other techniques that are seen as inappropriate for MMA and street fighting even though they do not require clothing or conditions similar to a Jiu Jitsu match. For example, people often claim leg locks as worthless for MMA and fighting due to the danger of being struck whilst trying to finish them. This always struck me as odd, as there are MANY examples of successful applications of leg locks in MMA going back a long time. I have seen many more athletes pounded out while trying to attack from various guard positions in MMA than I have seen people punched out while attempting a leg lock, yet nobody says we should stop using guard position in MMA or fighting. In truth, it is not so much about WHICH techniques of Jiu Jitsu you choose to apply - all of them are capable of taking you to victory or defeat in their own way - rather it is much more about the SPEED/TIMING, MECHANICAL EFFICIENCY, TACTICAL MASTERY AND OVERALL COMPETENCE WITH WHICH YOU APPLY THE MOVE that will determine its success or failure. Success or failure in combat is much more about YOU than it is about which Jiu Jitsu technique you choose to employ. We all have our favorite techniques - don’t worry so much about what that selection is as you do about how good you are at performing whatever techniques you have chosen.

The tale of the runner: One day many years ago I had the pleasure of a new private client who had arranged to come in to train with me. When he arrived he introduced himself as young fellow from Kenya who had emigrated to the United States after representing his country with distinction in one of the toughest Olympic events of them all - the 10,000m Steeplechase. He was of light build and clearly extremely athletic. His job in NYC was to run alongside wealthy private clients as a jogging partner - he literally ran all day every day. He had become interested in combat sports and wanted to give Jiu Jitsu a try. He asked to warm up prior to training and began running some laps around the blue basement. When I say this fellow ran - I mean he truly RAN. I had never seen such a perfect expression of human running in my life. It was like watching a gazelle as his feet barely seemed to make contact with the floor. To watch an elite Olympian run up close was truly a sight to behold and there was no doubt in my mind that he was probably the fittest and best trained running athlete I ever saw. We did some basic techniques and then he asked if we could do some sparring. I let him start mounted and we worked from there. Jiu Jitsu, as you all know, has a way of confounding the movement of even the strongest and most gifted people if they have no experience of it, and in a short time he was in bad position. To my surprise he began hyperventilating and breathing in a very labored fashion as he frantically tried to get out of basic pins. After less a few minutes of thrashing about he suddenly went rigid and froze and asked me to get off, which of course I did. His entire legs were shaking uncontrollably and I could visibly see both his hamstrings locked in the most powerful muscle spasm i have ever seen. He was worried he had torn both his hamstrings - thankfully he had not, but after just a few minutes he could not continue and had to sit utterly exhausted on the mats until he got enough energy together to get dressed and leave. What lesson is there in this tale for us as far as developing our own endurance? Do you have any similar experiences? Let me know in the comments!

Hand control: One of the truly foundational skills of the grappling arts is GRIP. Only when you have come to grips with your opponent can you begin grappling. The basis of both your grips and your opponents grips is their HANDS. As such, if we are to negate our opponent’s ability to grip us WE MUST MAKE CONTROL OF OUR OPPONENTS HANDS A PRIORITY - for if we can control his hands, we can control his grips, and if we can control his grips we can determine the direction and nature of his attacks. When we train without the gi, typically we control the hand or wrist itself; when we train with the gi, we often grip the sleeve cuff as an indirect form of hand control. Learn to start your gripping with control of your opponent’s hands and you will soon be able to shut down his ability to use his grips to further his attacks and then you will be able to focus on your own attacks without interference.

A thought experiment: Imagine we came across a race of aliens who outwardly were just like us - same shape, dimensions, physical and mental attributes etc - but with one peculiar difference. Located directly in the middle of their forehead was bright red button, and if you touched that button, they immediately went completely unconscious for one minute every single time. It was like an off switch that could turn their lights off as easily as the switch in a lamp. Now ask yourself - WHAT WOULD THE MARTIAL ARTS OF THESE PECULIAR ALIENS LOOK LIKE? Obviously they would be completely centered around THE ABILITY TO MAKE CONTACT WITH THE RED BUTTON IN THE FOREHEAD OF AN OPPONENT WHILE DENYING THAT OPPONENT THE ABILITY TO DO THE SAME TO THEM. Everything they did would be to protect their own red forehead button while exposing their opponent’s. Now a moments thought reveals that WE HUMANS ARE NOT SO DIFFERENT FROM THESE IMAGINED ALIENS - for we too have our own off switches that are just as available and accessible as the imaginary red buttons. In humans, the two main off switches are of course, the jaw (striking) and the neck (grappling). And as such, our martial arts are best understood as essentially a set of skills designed to expose an opponent’s jaw or neck whilst hiding or denying our own. If you had to fight one of these imaginary aliens you would of course do everything with the goal of getting to his red forehead button - so too when fighting humans you must steer all your goals towards the human “off switches” jaw and neck. In a truly competitive situation where physical damage from body blows or joint locks are not enough to dissuade an opponent from further fighting - go for the off switches. When you size up an opponent always try to see their jaw and neck as your ultimate goal and your own jaw and neck as your biggest concern - it will give you a helpful basic sense of direction in any physical bout you get into and also provide a useful sense of direction for your training programs. Understand that just as the vulnerable red button would be the basis of these hypothetical alien martial arts, the reality of our vulnerable jaw and neck is the basis of ours

The best possible description of my first five years in Jiu Jitsu 😂😂😂😂 I am happy to help my students avoid the many errors I made in those early days 😂😂😂😂

A fundamental dichotomy in methods of attack - the ultimate aim of all good Jiu Jitsu is submission. When you pursue that aim there is a choice between OPPORTUNISTIC methods and CONTROL BASED methods. The former involve seeing a momentary opportunity to attack usually based on a fleeting lapse in your opponent’s defenses. The latter involve the systematic dismantling of your opponents defenses even when they have been out resolutely in place until the defenses are insufficient to stop your attacks. As a general rule I prefer control based methods since at the higher levels athletes don’t make many mistakes upon which to capitalize. Nonetheless, it is critical that you be strong in both for the simple reason that in operation they usually compliment each other. So for example, when attacking the back we must constantly be looking for any minor lapse of defensive position of hands and jaw on the part of our opponent. If there should be a fleeting opportunity we must immediately capitalize upon it and threaten the strangle. The predictable defenses our opponent must put in place to prevent that immediate opportunistic strangle then allow us to set into operation our distinctive back attack system of arm traps that strip away defenses until the strangle in inevitable. If the opponent over reacts to the arm traps and exposes his neck, we immediately go back to the opportunistic route and snatch the strangle. In this way we can exploit both the speed of opportunistic methods and the inexorable power of systems based/control methods and play them off against each other to great effect. With all your favorite submissions, INVESTIGATE THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN OPPORTUNISTIC ENTRIES AND CONTROL BASED ENTRIES AND LEARN TO USE THEM IN UNISON - you will love the results!

Assessing your performance: Every day we training we need to assess our days performance so that we can make adjustments for tomorrow. The most natural and simple way to assess your own performance is in terms of result - did you win or lose the various matches you played in. That’s fine and definitely the most important criteria. However, you must start going beyond this as you will have training partners of varying ability and attributes. For example, if you are going against much better people than yourself, you might want to judge your performance in terms of how long you lasted before being submitted, or perhaps in how long it took them to pass your guard. If you are going against people much lesser than yourself, you might want to assess your performance in terms of how much or how little strength and effort it took you to apply your moves, or perhaps in terms of how effectively you were able to apply your worst moves. By making your self assessments much more broad ranging and sophisticated than just “did you win or lose today” you immediately start to get a much clearer sense of progress as time passes. Always remember that the fundamental feature of good training is PROGRESSION. Using a more subtle and diverse set of measures for sparring results get you thinking along all the right lines for forward progress. Here, Gordon Ryan is going with a much smaller training partner and so plays a very relaxed game and tries to see how much he can get done with as little use of strength and power as possible. There is much more to progress than winning and losing. Progress is your lifeblood on the mats - understand that it comes in different forms and measures and you will have a better read on whether you are going forward with your training or not.

Big congratulations to @mikeymusumeci for his big win at the IBJJF World Jiu Jitsu Championships today! What an incredible accomplishment for this outstanding athlete to get to his third worlds final at such a young age! He is a truly fine example of attaining excellence both in and off the mats as he is an outstanding scholar as well as athlete. Great to see all the champions out there in the biggest gi competition of the year - so many outstanding performances!

Unity and division: All of Jiu Jitsu operates along the principle of unity and division. The only way we can make our own bodies strong is to unify all the weight and strength we have and take it in a shared direction so that our whole body works in a coordinated shared purpose. The only way we can make our opponent’s body as weak as possible is to divide it up into parts that can be conquered. Only when we use our whole body in unison to fight our isolated and divided parts of our opponent’s body are we really expressing Jiu Jitsu. Look how Nicky Ryan’s whole body has latched onto his opponent’s head and arm in an obvious mismatch of a whole body versus a part of another persons body. You must make this theme run throughout your game - for it is the only way you will be able to beat bigger and stronger opponents. The good news is that most of the major techniques of Jiu Jitsu have this idea built into them - your goal is to go further and build it into your personal game to the greatest degree possible. Studying triangles is a good start - as this is a quintessential example of whole body versus parts of a body in operation. However you choose to manifest the principle, make it the philosophical core of your game and you will be a formidable threat to bigger opponents

Studying Philosophy: I have made many foolish decisions in my life, but one decision I made that I never regretted and am eternally grateful for was my decision to study Philosophy when I went to College and Graduate school. This might seem strange as Philosophy is not what I ended doing as a career, nor will it lead to what most people associate with success - money, fame or status. Yet I honestly believe that outside of sport specific physical training and study, the study of philosophy was the single most helpful activity I bought with me when I began Jiu Jitsu. My reasoning is that the study of philosophy teaches you the crucial skill of clearly identifying a problem and assessing the merit of proposed solutions. Interestingly Philosophy itself struggles to make progress on the many questions it seeks to answer. It is probably fair to say that Western Philosophy is no closer to answering its central problems than the Ancient Greeks who first voiced them at its outset. The real value of Philosophy is in its ability to get people asking deep questions and applying reason to battle towards a solution. This creates a mindset that can be applied profitably in any field - including Jiu Jitsu. Here I am outside my office at the University of Auckland in New Zealand the day I left for America to begin study at Graduate School at Columbia University in New York. I had no idea what direction my life would go, but I knew that the ability to identify and clearly differentiate a problem and apply a set of rational criteria for grading prospective solutions would be a useful thing - that much I got correct 😊 (although my sense of fashion got even worse 😂😂) When studying Jiu Jitsu, always try hard to clear state and understand the problems you are confronted with - this will give you a strong sense of direction that can greatly reduce the time taken to make improvements to your game.

Indirect attack: When you are engaged in combat with a neophyte, simple and direct attacks work best. Just use the simplest moves and set ups to get the job done. Overly complex moves don’t work well on neophytes as they lack the appropriate defensive reactions and simply don’t react to feints and subterfuge. However, as the skill level of your opponents rise, you must more and more come to rely up the constant use of INDIRECT ATTACKS to get the breakthroughs you desire. A good rule of combat is this - WHEN BOTH COMBATANTS KNOW EACH OTHERS MOVES AND THE COUNTERS TO THEM, IT WILL COME DOWN TO WHO DOES A BETTER JOB OF DISGUISING THEIR REAL INTENTIONS PRIOR TO THEIR ATTACKS WHO WILL PREVAIL. If you wish to attack in the left, feint to the right, if you wish to draw an opponent forward, start by pressuring him backwards, if you wish to attack high on the body, feign a low attack first. Only by confusing an opponent as to your real intentions will you be able to consistently break through the defenses of a skilled adversary. Make a mental habit of always having a real intention when you go to attack, and an apparent intention you sell to your opponent and onlookers. GOOD JIU JITSU DOES NOT RELY ON TRICKS FOR VICTORY - BUT IT DOES RELY UPON TRICKERY.

The greatest submission in all of Jiu Jitsu: I teach six complete submission systems covering the whole body to my students. In addition I teach many other submission holds that we use somewhat less often but are still very important nonetheless. However, there is one root basis of all submission that stands far above even the most high percentage submission holds when it comes to accounting for the success or failure of submissions - this is the notion of PRESSURE. Pressure, the act of putting an opponent under physical and mental duress through tactics, weight of attack, intensity of attack, off balancing, combined attacks and a host of other elements, has finished more opponents than any one submission hold ever did. Indeed, without antecedent pressure the vast majority of submissions never would have succeeded. IT IS ABSOLUTELY CRUCIAL THAT YOU DEVELOP THE SKILL OF PUTTING AN OPPONENT UNDER CONSTANT PRESSURE OVER TIME - When you can do this the submissions come easy. In many cases you must break an opponent mentally before you can break him physically. This is done through pressure that makes him feel defeat is inevitable - as such they learn to ACCEPT a submission hold - but the real submission was a mental act before it became manifest in a physical move. When you first begin Jiu Jitsu the two most important ways to develop a pressure game is through POSITIONAL pressure when on top - constant advance toward superior position and not relinquishing it once gained - and through KUZUSHI (off balancing) when on bottom. If you can develop strong Kuzushi from underneath and consistently get past legs and into dominant pins on top, you will finish many opponents. Make every facet of PRESSURE an object of study and watch your submission game go to a new level.

Preparation must mirror the event: In all your training you must ask yourself one simple question that is of supreme importance - DOES THIS WORK I AM DOING ENHANCE THE SKILLS I WILL NEED TO PERFORM BETTER? So often I see athletes working hard, but on tasks that have a very tenuous relationship with the actual event they are preparing for. Sometimes we feel that as long as we are working hard we are getting better. This is often not the case. Only if the work you are doing is relevant to the task you are about to undertake will the effort be worthwhile. Always ask yourself if your training really does help your perform the tasks of your sport better. It is quite surprising how often i see even top level athletes engaging in training behavior that even a moments thought would reveal has little relevance to the sport they are preparing for. It’s not the amount of sweat you produce that indicates how well prepared you are, but rather how much sweat you have produced working in ways that directly increase the necessary skills required for victory. Here, Garry Tonon is seen just two hours before his most recent MMA victory, practicing the very move that won him the fight in less than a minute. Striking into a single leg and falling back for ashi garami into a heel hook. A short time later he would use that same movement in front of an enthralled crowd to take his fifth win. Never stop asking “will this work make me better at what I do?” The speed of your progress is dependent upon your answer...

Juniors pushing forward! The squad juniors had a great weekend with @nickyryanbjj and @nickyrod247 winning big matches in England and today @katerinaleontyeva won the female tournament at 115 pounds at Finishers Sub Only event in Rockaway NY Ms Leontyeva was able to get fishes via heel hook, knee bar and kimura along with a dramatic overtime win against team mate @daniellekellybjj to take gold and win $2500 shekels 😜😜 Its always a pleasure to see motivated people working hard towards their goals and dreams and the juniors just keep doing exactly that! Thanks to @frankrosenthal11 for coaching and to the all the training partners in the basement who help get everyone ready for the stage.

Victory for Nicky Ryan!! Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj won his title match against the great Urijah Faber tonight in England. It was a very tough and physical battle that went the distance. Mr Ryan got one very tight entry into one of his favorite leg lock positions but went out of bounds before it could be completed and the adjustments made to restart the position appeared to loosen it so there was not a decisive finish. It was Mr Ryan who did all the engaging and attacking while Mr Faber played a very defensive game based on physical roughhousing and defensive positioning so the decision was an easy one for the judges. At the same event standout junior heavyweight squad member @nickyrod247 won via strangle from the back to show his impressive development in a very short time frame. Big thanks to @garrytonon for going out to England with the juniors to coach after his recent tremendous win in @onechampionship It’s wonderful to see the development of these outstanding young athletes as they battle towards their goals and dreams. Now everyone comes back to the basement and gets ready for the next big challenge! 😜😜

Escapes - psychology and physicality: I have said this before and will say it again - your psychological confidence overall in any given match/fight is directly proportional to your confidence in your ability to physically handle the worst case scenarios of your sport. If you have no fear of the worst case scenarios, nothing else can faze you. This confidence doesn’t come out of thin air. It does not come from positive affirmations, self help gurus, meditation, visualization, breathing exercises or any other hocus pocus fluff like this. It comes from knowing exactly what you are supposed to do in these situations and drilling them every day until you find them easy to deal with. So the psychological attribute of confidence has physical roots. I make My students spend a LOT of time on Escapes - everyone has to work it every day - no exceptions, no matter what their level - and in competition it shows. That’s why they attack so fearlessly, because they know they can take risks without fear of bad consequences. In a crises situation nothing will help except KNOWING THE CORRECT THING TO DO AND HAVING SPENT THE TIME DEVELOPING THE PHYSICAL SKILLS TO ENACT THAT KNOWLEDGE SO THAT THE ESCAPES COME FLUIDLY AND NATURALLY.

Nicky Ryan back onstage in England this weekend: Nicky Ryan will take on MMA superstar, the great Urijah Faber, this weekend at @polaris_professional grappling event. The event features squad juniors, @ethancrelinsten and @nickyrod247 along with our friend @craigjonesbjj I always love the interface between grappling and MMA and Mr Faber was a fine example of this. He was a very fine wrestler and long time student of Jiu Jitsu throughout his long and distinguished MMA career. I often find that many people badly underestimate the pure grappling skill of many top MMA athletes and when they see them in grappling they are shocked at how good many of them are. I have witnessed many occasions where top grapplers were brought into MMA fight camps and had a very hard time going against MMA stars even in pure grappling. Mr Faber has a great mix of wrestling and Jiu Jitsu and uses them very well together and has a fine guillotine attack on top of that. Mr Ryan has very refined technique but will have to overcome a significant strength advantage of he is to prevail in this fascinating match up. @garrytonon is just off his latest MMA victory and is in England for coaching and cornering the youngsters (in between eating hamburgers and English pudding - I think he may be over three hundred pounds at this point). Keep your eyes on this event!!

Start your training sessions with a sense of purpose: probably the single most common error i see in most athletes training routines is a failure to have a clearly outlined sense of purpose in their sessions. Too often I see athletes arrive on the mat with no sense of what they will try to accomplish in next few hours. As a result, the session meanders into sparring where at the completion there is no obvious sense in which you can say that you are now better than when you started the session. It is permissible to have occasional playful, relaxed sessions like this, but the majority of your sessions must have a strong sense of direction if you are to improve over time rather than just remain at whatever level you currently are. At the start of most classes I always begin with a short statement of what is the skill we are working on, why it’s important and what we want to do to get the job done. This immediately creates a sense of direction in the class towards which we can move. Then it’s into the main part of the class - technical details and the sparring. Just as a man walking in a forest without a compass will inevitably end up walking in a useless circle, so too, a years worth of training sessions without direction will end up with you at the same point you started. Whenever we train without a goal we inevitably go back to the same old moves we always use and progress eventually halts. EFFORT EXPENDED IS NOT A MEASURE OF PROGRESS - only effort expended in a positive direction gets you to where you wish to be.

The fifteen fundamental positional skills of Jiu Jitsu: A very important question to ask in any area of life in which you wish to excel is this - what are the fundamental skill sets in this enterprise upon which competence/excellence are required? In the case of Jiu Jitsu there are three broad areas in which you operate
1 - Standing position
2- Ground Top Position
3 - Ground Bottom Position
A useful way to categorize and map out the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu is to see each of these three areas as having five distinct skill sets that we must first develop competence in and ultimately, mastery.
STANDING POSITION - Stance
- Motion
- Grip
- Off Balancing (Kuzushi)
- Transitions to the ground (Takedowns/throws/guard pulls/Standing submission entries)
GROUND TOP POSITION - Opening a closed guard
- Passing an open guard
- Passing a half guard - Pin maintainence and transitions
- Breaking down turtle position
GROUND BOTTOM POSITION - escaping pins
- Guard retention - Sweeps/reversals from guard - Sweeps/reversals from half guard - Escapes/reversals from turtle position
Seen in this way we can create a fundamentals program that clearly identifies three broad areas for skill development and five skill sets within each as the fifteen essential positional skills that we will need to cover if we are to be considered as having completed the fundamental requirements of skill development in Jiu Jitsu. There are many ways to interpret and express a fundamentals program - this is the outline of the one that I use. Obviously within each of these positional skill sets there are many moves, movements, concepts, tactics etc to learn. It is important to have a road map of our journey into Jiu Jitsu and this fifteen positional skill sets map gives students a clear understanding of what they need to cover to have a complete fundamentals game. Obviously there are many other skills besides positional skills, but Jiu Jitsu is founded upon position so that’s a sound place to start a fundamentals program. I always recommend starting with bottom ground position pin escapes and guard retention first, as this is where most beginners naturally end up in most training sessions.

I am very happy to announce the release of my new instructional video BJJ FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER - PIN ESCAPES AND TURTLE ESCAPES with @bjj.fanatics today! This instructional series covers the fundamental positional skills of Jiu Jitsu. The entire sport of Jiu Jitsu is founded upon positional skills - as the old saying goes - position before submission. Only when these skills are strong can a submission game be built upon that secure foundation. Probably the single biggest problem that most people encounter when they first begin the sport of Jiu Jitsu is getting pinned helplessly in side pins, north/south pins, mounted pins and rear mount pins - so learning to get quickly and efficiently out of these troublesome situations is the first skill developing students need to master to create forward progress in Jiu Jitsu. An interesting feature of this first installment of the GO FURTHER FASTER series is that for part of it I am joined by my old friend Shawn Williams to demonstrate some of the moves! We started the beginner program at the Renzo Gracie Academy together many years ago and it was fun going over some of the material we taught in those classes that helped take so many developing students, including a young Georges St-Pierre, towards their Jiu Jitsu goals. There is a link in my Instagram bio for those who are interested 😊😊 As much as I love cutting edge Jiu Jitsu and innovation, my deepest attraction to the sport will always be to the fundamentals - that is where the heart and soul of the sport resides and the well from which all Jiu Jitsu excellence comes.

Pin escapes: The first skill I try to build in a student is that of escaping pins. My reasoning is simple. The great majority of finishes in Jiu Jitsu are the result of getting held down and controlled in a pin. In Jiu Jitsu a pin is usually understood as any situation where an opponent has passed your legs and has at least one of your shoulders held down on the mat in a chest to chest position (there are a few exceptions to this - knee on stomach positions and rear mount pins are obvious exceptions). There is nothing more stultifying to your own offensive ambitions than getting held down for long periods of time where you simply cannot perform any effective offense. Often I ask a student, “can you get out of a pin.” Whenever someone answers, “I think so,” I almost always interpret this as no. My first job as a coach is to get you to a point where you don’t THINK you can get out - you KNOW you can get out. Only then will you have the confidence and ability to attack an opponent from bottom position. It is rare that I teach a class where students are not asked to exhibit defensive skills. Regular skill development and training of pin escapes - the core defensive skill - is something so important we work it almost every day. IN A ROOMFUL OF PEOPLE WHO ARE ALL STRONG AT OFFENSE, IT WILL COME DOWN TO WHO HAS THE BEST DEFENSE THAT DETERMINES WINNER AND LOSER IN MOST CASES. Work hard on your pin escapes as your first goal of mastery in Jiu Jitsu. No matter how high you goal it will be protective insurance against catastrophic loss.

Garry Tonon back at work the morning after victory: I am always impressed by a strong work ethic and no one surpasses that of Garry Tonon. Here he is the morning after his big victory last night at @onechampionship here in Singapore teaching at the big Squad Super Seminar at @evolvemma teaching how to escape from the very move he used last night to get another big win. People here are deeply impressed by Mr Tonon’s teaching ability. Everyone already knew he was a great athlete but everyone here is amazed at the clarity and effectiveness of his teaching as well. Soon he will be making an instructional video with @bjj.fanatics on his mastery of escapes! Keep your eyes peeled for that one!!

Victory in Singapore! Garry Tonon extended his unbeaten record in MMA here in Singapore tonight with a brilliant fifty five second victory in the first round. Mr Tonon wanted to give recognition to our roots in the sport of submission grappling and win via one of our signature methods - leg lock. Drawing on his exceptional knowledge of our leg locking system he latched on to a very tight ashi garami from an initial takedown attempt and switched to a stronger breaking position - a variation of outside ashi garami - to quickly apply joint breaking pressure that ended the match immediately. Mr Tonon’s excellent work ethic and hunger to gain knowledge and train hard to turn that knowledge into skill was always the basis of his success in grappling and now it is bringing success in MMA. It’s been a remarkable first year for him - still a long way to go for him because his dreams are big - but another great step forward here tonight. Wishing you all the best from Singapore! Thank you all for your support and interest in what we do! It was always our ambition to show that submission grappling and Jiu Jitsu can help provide a winning way in MMA and fighting and Mr Tonon did a fine job of that tonight! Keep training hard and moving forward 😊😊

Countdown: Garry Tonon made weight successfully and went through his final workout today here at @evolvemma gym in Singapore in preparation for the big show @onechampionship tomorrow night. Mr Tonon has been working hard on his developing MMA skill set and is looking forward to an another tough test. It is an incredible fight card featuring some of very best kick boxers in the world in addition to the MMA talent. Now it’s time to get recharged and prepare for the big day tomorrow

A fatal error: Gordon Ryan made the rookie mistake of asking me to look after his new Gucci shoulder bag here in Evolve Gym as he went to begin teaching. Ain’t no way you’re gettin’ this back, homeslice - go teach your closed guard big shot - earn some money to buy a new murse - this one’s gone and ain’t coming back...

Gordon Ryan teaching a masterclass on attacks from closed guard: Gordon Ryan wows the big crowd at @evolvemma gym here in Singapore with his closed guard game. Mr Ryan will be putting out a whole video on our closed guard system later this year for @bjj.fanatics It’s amazing to see the crowd react to his teaching here and then take those concepts to the mat and live sparring and get the moves to work very quickly. Later on tonight it’s training time with @garrytonon in his preparation for his fight in @onechampionship - all action here in Singapore 😜😜

I am so proud of this young man: Here in Singapore at the @evolvemma Squad Super Seminar young Nicky Ryan, just seventeen years old teaching a masterclass on his favorite aspect of Jiu Jitsu- back control and finishes - to an audience of over one hundred international Jiu Jitsu enthusiasts at one of the best gyms in the world. It’s incredible to watch someone so young display such artistry and teach so commandingly. He will soon be releasing a video on Back Mastery for @bjj.fanatics and judging by the awed reactions to his teaching here in Singapore he will make it one of the very best ever made - amazing to watch this lesson unfold!

Amazing first day here is Singapore at @evolvemma super seminar with @garrytonon @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @nickyryanbjj The theme of the camp is the crucial interface between offense and defense in Jiu Jitsu. Garry Tonon got everyone off to an incredible start with his signature escape into offense skills. Now it’s big Gordon Ryan up next to teach our approach to closed guard the way we like it - as a devastating attack position that with the right methods, can get you dominance from underneath an adversary. In the future Garry and Gordon will produce videos on these subjects so it’s amazing to see the depth of their instruction and their own innovative ways of presenting the material 😜😜 Things are about to start up now!!

In all combat sports I observe the iron law of OFFENSIVE OUTPUT - IN ANY COMPETITIVE MATCH WHERE YOUR OPPONENT IS ATTACKING YOU AS YOU ATTACK HIM - YOUR OFFENSIVE OUTPUT WILL BE DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO YOUR DEFENSIVE CONFIDENCE. When I coach athletes I am not nearly as interested in how good their offense looks when they drill as I am in the question of whether their defensive skills MATCH AND INTEGRATE WITH THEIR DEFENSIVE SKILLS - FOR ONLY WHEN THEIR CONFIDENCE IN THEIR DEFENSE IS HIGH WILL THEY ACTUALLY USE THEIR OFFENSIVE SKILLS WHEN THE OPPORTUNITY ARISES. Every day I see athletes with fine looking offense in drilling, but when the moment of truth comes and it’s time to pull the trigger, they shy away and hold back. Why? Because they know if the attack should fail their suspect defensive skills will be exposed, so they stay in a safe zone and will not take a risk. ALL OFFENSE CREATES RISK. ONLY DEFENSE MITIGATES THAT RISK and thus ironically, DEFENSIVE SKILL IS THE SEED FROM WHICH ALL OFFENSE SPRINGS. Work hard in your fundamentals of defense. Only when you are defensively sound will you ever actually show what you are offensively capable of.

Bound for the Far East: Garry Tonon and the squad heading to Singapore from Newark Airport. Mr Tonon will be fighting in @onechampionship and we will all teach at @evolvemma 😊😊 This flight 21 direct from NY to Singapore is the worlds longest direct flight! 😳😳 19 hours straight sitting next to Gordon and Nicky Ryan will destroy me i am sure 😂😂 See you there!

Back in action: @garrytonon had his last NYC workout today - back to back grappling and shoot boxing (kickboxing with takedowns) work outs. It is a fascinating thing to watch his assimilation of striking technique and its blending with grappling. For so long the martial arts were heavily divided between striking arts such as boxing, Muay Thai, Karate, most Kung Fu styles, Tae Kwon Do etc and grappling arts, Judo, Wrestling , Jiu Jitsu etc There was some superficial overlap, but nothing serious. It is a wonderful thing to live in an age where the integration of the two has come back. Unarmed human combat has always had two methods of operation - KINETIC ENERGY - done through striking - and LEVER AND FULCRUM applied through grappling. The historical pattern of martial arts has been to divide them. There have been great exceptions such as the Ancient Greek Pancration but for the most part grappling and fisticuffs were held apart. Yet the most challenging, the most exciting, the most effective and the most difficult art has always involved the integration of the two. I always encourage students to think of their Jiu Jitsu in relation to fighting, to keep up with MMA and study it, take not of the strengths and weaknesses of Jiu Jitsu in this arena, even if they never train or compete in it. It is a very instructive and gives a clear insight into the roots of Jiu jitsu. Tomorrow we are off to Singapore and @onechampionship for another big challenge and another tough test for Jiu Jitsu in a bigger and tougher arena.

The devastating power of strangles - the dark art of strangulation: In all of unarmed martial arts there is no more devastating weapon than a well applied strangle. It is one of the few means of attack in empty handed combat that is reliably capable of killing people should the need ever arise. In combat sports it can overcome even the bravest of souls who simply refuse to submit to other methods - even the greatest bravery cannot make up for restricted blood flow to the brain. Having a good set of strangles in your arsenal is therefore of the first importance. My recommendation is to have one great strangle from the BACK, one from in FRONT of an opponent, one for when you are in a FRONT HEADLOCK situation and one great strangle with your LEGS. These four general scenarios are by far the most common in the sport with regards strangles and hence you must have all four covered if you are one day to be a master of strangulation. Note that these are MINIMUM requirements and it would be a very good thing if you went beyond this. The STRANGLE is the grapplers equivalent of a knockout punch and thus something to be coveted among us all. The good news is that there are quite a few choices of stranglehold among the basic four scenarios I mentioned and even more when you add the gi jacket. It would be a sad thing indeed if you went through your time in Jiu Jitsu without developing the arts greatest weapon. If you are starting out, start researching strangleholds for the four main scenarios and start your quest to find some favorites. If you already have some good strongholds, cover the other main strangle scenarios or improve your performance with those favorites in a wider array of set ups and variations to display increasing mastery. Here, Gordon Ryan shows his python like powers of strangulation in an intense match that shows well the kind of pressure too athletes must exert to get submissions at a high level. Train to be able to get similar strangulation power and you will one day be a master of the dark art.

Students and teachers: Something that I have always been very proud of is the fact that all of my senior students are excellent TEACHERS as well as athletes. This is no accident. I deliberately teach them to teach. Quite often when I show something I ask them to teach it back to me and I play the role of white belt asking questions which they have to answer. When I teach, I always seek to teach the WHY as well as the HOW of techniques so that they understand its RATIONALE as well as its MECHANICS. The result is that all are very fine teachers indeed. The first student of mine who I promoted to Black belt (I have only promoted a handful of people to blackbelt) was the inestimable Mike Jaramillo. He is a legend here in the basement for excellence of his game and teaching and mentoring ability. It is with great pride that Renzo and I announce he is now teaching a fundamentals gi class here in the blue basement every Tuesday and Thursday morning! Here I am giving him a beautiful Nepalese Khukuri blade I had made to my design in Nepal for all his great work and development over the years - I had it made fast and light and sharp - just Like Mr Jaramillo’s Jiu Jitsu game 😜 If you are in town and wanting one of the best introductions to our beloved sport you will ever see - come by and see Mr Jaramillo’s work! (Don’t worry - he won’t be carrying the khukuri knife 😂😂 - unlike me he has a warm and pleasant personality 😜😜) My sensei Renzo just awarded him his 4th degree this week - check out class and you will see how well deserved that rank is! And to all of you - when you learn something in Jiu Jitsu - teach it back to your friends as a kind of self quiz - nothing sharpens the mind like teaching. If there is no one there - teach it back to yourself. The questions you will ask and answer will sharpen your understanding and make you a better athlete on the mat.

Y2K Fundamentals back in NYC! In 1999-2000, My good friend and RGA comrade Shawn Williams and I started the beginners fundamentals class at Renzo’s. Up till that point all classes were just whoever showed up and beginners were immediately crushed like insects by the more advanced maulers. It was a Darwinian approach to training that produced some very tough and skilled survivors but the attrition rate was extremely high. I loved teaching that fundamentals class all those years ago with Mr Williams, some of my favorite coaching memories came from there - Georges St-Pierre was one of the original members (he used to do fundamentals and then immediately go to the advanced class afterwards). The real magic of Jiu Jitsu is teaching timid beginners skills that let them do things they could never have done previously in a physical confrontation with strong opponents in a fairly short period of time - and that magic begins in fundamentals class. Imagine my surprise when Mr Williams came back out of the blue to New York City this weekend and we taught the advanced Saturday morning class together like old times - only now it was the cutting edge material used by the squad. I’m excited to release a new video in next few weeks covering fundamentals so it was a blast talking about the old days learning the trade as a Jiu Jitsu teacher and how my views on fundamentals have both changed in some ways and held fast in others. One thing is sure - even the most most advanced classes i teach always make reference to the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu- for without them advanced material is like a beautiful house built on weak foundations - pretty to look at but liable to collapse and fall under stress. Here, I tie together fundamental concepts such as inside positioning with some advanced entries into leg locks from guard position to demonstrate the marriage of fundamentals and advanced Jiu Jitsu.

The defensive orientation of Jiu Jitsu: My sensei Renzo Gracie gave me a piece of advice when I just a white belt that I never forgot - he said, “John, your first responsibility is to not get your ass kicked - anything on top of that is a bonus!” This is really the essential idea behind Jiu Jitsu - it is first and foremost a means of PROTECTING YOURSELF FROM HARM and only secondarily a means of damaging an opponent. Even though my own approach to Jiu Jitsu is strongly offense oriented with a constant push towards submission victory, I always recognize that this is only possible if you have a sound defense that let’s you take the risks necessary to play an offensive game. To this day if you give me a choice in learning a new technique between one which gets me out of trouble versus one that lets me attack an opponent, my natural inclination is towards the one that gets me out of trouble. Your first responsibility then, is to learn the skills associated with SURVIVAL and ESCAPE. Only when you can guarantee these can you go on to attack an opponent. Escapes may not be the most glamorous part of the sport, but they are without doubt a huge part of the foundation of it. Spend time every day refining your ability to get comfortable under pins and then escaping them. This knowledge is pure gold and when you are in a bad situation on the mat and all the glamor moves are worthless, it will be all that time you invested in escape skills that saves you.

A fundamental feature of Jiu Jitsu: One of the signature themes of good Jiu Jitsu and one which I constantly look to instill in my students is to ALWAYS SEEK TO FIGHT YOUR OPPONENTS UPPER BODY WITH YOUR LEGS. This is probably the single best way for a smaller weaker person to defeat a bigger stronger person. If you are a big strong person yourself, then it represents the most efficient way to win. The reason is simple - the human body as a big asymmetry built into it. The asymmetry between the strength of our lower body (quite impressive ) versus the strength of our upper body (not impressive in comparison). Our legs have massively greater strength, endurance and reach than our arms. The only problem is that they lack dexterity and coordination compared with arms - BUT THIS CAN BE OVERCOME IN TIME BU TRAINING - and once you get around this, your legs will overcome even a bigger stronger opponent’s arms. IN ALL YOUR TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT - SEEK TO MATCH YOUR LEGS AGAINST YOUR OPPONENTS ARMS/UPPER BODY AND YOU WILL PREVAIL IN MOST CASES. This is why I greatly favor moves such as triangle and arm bar - they are quintessential examples of this principle in operation. Here, outstanding squad junior Ethan Crelinsten uses a squad favorite - ushiro sankaku - the rear triangle - to use his legs to entrap and overpower his opponent’s head and arm in a classic expression of this critical theme. Make every battle you fight in a Jiu Jitsu a battle between your legs and his arms and victory will come to you often

Gym monsters: Most people in Jiu Jitsu know me through the fine work of my competing students. Their incredible success in competition gained international attention and generated great interest in our training methods, tactics and techniques. Understand however, that my training room has many people in it who chose never to compete or to compete very rarely, on a very informal, sporadic basis. Let me assure you of something - some of the toughest people in the room you have never heard of. I always loved this kind of thing - a student who trains part time and doesn’t really have competitive aspirations but who can go up against the best people in the world and go toe to toe with them without a problem. These are the gym monsters - athletes who work their craft in the dojo and whose goal is entirely internal - but their skills are as good as any. A legend in the blue basement is my student Shy Ace - a true gym monster. He spends most of his time in night clubs and on motorcycles but has a game that can shock the hell out of even world champions. Here he is going up against Kasai Grappling standout and silver medalist Tex Johnson and heel hooking him in short order after spontaneously entering a local grappling show after Gordon Ryan told he should give it a shot for the hell of it. One time when he was a white belt he went against Cyborg Abreau and survived a ten minute match without a problem. He has the best mount escapes I ever saw - he did one private class with me many years ago as a white belt and asked what should I learn first? I told him escapes come first and he is basically unmountable at this point. One time I asked a famous world champion to try to stay mounted on him for as long as he could - the longest time was around seven seconds in ten attempts! Take a lesson from this - even if you have no competitive aspirations and don’t train as often as the competition team - you can still be an absolute monster on the mats - I’ve seen it MANY times - indeed, there’s a good chance you have to - almost every good dojo has its own unsung and unknown mat monsters that can shock and inspire us. Maybe one day you can become a feared gym monster yourself! 😜😜

Guard Retention - Specifics vs General Theory: There are few skills so difficult for most students to understand and master than guard retention - and even fewer so important for your success in the sport. Guard retention is one of those skills that lacks glamour and sex appeal, but is absolutely essential to success in the sport. You have have the best guard attacks in the room, but if you can’t hold guard long enough to employ them against a good guard passer you will never get to employ them. The standard method of teaching guard retention is to teach the student a specific guard pass and to take note of its strengths and weakness. Students are taught to negate the strengths of the pass and exploit its weakness. This is a good method and has worked well for generations. It requires that you be able to quickly identify the type of pass being used against you and employ the appropriate counter moves. One problem with this move-based approach is that guard passing is typically a FAST and DYNAMIC part of the game characterized by rapid changes in direction and combinations of one style of guard pass to another. This immediately creates problems. By the time I have identified and reacted to the guard pass method being used against me, the opponent has switched to another and we can get left behind and passed. As much as I like and still use the traditional approach, I favor a more general approach to guard retention focus upon a core set of BODY MOVEMENTS and RETENTION SKILLS that can be applied against ANY form of guard pass. Rather than focus on the type of pass, I get students to focus on the DEGREE OF PASSING DANGER the pass presents as it is applied and reply with the appropriate degree of response. This enables students to better deal with the reality of a vigorous and fast moving, quickly changing guard passing vs retention exchange. Here, I am using a more traditional move vs move approach against the formidable over/under guard pass favored by the great @bernardofariabjj I’m looking forward to showing elements of this general concepts approach to guard retention soon!

Somewhere in that tangled knot there is both victory and defeat: perhaps more than any other grappling sport Jiu Jitsu often requires its athletes to get into complex limb entanglements for protracted lengths of time with opponents. Sometimes it is not obvious to an experienced eye who has an advantage. One thing however is sure - whenever this happens it is the athlete who can calmly and accurately ASSESS THE SCENARIO AND COME UP WITH A RATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION FASTER THAN THE OTHER FELLOW WHO WILL GENERALLY PREVAIL. There is a lot to be said for the ability to STAY CALM AND SOLVE PROBLEMS QUICKLY in this sport. Think about any kind of problem solving activity you have to engage in in your daily life. Has it ever been helped by getting emotional? By just doing the first action that occurred to you? By just being inactive? Nope. Me neither. A calm mind is the beginning of all problem solving. However difficult it may seem, try to THINK your way out of problems and towards solutions rather than just move for the sake of moving. This is a habit that must be formed - it is not natural - panic is natural - calm rational thought in a frightening or frustrating situation is not. Next time you are in a limb entanglement deadlock - stop, breath, take in the situation and work as a problem solver rather than just aimlessly thrash about and become a problem exacerbator. Just this simple change is a big first step towards maturity in your Jiu Jitsu.

Active observation: When most people observe Jiu Jitsu they do so as a spectator enjoying an event - as entertainment. That’s certainly an enjoyable way to spend your time - but you, as a student of the game seeking to rise in skill level, must go beyond this. You must always seek to ACTIVELY observe Jiu Jitsu, that is, to see yourself as one of the combatants and actively anticipating in the action - asking yourself what you would be doing in those situations second by second. In this way you begin to train your MIND in Jiu Jitsu in the same way you train your body every day. You will soon note that as the speed of your thought processes increase - SO TO THE MOVEMENTS OF YOUR BODY WILL INCREASE. Don’t be satisfied with just watching Jiu Jitsu. Go the extra distance and actively observe it every time you get the chance. Make it your goal to understand WHY people are doing what they do and what you would do in the same situation. You train your body every day - why not your mind also?

What are the most readily available moves and most commonly occurring scenarios in Jiu Jitsu? Whenever people ask me how to make make faster progress in Jiu Jitsu i always answer their question with a question of my own. WHAT DO YOU BELIEVE ARE THE MOST READILY AVAILABLE MOVES AND THE MOST COMMONLY OCCURRING SCENARIOS IN THE SPORT? I listen to it whatever answers they give - almost always there is pretty widespread agreement about this as the facts are rather plain and open to be seen by all - and then I tell them - DEVOTE THE GREAT MAJORITY OF YOUR TRAINING TIME TO THOSE MOVES AND SCENARIOS AND WATCH YOUR PROGRESS ACCELERATE. A classic example is the front head lock. You show me any Jiu Jitsu match (especially a no gi match) that goes longer than two minutes and i will show you multiple opportunities for both athletes to get to a front headlock. It is almost impossible to engage in a sport where the primary goal is to get a hold of people and control them without both people putting themselves in position to take or be taken in a front headlock. Time invested in this or any other readily available move or scenario in the sport is this time well spent - you will be making use of the skills you develop every single time you train and compete. Here, @heysonnyy applies a superb high elbow guillotine out of a front headLock to win her recent match at @kasaigrappling Despite a very short time in the sport she has deep knowledge of the position due to our heavy emphasis on building systems around the most commonly occurring systems and most effective moves so that valuable training time is not frittered away on skills that will rarely be used or which have only a low percentage chance of success if they are. Make your training time count the most by focusing upon the situations you are most likely to encounter and the moves most likely to succeed.

If unity is strength - isolation is weakness: Perhaps one of the biggest themes of my Jiu Jitsu coaching is LIMB ISOLATION. As long as one of your opponents limbs is locked close to another limb or to the torso, it will be very strong and difficult to attack. One of your primary goals in submission attacks, particularly joint locks, is to ISOLATE ONE LIMB FROM THE OTHER OR GET IT EXTENDED AWAY FROM THE TORSO. If you can do this consistently, you will submit many people. Whenever an attack on your opponent’s limbs is your goal - think about the two critical aspects of isolation - separate one limb from the other and separate it from the torso. Both are required. Doing so will make strong opponents feel weak. Every scenario will require a different method of limb isolation so I cannot give even general guidelines as to how you will do this every time you grapple, but the goal is easy to comprehend even if the means to it can be complicated. Still, this is a sport where KNOWING WHAT YOU WANT TO DO is half the battle - and that’s always a solid start in the right direction

Demian Maia and Michelle Nicolini: The greatest representative of Jiu Jitsu in modern MMA, Demian Maia @demianmaia came by the blue basement to train with the squad today. This incredible athlete has flown the Jiu jitsu flag with tremendous distinction for so long - it was an absolute pleasure to watch him drill and spar with the juniors and even get some light MMA work with Garry Tonon. He is a true role model for the sport - a gentleman fighter who represents our art with style and grace. There is something deeply impressive about an athlete who can really hold up the ideal of Jiu Jitsu as a gentle art amongst all the violence of the octagon and weave a tale of bloodless victories in a bloody sport. Also in town was the the great Michelle Nicolini @miznicolini who is also doing a very fine job of taking Jiu Jitsu into MMA. It is fascinating watching a great gi competitor make adjustments to the no gi game and from there into the fight game. I’m always proud to be involved in Jiu Jitsu and having two such great athletes representing our sport in the worlds toughest game always makes me even more proud. Wishing these two all time greats all the best from the basement in NYC! 🤗🤗

Remove the impediments first to get to what you really want: Everything we do in the sport of Jiu jitsu is done AGAINST KNOWLEDGEABLE RESISTANCE. This has a simple yet crucial ramification. We cannot in the vast majority of cases, simply go straight to our goals. In almost every case we have to take an INDIRECT route that entails first REMOVING THE BLOCKS AND IMPEDIMENTS OUR OPPONENT PUTS IN FRONT OF THE THING WE WANT TO GET AND ONLY WHEN THOSE HAVE BEEN REMOVED THEN GO TO TAKE WHAT YOU WANT. We all have to develop a sophisticated arsenal of techniques and tactics to remove those defensive barriers long enough to get to what we want. Here, Nicky Ryan wants to get to a leg to begin a takedown sequence. That cannot be done until he removes the barrier of his opponent’s hands, arms and head. SO THAT IS WHERE HE BEGINS THE BATTLE - not at the legs- even though that is his primary goal. He initiates with wrist ties that can clear away defensive hands and arms. If he can then get past his opponents head, there will be little between himself and the leg he wants - only then will he go in. ALL OF JIU JITSU IS LIKE THIS - from takedowns to positional moves to submissions. Become a master of INDIRECT THINKING and enjoy watching your game go to a new level.

Ask yourself two questions today: First - If you could have only one submission to use for the rest of your life, what would it be? Second, what is currently your most successful submission hold? Then go further...Are they the same? If not, what does that say about your training? If they are the same, how does your choice stand in relation to the observed success percentages of most athletes in international competition? Know yourself - Know the game - Know more - Win more

Rise among your peers: 90% of your training and development is done among your peers within your own dojo. As a result, your whole image of yourself is built upon your relative successes and failures among your peers. Your attempts to gauge your progress is largely done by assessing how much better or worse you are doing with them. They are your best friends and fiercest rivals, your measuring stick for who you were, who you are now and who you want to be in the future. Dream big - far beyond the walls of your dojo - but understand that it is your peers and your drive to rise among them that will be the vast majority of your Jiu Jitsu life. So dream big and international but realize that your daily life will always be familial and local - train accordingly.

The squad had a blast today training with the great Keenan Cornelius. Mr Cornelius has always been one of our strongest rivals - a true innovator and pioneer in the sport and someone we have always admired. He had some great rounds with the juniors as we all went through standing and ground grappling. He is an athlete whose game changes very dramatically from gi to no gi so it was fascinating to watch his no gi game and how it contrasts with our own. Looking forward to more sessions over the week from this outstanding American grappler.

Breaking your opponents structure and alignment - the power of unnatural positions: The human body is a fascinating subject of study - and at the deepest level, ALL OF JIU JITSU IS SIMPLY A DEEP STUDY OF THE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE HUMAN BODY IN UNARMED COMBAT. There are radical differences in the performance levels of our body depending upon the stance or structure in which it is held. Certain structures/stances make us very strong and powerful, others leave us shocking weak and vulnerable. In Jiu Jitsu our job is keep ourselves in stances/structures that make us strong whilst putting our opponents in stances/structures that make them weak. As much as possible, seek always to PUT YOUR OPPONENT INTO AWKWARD AND UNNATURAL POSITIONS FROM WHICH THEY CANNOT MOVE OR EXERT STRENGTH. Probably the single best way to do this is through your opponent’s HEAD. THE HEAD IS THE FOREMOST MEANS OF MISALIGNING AN OPPONENTS STRUCTURE IN WAYS THAT ROB HIM OF ATHLETICISM. Whenever possible, seek to put your opponent’s head into misaligned positions that make it very difficult him to use the rest of his body effectively. Here, I am putting my training partners head into a misaligned position that makes defense to the arm lock that I am applying significantly more difficult than usual. Actively applying the cross face leg in juji gatame arm locks like this undermines most of the standard defenses to the lock and will greatly boost your finishing percentages in sparring and competition. Look to apply the principle of posture/structure breaking wherever you can - once you can break an opponent’s structure and posture - his limbs will soon follow.

If you can isolate an arm - you can break an arm: arm locking an opponent who knows what an arm lock is and how to defend it never an easy thing. One way to make things easier is to focus on isolating one arm from the other. The principle of double trouble runs throughout Jiu Jitsu. NINETY PERCENT OF THE RESISTANCE TO A GIVEN JOINT LOCK ON AN ARM OR LEG COMES FROM THE OTHER ARM OR LEG. So if you can negate the defensive effects of the OTHER limb, breaking a limb becomes a LOT easier. There are many ways to isolate one limb from the other. In the case of one of the most popular and effective arm locks - Kimura - one highly effective method is to lock a tight triangle (sankaku) around your opponent’s head and arm and then focus upon the isolated and vulnerable trapped arm within the triangle. It is now significantly harder for your opponent to engage his other arm defensively. In addition, the strong head control greatly amplifies the potential breaking power of the Kimura by reducing the defensive head movements that can undermine the effectiveness of the Kimura lock. Here, outstanding junior Ethan Crelinsten uses triangle and Kimura in unison to do exactly this - the result is a punishing Kimura lock that is very difficult to defend and in the few cases where a successful defense can be made, leads immediately into other submission possibilities.

One of my favorite teaching experiences is always that of teaching military personal the kingly art of Jiu Jitsu. I have had the honor of teaching students from elite special forces units such as Navy Seals and Delta Force, Marine Recon and Green Berets along with many many students from regular service units. It is always a fascinating thing to listen to their stories about their training and development in the very extreme conditions in which they so often find themselves. It’s incredible to hear of their personal Jiu jitsu journeys under very challenging circumstances. It’s also extremely interesting to hear their theories as to the value of Jiu Jitsu training for military personal. Obviously we live in a time where highly advanced weaponry dominate the battlefield and unarmed combat is a rarity, but still these soldiers, sailors and airmen talk passionately about the value of their martial arts training. Today I had the great pleasure of training a fantastic group from a foreign military outfit that I have always greatly admired - Her Majesty’s British Royal Marine Commando! They are here in the USA competing against our United States Marine Corps in the 2019 Virginia Gauntlet Sports Tour, featuring nineteen different sports played by two hundred and fifty Royal Marines versus two hundred and fifty US Marines! 😜😜I would not want to take these fellows on in grappling! They impressed me with their skills! As much as we all value peace and diplomacy, our ability to protect and stand up for our ideals is directly proportional to our ability to fight for them. This is true for all of us as individuals in civil society and collectively as one nation among many in the world. As such I am always very happy to help train our soldiers and those of allies and listen to their experiences learning and applying Jiu Jitsu in areas far more extreme than any that most of us ever face. Thank you to @royalmarinesjiujitsu

Counting down to the super seminar in Singapore!! The squad is always looking forward to the next big project and coming up soon we have a triple challenge! @garrytonon will compete again in @onechampionship in his fifth MMA fight - a very quick turnaround from his flawless victory just a month ago in Japan. Then @nickyryanbjj takes on the great Uriah Faber in a grappling match in London’s week later. In between that the squad, myself, @garrytonon @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @nickyryanbjj will teach the biggest super seminar of the year at @evolvemma in Far East Square Singapore over five days, twice a day! This is going to be great!! We are plotting out our teaching and training schedule and really looking forward to this!! The energy and synergism of a multi teacher event is always something special and the location in the center of Asia adds something special to the whole event. Can’t wait to see you there!! #knowmorewinmore

The return of the boxing master!! Wonderful seeing my friend and cornering comrade, the inestimable Freddie Roach along with his hard working assistant Marie at RGA today!! Mr Roach is in town for Boxing at Madison Square Garden this weekend and stopped by to say hello. What a treasure this fellow is. He looks in the best shape I have seen him in years!! He came dancing down the basement stairs like a shadow boxing workout! Tonight we will go out with Georges St - Pierre and talk old days and technique 😜🤗 There is nothing better than a conversation with a person who is a master of their craft - tonight I get to talk with two!

Comeback: Despite its claim to be “the gentle art” Jiu Jitsu is a contact sport who principle aim is tackle people down to the ground and then manhandle them into locks that are fully capable of snapping limbs like match sticks and strangling people unconscious - as such injuries are entirely inevitable. There are going to be times when those injuries take you off the mat - sometimes for extended periods. It is natural to feel that when this happens all your hard work and progress will be lost and you will have to start off at the bottom again. My advice to injured students is always the same - STAY IN THE GAME THROUGH YOUR MIND. While your body is recuperating train your mind. My favorite way to do this is to have injured students watch their team mates training, both drills and sparring. By watching, thinking and questioning THE LEARNING PROGRESSION CAN CONTINUE TO SOME DEGREE EVEN WHEN YOUR BODY IS INACTIVE. In my career I have seen all my main students go through injury problems and emerge better than before. In my own case I entered the sport with a crippled leg and as a result many physical problems - this simple method of replacing physical engagement with mental engagement meant that we all came back to the mat KNOWING MORE than when we left and then it was just a matter of getting our body to catch up to the new knowledge when we got back. The only times I have seen students get noticeably worse during injury lay-offs was when they simply stopped coming and just did nothing Jiu Jitsu related during the down time. Here I am with Gordon Ryan - he is coming back from Knee surgery after a complete tear of his LCL - every day he comes down to the basement and watches class next to me. Every time he watches his mind is active - asking himself what he would be doing if he were in that situation he is watching - active minds don’t degenerate and bodies will soon soon catch up when they get healthy again. Whenever fate pushes you off the mat - and it will happen on multiple occasions - use this approach to stay moving towards your dreams and goals.

Know where you are now and where you want to be in the future: Most of my time coaching is spent upon technical guidance and development. In truth however, one of the most important roles any coach can play is that of ASSESSING WHERE A STUDENTS CURRENT SKILL LEVEL IS AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE CHANGED AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE ADDED. This is why I always try to monitor my students training and chat with them afterwards about what is good about their work and what needs to be improved. It’s tempting to just come in and roll around and play with your favorite moves - there is nothing wrong with that and you can make decent progress in this way and have a lot of fun. However, if you have higher aspirations you will definitely need to go beyond this. There must be a constant sense of PROGRESSION. You will need a sense of your current level and where you wish to be within a given time frame. If you don’t have that constant set of eyes on you - THEN YOU WILL HAVE TO OBSERVE YOURSELF AND DO YOUR BEST TO MAKE SELF ASSESSMENTS. Whatever errors you may make will not harm your progress nearly as much as making no assessments and merely drifting from one workout to the next with a “let’s see what happens” approach. Interestingly, I am the eyes that monitor my students, but there are no eyes that monitor me - so all my career I have had to use self assessments to gauge my own progress as a teacher and coach. You can do it too. Fortunately the very nature of Jiu Jitsu makes it relatively easy - every time we spar we get direct feedback as to our skill level and we can see very clearly both in ourselves and others which moves work well and hence what we might want to add to our arsenal in the future. So make sure there are some eyes on you - whether your coaches or your own - so that your workouts BUILD YOU UP OVER TIME rather than degenerate into repeating the same moves and tactics from one day to the next.

A new look at the fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu - GO FURTHER FASTER: Heading back to NYC after a great weekend filming more content for the next instructional video series I am making in conjunction with @bjj.fanatics It will be titled GO FURTHER FASTER and strongly emphasizes faster progress in Jiu Jitsu through a combination of concepts to give you direction and details to give you the ability to move efficiently in that direction. The first great challenge most beginners in Jiu Jitsu face - and a challenge that will remain with you throughout your time in the sport - is the challenge of overcoming inferior position. Jiu Jitsu is not fun when you are constantly finding yourself pinned underneath people and totally unable to move into your attacks. Fundamentals must begin with the path towards mastery of DEFENSE and ESCAPE . Only when you are defensively sound will you be able to assert your offense. Keep your eyes out for some of the content we filmed today which we will put on YouTube for to check out and get your defensive game strong enough to show off some of your offense!!

Building a devastating arm bar: I always encourage my students to focus hard on the mechanics of their submission holds. Most of you know that I put the overwhelming majority of my teaching time on six submission systems - Back attack system, Ashi garami based leg lock system, Kimura system, front head lock system, triangle system and arm bar system. While it is only natural that among these six systems everyone will have a few that they favor over the others, they have to be strong in all six so that they can attack the whole body from any scenario. The arm bar (juji gatame) is a submission i strongly emphasize in their training. It is a potentially devastating weapon that can be used with equal effect standing or on the ground, gi or no gi, too or bottom, grappling or fighting. One very memorable application of juji gatame was a particularly powerful variation used by Georges St-Pierre in his third fight with the great Matt Hughes. Due to the fact that juji gatame usually requires some degree of prior positional work to get to the upper body it tends to come at the end of a sequence of takedown, guard pass, pin transitions and then the arm bar finish. That is exactly how Mr St Pierre used it in this fight. Done it this fashion it finishes a fight the way a full stop finishes a well constructed sentence. You can see here the arm breaking power of the move that has finished so many matches. Make a deep study of this submission - is your toughest matches it will always be one of your best weapons - a genuine fight ender as it was here.

Big plans: Here I am with my great friends @bernardofariabjj and @michaelzenga from @bjj.fanatics We are discussing our biggest video project yet - the follow up to the ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional series - it will focus on BJJ Fundamentals and as the name GO FURTHER FASTER implies, will cover a systematic approach to getting to a higher level in less time in Jiu Jitsu. We had a great day filming in the blue basement - now we are discussing video ideas in downtown Manhattan. My goal is to change the nature of video instruction and make it a viable addition to your learning journey that does not merely offer some moves to mimic, but rather changes your thinking and perception of the sport and pushes you towards creative independence and self discovery. Can’t wait to tackle this project! Wishing you all the best from NYC! #knowmore/winmore

The importance of Front Headlock position: One of the main criteria I use for selecting the main submission series I focus upon when teaching is AVAILABILITY. There are certain submission options which are almost always readily available in any grappling match regardless of your opponents body type or style. For example, Kimura opportunities arise any time your opponent reaches for you - and in a sport where you have to grip people to do anything, that means it is almost always there for the taking of you want it. Ashi garami based leg locks only require you to position at least one foot inside your opponent’s legs. In a sport where base is crucial athletes usually have to stand with feet apart to maintain base, so ashi garami is almost always available. However, the position which I believe is the most readily available of them all is THE FRONT HEADLOCK. Any time your head is higher than your opponent and he is in front of you - it’s on! Standing, ground, top or bottom - it doesn’t matter. Once you have the front head you have a bunch of very high percentage finishes - all manner of guillotine variations, all manner of kata gatame variations(Darce, Anaconda etc) and of course you can go behind your opponent any time to take his back. It is truly among the most effective positions in the sport. I put a huge emphasis on it among my students and many of them excel in its use. Here, Garry Tonon takes a fine win with a devastating high elbow guillotine finish from mount after beginning in a front headlock. Note how he has taken his opponent’s head into an unnatural position that weakens his body structure and makes defense extremely difficult. Make a deep study of the front headlock and I promise you both your positional game and your submission game will jump up in level 😊

Negation: A huge part of winning in Jiu Jitsu is the negative game of SHUTTING DOWN YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE. Our primary emphasis is not so much about how to move ourselves as it is a game of preventing the other guy from moving himself. Think about a foot race. There are always two ways to win. You can win by making yourself faster than the other fellow; or you can win without making any effort to make yourself faster by making the other fellow slower than you, say for example, by breaking his legs shortly before the race. Both methods will be very effective in bringing you victory (though of course the second would be highly illegal in most foot races). Interestingly, it is the second approach that is more prevalent in the sport of Jiu Jitsu. Our main concern is to UNDERMINE THE OPPONENTS ATHLETIC POTENTIAL MORE THAN IT IS TO ENHANCE OUR OWN. If you can tie up, immobilize, restrain or otherwise impede your opponents movement potential you have a huge advantage that can be used to take you to victory. Look at how Nicky Ryan focuses first upon shackling Garry Tonon’s feet together as a means of undermining his athletic potential prior to attempting a heel hook attack. Any time two legs are shackled together, athletic potential is severely compromised - that’s why I made it a centerpiece of our leg lock system. You must make a deep study of immobilizing and restraining people in your Jiu Jitsu journey. I tell you in all honesty - FOR EVERY TIME YOUR OWN SUPERIORITY IN MOVEMENT SECURES YOU VICTORY IN A MATCH, YOUR ABILITY TO ROB YOUR OPPONENT OF HIS ABILITY TO MOVE WILL WIN YOU TEN VICTORIES.

Fast progress: Ultimately I want you thinking about Jiu Jitsu in the long term as a lifetime study centered around self improvement, but let’s not kid ourselves, we all have a more short term goal to GET AS GOOD AS WE CAN AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE. Like any learning project, there will always be discrepancies in learning rates among different people, but I am very confident that all of us could be learning faster if we structured our training a little better. Sometimes the collusion of hard work, excellent attributes and sound training program can produce incredible results in a shockingly short time. This weekend @nickyrod247 who has done Jiu Jitsu for less than a year along with a year of wrestling at a D2 college took on and dominated a Black belt (and previous winner of brown belt world championships). The key is always to find a good balance between the need for DIRECTION and the need for DETAILS OF TECHNIQUE that enable you to actually move in that direction. With regards direction, ask yourself what directions you want your Jiu Jitsu to go. What will you need to get where you want to be? What should you be focusing on both short term and long term? THE MOST IMPORTANT TOOL IN ANY JOURNEY INTO THE UNKNOWN IS A COMPASS because it does not matter how how much effort you put into walking and climbing and running - if you are going in the wrong directions you won’t get to your destination. As soon as that direction is determined (and this will largely be a reflection of who you are and what you want to do) then it’s all about fleshing out details of technique and practice. Get those two elements - direction and technique - and you will fly towards your goals like this young man!

Observation: There are many catalysts to learning in Jiu Jitsu and life, one of the most important is observation. When most people watch a match or sparring session they look at the result - who won - and remember only that. The result is the least important element to look for. Much better progress will come by looking for successful application of a technique and the mechanical and tactical reasons why it succeeded. Best of all is to look for PATTERNS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE. If you see certain movements repeatedly giving positive or negative results you have made an important discovery - obviously one will push you towards what you want to do yourself and the other a cautionary tale in what to avoid. Only when you see REPEATED SUCCESS do you get clear evidence that something important is going on and may be worth devoting serious study to. It maybe something small, a simple set up or preambles a move - big or small, if you see repeated success then you ought to try it for yourself and see if you can share in that success and perhaps even improve upon it. Understand that simple observation, while never enough in itself, is nonetheless an important part of the learning and development process. It’s easy to sit back and relax and watch sparring and competition like a movie, but it is much more productive to watch it like a puzzle to be solved - you will need to do a lot more work from there - but it’s a great start that we all get many opportunities to partake in every day.

Great work by Craig Jones taking 3rd place at @kasaigrappling championships in New York City tonight! The outstanding Aussie grappler has two beautiful submission finishes out of four matches to take the bronze medal in a stacked tournament here in NYC. The show itself was outstanding with upsets and action at every turn - the tournament format creates great excitement and often produces unexpected results as the athletes have to make split second judgements in a delicate balancing act between position and submission. Outstanding performances tonight from @kaynanduarte @texjohnsonbjj To get to the finals. Mr Jones will travel for a while in Africa before returning to New York in preparation for the ADCC world championships in September. He was joined by his loyal friend @izaakmichellbjj who came all the way from Australia to help out his buddy here tonight. I always love working with these globetrotting athletes from Down Under - it is deeply inspiring to see how much progress they make working far from the known centers of Jiu Jitsu and how far they travel to compete and learn to better themselves - we can all learn from that example. Hope you all enjoyed the show!!

Attack their ability to move first and their joints second: Submission holds are most exciting part of Jiu Jitsu - the highest ideal of the sport is to make the opponent surrender. It natural therefore, that when you get into position to apply a submission hold, that you often tend to rush towards finishing it. Understand something - YOUR FIRST TASK IS TO SHUT DOWN/REDUCE YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE. Only then can you reasonably expect to exhibit the kind of control necessary to break a limb. Breaking a limb is extremely difficult when your opponent is moving around. Take your time, ride out the storm of the initial resistance and focus on limiting his ability to move to the greatest degree possible. You can’t really PREVENT movement, but you definitely can REDUCE it. Only when you feel your opponents defensive movement has been reduced to manageable levels do we switch to the next phase - breaking the arm or leg under attack. Think of submissions as having (at least) TWO SEPARATE TASKS. First, shutting down movement. Second, using lever and fulcrum to break the limb. Don’t bypass the first task in your concern to complete the second. Train yourself to hold and control the submission hold as long as you can before you actually go after the joint lock. You will soon learn that all the major joint locks also have a powerful pinning/riding/control component that can immobilize an opponent for long periods of time. Only when you feel your opponents movement and resistance begin to wilt do you go after the joint lock itself. Start looking at your submission holds as having these two separate phases and I promise you your finishing percentages will start to rise 😜 Here I demonstrate some of the control aspects behind an arm bar (juji gatame) That create a stationary opponent who is easy to finish.

One adjustment at a time: Understand something - there are certain fundamental techniques of Jiu Jitsu that you will be using every day of your training for the rest of your time in the sport. They constitute the very heart and soul of Jiu Jitsu. Moves such as the elbow escape, upa, knee slice pass, arm bar (juji gatame), triangle (sankaku) Kimura etc are so essential to the game that you must understand that mastery of them will be a lifetime endeavor. If you are still doing Jiu Jitsu twenty years from now - you will still be doing Arm bars, triangles and Kimura every day twenty years from now. As you progress, you will learn more about each and make small adjustments that hopefully will improve both your understanding and performance of these key fundamental moves. SOMETIMES A SINGLE NEW INSIGHT AND SUBSEQUENT ADJUSTMENT CAN YIELD VERY SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENTS IN PERFORMANCE. When you go to make new adjustments to old moves in your repertoire, try to make the adjustments ONE AT A TIME so that you can really focus on the adjustment and make it fit into your previous skill set. If you add five new elements to your arm bar at the same time it is difficult to do credit to all five. I prefer to add new details one at a time so I can focus on that aspect of improvement and maximize it. Remember always that you will be doing this move for the rest of your career - there is no rush. Once you feel you have maximized the value of the new adjustment, start work on the next. Let time work for you not against you. Here I am coaching two students through some arm bar work and focusing only upon the height of the knee of their cross face leg - this is a major adjustment that if done well, will significantly improve their connection to their opponent and much greater control of the head - two results that are TRULY WORTH the investment in time - one at a time - until it’s mastered and we move on to the next

Fun day of training today with the squad: It was great having guests @felipepenabjj @romulobarral and @marcusbuchecha and @craigjonesbjj joining up with myself, @gordonlovesjiujitsu and the squad juniors in a packed class in the blue basement today. Everyone is getting ready for the big show at @kasaigrappling this weekend featuring some of the worlds greatest grappling talent. Everyone looked in tremendous form - this show has the potential to be one of the very best ever. It was a pleasure to share technique with these gentlemen and some laughs to. Keep your eyes on Kasai grappling this weekend and see the best in our beloved sport!

That critical moment: Understand something that goes to the very heart of your performance in Jiu Jitsu - something we might call THE SHARED KNOWLEDGE PROBLEM. Whenever you go to employ a given move on someone of roughly the same rank as you - YOU BOTH HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE MOVES YOU ARE TRYING TO EMPLOY ON EACH OTHER AND THE COUNTERS TO THOSE MOVES. So if we both know what an arm bar looks like and we both know the counters to it - how are we supposed to successfully apply it in a competitive situation? When there is shared knowledge of a move there will always be a critical moment halfway through the performance of the move where your opponent will recognize what you are attempting and go into his counter sequences. THIS IS WHERE THE MAJORITY OF SUBMISSION HOLDS ARE LOST. Look at this photo - I am roughly halfway through an arm bar (juji gatame) from Guard position. Any opponent worth his salt will have recognized what is happening by now and ought to be going into strong defensive counters - IT IS HERE THAT THE REAL BATTLE FOR SUBMISSION IS WON OR LOST. It is at this point that you must be at your most mechanically sound in the application of the move. DON’T TRY TO USE SPEED TO GET PAST THIS POINT- USE MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS. Note how I use lower leg alignment and angle combined with a strong back-heel leg action to stay heavy on the head at this critical junction so that I can control my opponent’s movement and prevent slippage. Identify these critical halfway points of the major submissions and research how to exert tight control to take you successfully from HALFWAY there to ALL the way there - this is the single most important stage of mastery of any given submission hold and the one that you must master on your journey to submissions success.

Interesting assessment of Mr Tonon’s winning performance in Tokyo from Wikipedia: Not entirely inaccurate 😂😜

Mixed feelings: Waiting for my flight at Tokyo Narita airport bound for home. I’m sad to leave Japan. This is one of the most incredible places I ever traveled to. A nation of industrious, well ordered, hard working and well educated people. I have never seen a place where every person i observed was so committed to excellence in their work performance. Despite its immense size, Tokyo is the cleanest and safest city in the world - the world can learn much from this incredible island nation. It was incredible to be part of @onechampionship emergence into industry leadership in MMA competition - this show clearly revealed the big steps they have made and how high a level many of their athletes are. Huge congratulations to Garry Tonon - that young man is so hard working and driven - he grinds though hardship and physical issues that would stop anybody else and finds a way to his goals - an inspiration to all of us. Still I’m happy to return to America and see my students and help get them ready for big upcoming challenges! There’s no place like home and NYC is always my favorite. Can’t wait to see the troops back in the basement of suffering and hope and get the room cracking again! Wishing you all the best from the land of the rising sun! 🇯🇵🇺🇸🇯🇵

Victory in Tokyo!! Garry Tonon went to his fourth stoppage victory in his Burgeoning MMA career here in Japan at @onechampionship He took on talented Anthony Engelen a Dutch/Indonesian kick boxer. Early in the match Mr Engelen went to his strength with a strong low kick attack, giving Mr Tonon a reactive kick catch takedown. From there Mr Tonon put on a devastating display of grapple boxing - the integration of grappling and striking on the floor. Mr Tonon is a master of grappling after many years at the highest levels of the sport, tonight he showed his developing skill in grapple boxing and the intimidating power of this mode of attack when well applied. It is hard to believe he has been competing in MMA for only one year. And training for only three additional months. In that time, four fights, four victories, four stoppages. I am incredibly impressed by the speed of his development and the work ethic he has exhibited in making it possible. Here he is backstage at @onechampionship press conference area. Congratulations to Mr Tonon and @onechampionship for another amazing show. A big thank you to the amazing people of Japan - I am so hopeful that big time MMA can come back here to this great bastion of martial arts history and spirit. Wishing you all the best from Tokyo! Thank you all for your support and interest in our approach to learning and training! To all my students back in NYC - see you soon! To all my Instagram followers - keep training hard and aiming high!

Garry Tonon makes weight - all systems go! Garry Tonon Just successfully weighed in here in Tokyo for his fight tomorrow at @onechampionship Here we are going back to the hotel to recharge. It’s Cherry Blossom season here in Japan and there is a beautiful Temple next door which is popular for traditional weddings which are going on as a large groups of MMA athletes prepare for action tomorrow - such an odd contrast - but a rather poignant one as the essence of martial arts is controlled power. Though our business is ultimately a violent one, it is always sublimated to be contained within a peaceful social setting - that’s what differentiates a martial artist from a thug - so it’s beautiful to observe wedding guests intermingled with some of the baddest people on the planet as naturally as birds with the cherry blossoms above them. Wishing you all the best from Tokyo! Hope you all enjoy the big show!

Old school in Tokyo! Wonderful meeting up with two true MMA legends and pioneers - both early heroes of mine from the early days of MMA all the way up to the present and into the future! @vitorbelfort and @caoluno These guys had so many thrilling matches over the years - can’t wait to see them do more in the future! They are here in Tokyo for the big @onechampionship event this weekend - it’s a great time to be in Japan! Legends like these fellows put MMA on the map - I can still vividly remember all their biggest fights from years ago and they are both in tremendous shape even now and ready to show that old school skills are still an incredible force in an ever changing sport! I must have watched their fights a thousand times - such an honor to meet them in person!

Heading back from gym - Tokyo train: Taking the train back to Shinagawa Station after another great workout for @garrytonon for @onechampionship I am extremely impressed by the Japanese people and the city of Tokyo. It is deeply impressive to observe how well mannered and courteous everyone is. I have never seen a people so committed to their work - literally every interaction I have had with local workers, from Hotel staff to a cashier at the local seven eleven, has impressed me with their diligence and commitment to doing their job as well as they can with enthusiasm, vigor and professionalism. It soon becomes obvious how this Island nation with no natural resources worked their way up to become the second largest economy in the world for so long (and probably pound for pound number one). While no people or place perfect, There is much the rest of us could learn from them and improve ourselves. Their subway is immaculate and extremely efficient and people are extraordinarily polite and well ordered. Even though the population density here is very high one does not see many of the social problems we have back home here. There is a real martial arts culture also - with many great martial arts schools all around. The level of Judo and Karate here is simply astounding. I am very proud to be a tiny part of the first big MMA event here in Japan in many years. For such a long time Japan was a global leader in MMA development - it would be incredible if that could be brought back. Wishing you all the best from Tokyo and hoping this day took you all just another step closer to your martial arts dreams and goals! 😊😊

Shoot Boxing: Garry Tonon goes through his shoot boxing drills and skills in preparation for his upcoming fight at @onechampionship Tokyo. It is always fascinating to study how the presence of some new variable drastically changes the behavior of an established system. Nowhere is this more evident than in the case of shoot boxing - where the presence of takedowns drastically changes the established rhythms and patterns of boxing and kickboxing. Mr Tonon continues to make progress in this fascinating aspect of MMA training - he only started just over a year ago and has made tremendous progress in such a short time. Now it’s back to the hotel and some reading, them some note taking for the next video series I will make on BJJ Fundamentals. So impressed by hospitality and friendliness of local people - I hope @onechampionship has many more events here!

Garry Tonon getting ready: The big show in Tokyo draws closer. @onechampionship has sold out for their biggest card ever. Today was another step towards the cage as Garry Tonon went through his drills in the midst of cutting weight and the various media obligations that come with big events. It was fun going back to the hotel with tour guide Matt Hume through the Tokyo train system at rush hour! This city is amazing! So busy but so well organized! NYC looks like total anarchy and chaos in comparison! 😜😜 Here we are after this afternoons workout - so impressive to watch the dedication that Mr Tonon outs into his preparation and skill development - it’s hard to believe that it’s still less than a year since his first fight! His prodigious training routine helps make up for his short time in the sport.

Matched pairs: A very important notion to advance your game is to understand that all good Jiu Jitsu is based around the idea of DILEMMA. Whenever possible, work with two moves linked together so that as one runs into resistance, the over takes over. Note immediately that your CHOICE of linked moves is very important - CERTAIN MOVES LINK TOGETHER WITH OTHERS MUCH BETTER THAN OTHERS. What makes a superior link is often dependent on how you want to attack and what the scenario is. One of the very best linked attacks is the pairing of arm bar (juji gatame) and triangle (sankaku). Whenever you have one, you almost always have the other. Here, I start in a commonly seen arm bar from top rear mount, but as my partner begins to go into a standing escape sequence, I hook into the posted arm in a way that immediately leads into one of my favorite triangles - the rear triangle (ushiro Sankaku). The leg hook under the arm and over the neck creates an extremely strong breakdown to return the opponent to the mat. All it takes on your part is some simple leg pommelling - made easy by the fact the leg positioning in arm bars and triangles is very similar - and now you have two easily linked attacks in one scenario that double your chance of success!

First workout in the land of the rising sun: Garry Tonon gets a nice shoot boxing workout after the long flight to Tokyo at a local Golds Gym - impressive to see that in Japan even the body building gyms have martial arts mat area 😜 Tomorrow we will use a real martial arts gym but this was perfect as a first late night workout to break jet lag and get moving. It’s always fun adapting a workout to a new environment - even more so when its a new country! Now we get a chance to see some of this grand city of lights as we head back to the hotel in a cab. This nation is so impressive - physically small and with very few natural resources other than a highly disciplined, education and research oriented, unified and motivated population they rebuilt and reinvented themselves soon after the total catastrophe of World War 2 to become the second or third largest economic power in the world - a truly remarkable feat that we can all draw inspiration from in our own individual bid to grow and prosper.

Tokyo bound with the the Lion Killer: heading to @onechampionship Tokyo with @garrytonon at Newark Airport. He has trained exceedingly well as always - so impressive with his drive to learn and improve - a real inspiration to all the other athletes in the room. Thank you all so much for your interest in our approach to the game. Will try to keep you all updated as the week progresses. I will miss all my students in the basement as always but excited to see you all when I get back! 😊😊

Six systems - feel the power: With the release of the arm bar (juji gatame) video, the ENTER THE SYSTEM series is complete. It might seem odd that I teach only six submission systems, Back attack system, ashi garami system, front headlock system, Kimura system, triangle system and juji gatame system; afterall, there a vast number of other submission holds out there. When it comes to submissions i use three criteria for selection. First, which moves are truly high percentage? Are they used repeatedly by athletes at all levels, all weight classes in all formats? Second, do they as a whole allow you to attack the entire body? Third, can they be put into highly developed sequential systems that enable you to punch through the toughest defenses and resistance at championship level? Judged in this light you will see that the number of submissions to be selected now shrinks dramatically. My coaching philosophy is always to focus on a select few very high percentage moves and create great DEPTH of knowledge around those, rather than superficial knowledge of a vast BREADTH of moves whose effectiveness in competition is questionable. When my students go out to compete I am always very confident that the six systems we practice will give them a big firepower advantage in submission skill and range. They have enough HIGH PERCENTAGE submissions to cover THE WHOLE BODY with a depth and sophistication that will make them VERY DIFFICULT TO STOP. As Thanos strapped on six infinity gems to gain his powers - add these six submission systems to gain your powers on the mat! 😜

Very pleased to announce the release today of the latest and last installment of the worlds most popular martial arts video instructional series - ENTER THE SYSTEM: ARM BAR (juji gatame). The arm bar is highly representative of the ideals of Jiu Jitsu - it uses the power of the legs and hips to fight against an opponent’s head and arm - and so allows smaller players to overcome bigger and stronger opponents. It is equally effective gi and no gi, in grappling and fighting, from both top and bottom position. Its central feature is its great control in a perpendicular angle that gives easy access to arm locks, strangles (switching to triangles) and leg locks (switching down stairs to variations of ashi garami). This makes it a devastating weapon in the hands of a well trained athlete - fully capable of ending a match in a moments notice when done well. As always thank you to all my instructors and mentors, to my many outstanding students whose brilliant exploits and hard work made the world notice the power of a systems based approach to submission holds and training, and to all you, my readers and followers who have taken an interest in our approach to the kingly arts of Jiu Jitsu and MMA. Thank you also to @bjj.fanatics for all their help in getting my teachings out to the world and joining my vision of changing the nature of video instruction in martial arts into a truly viable supplement to orthodox methods of instruction and learning that can speed progress and offer new ways of looking at the sport rather than simply offering a small set of tricks. The link to the video is in my Instagram bio above. Wishing you all the best - work hard on your arm bars! They represent one of the most valuable combat skills you can ever learn and are big part of our Jiu Jitsu ideal - YOUR WHOLE BODY AS A WEAPON - YOUR OPPONENTS WHOLE BODY AS A TARGET!

The power of symbols: I am a big believer in the power of symbols to inspire, educate and motivate people towards their goals. I try to use them as much as possible in my own life and those who I coach. For example I believe that edged tools and weapons - knives and swords - have important metaphorical value (in addition to their obvious practical value) in martial arts training (one day I will discuss this at length). One of my favorite symbols since my childhood is the famous MITSU-TOMOE (sometimes mitsu domoe) - often seen throughout Asia. I use it’s symbolic power whenever possible in my coaching and living. My own version of it is a double mitsu- tomoe; a smaller one inside a larger one. This captures the biggest theme of my coaching philosophy in Jiu Jitsu - the idea of Jiu Jitsu as a system and my attempt to create subsystems within that system to create a new approach to Jiu Jitsu. Traditionally the most common forms of this symbol have three “commas” inside a circle (there are other versions with more or less commas) and these are usually seem to represent heaven, earth and humans. My personal rendition of it sees the trinity of commas representing the three fundamental skill sets of Jiu Jitsu - standing position skills, ground top position skills and ground bottom position skills. Interestingly the three commas create an optical illusion. If you look you can either see three spokes or blades, or three commas - depending on your focus. Two people can look at the same thing and see two different things - just like Jiu Jitsu - where two athletes can be in the same situation and see two completely different opportunities - and both be correct. Like the mitsu tomoe, Jiu Jitsu involves interpretation on top of technique. So many key themes of Jiu Jitsu and my interpretation of it are bound up in this beautiful image - I love to surround myself with it when I can. Do you have your own favorite symbols to keep your mind on what you do? Do they capture how you feel about your passions? Put them around you in daily life and let them help keep you focused on your dreams and goals 😊

Aussies in NYC: Team Australia is back training in NYC in the basement. Aussie grappling super star and overall nicest dude in grappling Craig Jones is here for the month in preparation for the big upcoming show at @kasaigrappling tournament featuring many of the best in the world such as Felipe Pena and Kaynan Duarte among others. Mr Jones has been training hard and continues to improve as he goes through a busy competition season leading up to world championships at ADCC this year. He is joined by rising Aussie grappler @izaakmichellbjj who is preparing for Oceania ADCC trials. Always a pleasure to see these guys back in the gym. Keep your eyes on this upcoming Kasai Grappling event April 6th - that will be a clash of Titans for sure! Meanwhile it’s back to work in the basement! Lots of new skills to develop and new tactics to try! 😜😜

Pins and transitions: Very often when I coach Jiu Jitsu i see players get into a mindset when they get to a dominant pinning position such as side or mount or north/south - they tend to use it as a STATIC PLATFORM FROM WHICH TO LAUNCH ATTACKS. There is nothing wrong with that approach - it is a time tested and valuable method. However, don’t ignore an alternative that can be very useful for tying together your positional game with your submissions game - this involves strongly emphasizing TRANSITIONS BETWEEN PINS RATHER THAN THE PINS THEMSELVES. Constant movement from one pin to another is one of the very best means of generating LIMB EXTENSION in an opponent as he tries to respond to your movement and escape. WHERE THERE IS EXTENSION THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY OF SUBMISSION. When you emphasize movement between pins you will generate many move opportunities for submissions - it can come at the price of stability if done poorly - SO KEEP THOSE TRANSITIONS SMOOTH AND TIGHT. Here, outstanding junior squad member Frank Rosenthal shows excellent skills going from one dominant pin to another to get around a wary opponent’s defense and shift to a strangle from the back at a recent grappling tournament in England. This kind of pin transition is something we should all be building into our game.

Different arm bar - different priorities: Probably the most basic difference in the execution of arm bars (juji gatame) is that between arm bars performed from bottom positions and those performed from top positions. The fundamental emphasis in each is substantially different. In the case of juji gatame from any given TOP position our primary emphasis must be upon KEEPING OUR OPPONENTS HEAD DOWN, whereas in the case of juji gatame from bottom position our primary focus is on KEEPING OUR HIPS UP HIGH to our opponent’s shoulder. This difference in primary focus creates a very different feel for one move in two different applications. In order to maximize your effectiveness with the move overall, you must be mindful of different priorities in different applications. When underneath - work hard to get your hips rising up off the floor and chase your opponent’s shoulder. You will soon notice an increase in your finishing percentages with this great move

Nicky Ryan vs Uriah Faber: Very pleased to see Nicky Ryan will face off against MMA legend Uriah Faber at Polaris Pro 10 on May 25 in England. Mr Faber always showed great grappling skill throughout his MMA career and was renown for a devastating guillotine which he often used to win his matches. As a grappler he has gone the distance with one of the very best in the world - none other than Paulo Miyao - so he is no stranger to taking on the best in pure grappling. Mr Ryan was back in the gym training today in preparation for this next great challenge - this should be a tremendous match as both athletes are known for a dynamic attacking style! As always, Mr Ryan will go in with a serious strength disadvantage but he is used to that and structures his game around movement and positioning to overcome it. Looking forward to helping with preparation for this show against such a great opponent!

One of the most fundamental concepts in all of Jiu Jitsu is that of BASE/BALANCE. Whenever you are in top position or standing position it is crucial that you be able to maintain some form of base so that you are STABLE ENOUGH TO GET THE TASKS YOU NEED TO DO, DONE. Now when you first begin Jiu Jitsu most people equate base/balance with STATIC BASE. That is, a stable stationary position that feels secure and solid, usually featuring widely spread hands and feet and lowered center of gravity. That is fine for beginners class, but understand something - as you go with better people, THEY WILL ALWAYS BE ABLE TO USE MOVEMENT TO EXPLOIT YOUR CURRENT BASE OF SUPPORT AND KNOCK YOU DOWN. As you progress in Jiu Jitsu you must begin to trade static base for DYNAMIC BASE, where you use momentary supports in rapid succession to hold yourself up long enough to get your tasks done. This is not an easy path and there is no set way of making this switch - it typically takes place organically over time as you go with better opponents - but being COGNIZANT OF THE NEED FOR IT HELPS PUSH YOU IN THE CORRECT DIRECTIONS AS YOU TRAIN. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows characteristic dynamic base as he gets fully elevated yet easily holds his base on one arm and uses his opponent’s body as the rest of his base in a way that will facilitate a hip switch guard pass follow up - a fine example of dynamic base leading to task completion that must become YOUR ideal as you progress.

Arm bars from bottom - GET HEAVY ON THE HEAD: Arm bars (juji gatame) are among the most versatile weapons in Jiu Jitsu - being effective gi and no gi, standing or ground, top or bottom position. When performing them from underneath the main problems you run into will always be stacking and posturing up and away. Both reactions, if done well, can subvert your ability to finish your arm bar. Both reactions start with head position. It is crucial therefore, that you get HEAVY ON YOUR OPPONENTS HEAD WITH YOUR LEGS in order to prevent forward head movement (stacking) or up and away head movement (postural escapes). Look at Nicky Ryan finishing a beautiful juji gatame arm bar variation that involves two legs covering the head for extra weight over the head and a very strong finish. Next time you work juji gatame from bottom position really emphasize getting heavy on your opponents head as he begins to resist and watch your finishing percentages rise with this classic Jiu Jitsu finishing hold.

Drilling: All forms of drilling are to some extent, artificial. They are not the same as real sparring or competition - nor are they intended to be. Drilling is meant to take some element that you will use in sparring or competition and isolate it so you can focus upon some aspect that if you trained and understood it, it would improve your sparring/competition performance. There are many forms of drilling - each has its good and bad points. Understand that drilling represents an ARTIFICIALLY IDEALIZED FORM OF WHAT YOU WANT TO DO IN SPARRING/COMPETITION. You can easily perform a perfect arm bar in drilling because your partner is not resisting. When you compete against each other - it will never look as clean and perfect as it does in drilling. Realize that the better your drilling looks, the better your sparring will look - but that it will never match the ideal of drilling due tot he inevitably messiness caused by strong resistance. This is important - it means that when you drill it is relatively easy - SO SET THE BAR DAMN HIGH FOR YOUR PERFORMANCE - knowing that it will be a lot more difficult in real situations. If you look sloppy and uncoordinated in drilling against a cooperative partner, how do you think you will look when you go against an opponent fighting you tooth and nail? SET THE BAR HIGH WHEN YOU DRILL. The higher your standards when you drill the better you will move when it counts. I coach my students to take real pride in the quality of their drilling and to constantly seek improvements in mechanics and smoothness of application (and severely punish poor performance with a torrent of verbal abuse 😂😂) Whilst the real application will never be as good as the ideal - understand that the higher the ideal - the higher the real world application.

Very excited to join @sanabul for the development of MMA training gear this year. I have been coaching MMA for a long time now and am fascinated by the idea of improving training gear for athletes to help create better workouts in the cage in preparation for bouts or just skill development. Looking forward to working with @sanabul in the development of shoot boxing and grapple boxing equipment to take your workouts to a new level! Stay tuned! 😜😜

The legend of Alabama Joe - part 2: Now don’t get me wrong - it was not pretty. Joe was not going to win any style points from the IBJJF for his performance. His tackle looked like zombie attack from the dawn of the dead, his guard pass to mount looked like a crippled dog pissing on a tree and his punches were about as explosive as a sackful of wet mice - the sleeper hold he employed was about the same level as Rick Flair - BUT IT WORKED!! Three more times in those four nights Alabama Joe stepped up to the plate and fought people that I would have bet would defeat him - and each time he won a messy, ugly, but complete and well deserved victory! It was fascinating to me that this man could more than hold his own with untrained adversaries JUST BY KNOWING WHAT GENERAL DIRECTION HE SHOULD BE GOING IN A FIGHT. Technique? As primitive and unrefined as could be. Outcome? Total victory four out of four times! Now don’t get me wrong - if Joe had fought anyone with skills he would have come up short. But in mid 1990’s NYC no one even knew what Jiu Jitsu WAS - forget about how to defend it. Just by watching Early MMA and Jiu Jitsu he carved out a remarkable run of success in that context. Now, understand that Joe did have some advantages - he had been in a lot fights and so did not freeze or get adrenaline dumps etc and you could argue that his job - bouncing WAS his training. Still, it is clear that just some basic knowledge without any refined skills made a DEFINITE DIFFERENCE in his performance. I always wonder what became of that crazy cat but never forgot that lesson that in a world of ignorance a little sound knowledge can be a game changer - even without a training program

The legend of Alabama Joe - part 1: Would it be possible to become a better fighter just by knowing the theory of what you ought to do in a fight without ever actually practicing? That’s a question I have always found interesting. I got an answer years ago while working as a bouncer during my early years in NYC. Working around the city in was often teamed with interesting characters with many different approaches, theories and styles of combat. Some of them (especially wrestlers, BJJ and Judo players and boxers) were very effective - others not so much. At one time I was briefly paired with a fellow who we called “Alabama Joe” He was man of average build, not in particularly good shape whose main joys were drinking, smoking cigarettes and fighting. We worked a door together for just four nights in the lower east side mid 1990’s but I never forgot the experience for a good reason. As we worked, Joe talked incessantly about his prowess in brawling and how he would whip any man who was foolish enough to step up to the plate with him. I was rather skeptical as I’ve always believed fighting prowess to be mostly determined by ones training regimen and Joe’s training regimen appeared to be based around nothing more than Bourbon and Marlboro’s. He proudly told me he had never trained a day in his life but that he was a huge fan of the early UFC’s which he would watch incessantly. I was intrigued by this as I had begun training with Renzo Gracie And was similarly fascinated. He told me that when he fought he just did what he saw Royce do - run forwards and tackle people, climb up to mount, hit them and wait for them to turn and then strangle them. Later that night we threw some fellows out of the bar after a dispute and outside one of them was unimpressed by the appearance of Alabama Joe and demanded a fight. This fellow was a powerful looking man and I had to do some work to get him outside with a body lock and some light wrestling - I was not at all confident that Joe would be able to handle him. They immediately went to fisticuffs and true to his word, Joe tackled him, got mounted and punched him enough to make him turn and strangled him out!

KNOW MORE - WIN MORE: The first step in performance improvement in Jiu Jitsu is KNOWLEDGE. someone who KNOWS THE CORRECT THING TO DO will always have a chance of success, where as someone who simply does not not know the correct thing to do has no chance. Then the question will always become - if they know the correct thing to do, are they actually CAPABLE of doing it. You must begin with knowledge and then build that knowledge into a skill. Without the prerequisite knowledge, the skill is very difficult to build. My job as a coach is to supply the knowledge and then construct a training program to build the skills into the student. I have made my career as a coach on the notion that knowledge and skill will generally prevail over toughness, spirit and will. In the last year I have been able to massively increase my reach to people outside the gym in which I teach through video instruction. My aim in partnering with @bjj.fanatics is to get out to the world the same knowledge i offer to my students in the classroom and then they can in their own time and through their own daily training convert that knowledge into skill - skill that help take them towards their goals and dreams in the sport. In a world of tough competition where a great number strive for only a tiny number of prizes I count on KNOWLEDGE as the single most important resource you can have - more important than all the things we ordinarily stake our success on - toughness, courage, tenacity, etc. My goal is make people see that every battle on the mats and indeed every battle in life is a war of knowledge where WHO KNOWS MORE WINS MORE. Once knowledge is infused then you must go in to convert that knowledge into a SKILL by hard physical training over time but it all begins with knowledge. There is a sense in which our videos create a partnership. We offer the initial knowledge and you train to convert that into skills. There are not many things in life of which I am certain - but one of them is this - in all combat, KNOW MORE - WIN MORE.

Mixing Martial Arts - Personal Growth and Evolution: I am extremely proud and happy to see the recognition of one of my favorite martial arts comrades today. I want to talk about it a little because i think there are lessons in there for all of us. Gene Dunn, US National Karate champion and Renzo Gracie black belt was inducted into The US Karate Federation Hall of Fame for his outstanding career in the 80’s and 90’s where he was a feared champion. As a champion in his sport he could have stayed there and had a very successful career on that alone - but when the MMA revolution began in 1992 he came out of his comfort zone and at a relatively late age started BJJ as a white belt at the same time I started. We went from white belt to black belt together. As we progressed and senior students left to open their own schools, I became the night time time enforcer and Mr Dunn was the day time enforcer at a time when you had to prove to a skeptical martial arts world that Jiu Jitsu really worked. Mr Dunn’s introduction to martial arts came from need - he grew up in the mean streets of 1970-80’s NYC - a very different place from today. To put things in perspective, 1990-1 when I arrived NYC had 2245 murders, last year less than 250. Mr Dunn saw martial arts as a route to survival in a very tough city. His training and demeanor reflected that. Now Mr Dunn is a teacher. He runs a very successful set of schools in Brooklyn NY teaching Jiu Jitsu and Karate together. Interestingly he has continued his evolution as a teacher. As an athlete it was always about being the toughest fellow in the room - but as a teacher he saw that he need to appeal to the people who NEED MARTIAL ARTS THE MOST - the weaker, smaller, less confident - and building them into a new, more powerful future where they can take the knowledge of his lifetime in martial arts and become better, more confident and skilled people both in the dojo and everyday life. Congratulations Gene Dunn @gene_dunn_ @brooklynbjj You joined different martial arts, unified them, excelled at them and now pass them on to others. Great to see you get recognized for all you have done for US Karate, for RGA and your many students

Georges St- Pierre showing the colors of his team mate @garrytonon in Singapore at @evolvemma gym where he is teaching a huge seminar this week 😊😊 Mr Tonon fights for @onechampionship owned by @yodchatri Great to see the GOAT showing everyone his way to the top and helping his buddy on his own path! Mr Tonon will soon be heading to Japan for his fourth MMA fight - remarkable given that he only began serious MMA training less than a year and half ago!

Division and Unity: A big part of the arm bar (juji gatame) system that I teach is the DIVISION PRINCIPLE. This is the idea that you have both of your legs involved in any juji gatame attack and EACH HAS A SEPARATE FUNCTION. Knowing what the function of each leg is at every step of the arm bar is a big part of success. As you go to complete the final phases of the arm bar, your legs must become much more unified. Here you can see me approaching the last steps and my two lower legs are lined up together. Once I clamp the right leg down the unity will result in a very tight clamp around my opponent’s head and shoulders that will make extraction and defense surprisingly difficult. When performing your arm bar practice, always look for this unity of direction in your lower legs. Should the lower legs be pointing in opposing directions at this point there will be a noticeable drop in pressure around your opponent’s head and shoulders. You will need to divide the function of your legs to ENTER arm bars, but to FINISH them you need this readily observable unity.

Approach on your own terms: Very often in the sport of Jiu Jitsu and indeed, any grappling sport, where you will break contact with your opponent and then have to re-engage. Every time this happens you will have to approach your opponent. When you do this - MAKE A HABIT OF DOING SO ON YOUR TERMS. What does this mean? Whenever you step forward to engage - both of you will have your respective aims - usually they will be directly opposed to each other. Both of you will be seeking some form advantage, which in this type of situation is usually an interesting amalgam of DISTANCE, ANGLE, LEVEL and GRIP. Have a sense l of what you want BEFORE you engage and you are much more likely to get off to a good start. Make sure also that you work to NEGATE what your opponent wants. Here, Georges St-Pierre approaches Frank Rosenthal and immediately takes control of the grips to prevent any kind of effective attack from the bottom player and setting up a safe entry into guard passing work. The game is hard enough already - don’t make it harder by fighting on your opponents terms. Understand what you want upon approach and start working early to get it.

Redlining: A common phrase that most people understand is that of redlining. It refers to a situation where you push an engine above its rated rpm (usually indicates by a red line on the tachometer). If you stay above the redline for any length of time, it is almost inevitable that the engine will be blown out. Just as we studiously avoid redlining whilst driving, so too we must avoid it in Jiu Jitsu. Much of what we call fatigue to failure on the mats is caused by unconscious redlining where an athlete takes his muscular exertion beyond what his breathing patterns can sustain. Interestingly, this is very often not so much a result of what the opponent is doing, but rather, is A SELF INFLICTED HARM CAUSED BY A FAILURE ON OUR PART TO MATCH OUR BREATHING PATTERN TO THE ACTION. In beginner classes this is usually the result of unconsciously holding the breath while attempting to finish a move. Nowhere is this more common than when attempting a strangle. Usually by the time you get to apply a strangle you have done a lot of prior work and so begin in a state of fatigue. Then when you clamp down to finish we hold our breath to maximize squeezing power - this must be avoided. YOU MUST TRAIN YOURSELF TO DEVELOP MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS ON THE LOCK RATHER THAN MUSCULAR TIGHTNESS. Above all, keep your energy expenditure within sustainable limits - strangles take time so budget your rate of energy expenditure accordingly - and KEEP BREATHING! Your opponent should be the one unable to breath - NOT YOU! Here Nicky Ryan shows perfect strangle composure - there is tightness and tension, but it is intended to lock him into POSITION rather than provide the horsepower behind the strangle, and of course, he maintains his own breathing as his opponent loses his ability to do the same (though of course this is ultimately an attack upon blood flow rather than airway). Train your STRANGLE COMPOSURE as you would any other skill in the sport - it is a big part of the path to submission mastery.

It had to happen...due to underwhelming demand, BJJ Fanatics has done the unthinkable and brought out an 80’s Danaher T Shirt featuring the infamous ultra tight V neck sweater and Flock of Seagulls haircut 😂😂 Check out the link in my bio for the “I’m from the 80’s” T Shirt 😂😜😂

Memento mori: I am a big believer in the power of metaphor to teach and remind us of important ideas. Often I surround myself with images, artifacts, art works etc that provide daily reminders of important themes in our lives. One of my favorite is the juxtaposition between our active, striving will - placed in a competitive world where strategy, tactics, planning and knowledge are our keys to success; versus our innate weakness and mortality. The tension between our high ambitions and our mortality fascinates me. I symbolize this with the image of the chess board - the quintessential example of our striving, strategic mind in competition, and the skull, the best memento mori - reminder of mortality. In my living room it is a daily reminder that for all our planning, desiring and striving - we are weak and finite - so don’t take it all too seriously and remain humble in a world where the best laid plans of mice and men often crumble and fall.

Negate first - attack second: A big part of my coaching philosophy whenever you are in neutral positions (neither athlete has a distinct advantage over the other in terms of basic position), is to BEGIN BY SHUTTING DOWN YOUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO ATTACK YOU, and only then, ASSERTING YOUR OWN ATTACKS. Nothing is more hazardous than trying to attack someone while they are simultaneously trying to attack you. The match quickly becomes like a Wild West shootout where the first cowboy to land a shot wins. Instead, position yourself in ways that subvert your opponent’s offense and when things have calmed down a little and under greater control, then switch focus to attacks. Now the attack can be performed in a more relaxed fashion as you are no longer fighting for survival as you are trying to mount your offense. Here I am negating much of my partners guard offense by leg positioning - this will make the subsequent passes and submissions much easier to apply. When you are in these common neutral positions, ask your self what your opponent needs to attack you, and begin by DENYING HIM THOSE THINGS. Only when you feel you have done an adequate job of this and you are under less pressure should you now apply your own offense

ENTER THE SYSTEM is complete: Just finished a final last minute filming session for the final installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video series - ARM LOCKS (juji gatame) These videos have a vast amount of material in them - I was curious to see if i could improve this latest one by adding a special feature at the start of the video where I taught an outline of the system so that viewers can get the big picture at the outset and then get all the crucial details in the heart of the video. We filmed it today at it came out really well! Now it’s time to head back to NYC - there’s a big snow storm coming so this should be interesting! 😜 Wishing you all the best and can’t wait for this last ENTER THE SYSTEM video to get edited and released in a week or two!

Coming to America part 2: Just when you thought it was safe to come back to Instagram...the return of 80’s Danaher and the V neck sweater...This photo is from my last day in Auckland New Zealand, at the airport waiting for my plane to the land of my birth, The United States. Here I am with my old side kick, Kemp - himself a formidable martial artist from the same era as myself- the era of standing striking as the paradigm of all martial arts (to this day, Kemp had one of the best sidekicks I ever saw in my life - full splits and perfect kick control even in near vertical axis at 225 pounds!). Just a few months after this photo was taken my whole conception of martial arts would be turned upside down and my American Journey would begin. Soon after my arrival in New York I began working as a nightclub bouncer and began working with wrestlers and Judoka, two arts I had ignored (such was my naivety I did not even consider wrestling to be a martial art at this time). Hard experience quickly revealed the errors in my thinking and I began the study of grappling. Ultimately a series of fortuitous events took me in the direction of Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and Renzo Gracie. In time, even my earlier conception of standing striking tactics and techniques would be completely overturned with the arrival of the Young Georges St-Pierre and his approach to standing striking integrated with takedowns - what he called “Shoot Boxing.” If I had known that day at the airport how much I would change and in what directions that change would take me and what I would go through to make those changes - perhaps I would have turned around and gotten off the plane! Nothing is more rewarding and uplifting than the feeling of positive change in your life - even when it overturns long accepted beliefs and dogmas. I am infinitely grateful to all the people who helped me on that journey and hope that I can help other people on theirs (only in martial arts, not fashion 😂😂)

Submissions - It’s an all or nothing game: There is a temporal order to Jiu Jitsu that is emphasized from your first day in the sport - first get your opponent to the floor, then get past his legs, then work your way through the various pins, and finally submit your opponent. Before you even get to attempt a submission, quite a lot of work has to be done. There is nothing more frustrating then, than doing all that work and getting halfway through your match winning submission hold and then having your opponent slip out just before you could close the deal. Failed submission holds are like missed punches - they had potential, but score nothing and if thrown too often can exhaust you. It is critical therefore that your study of all your favorite submissions be in great depth to minimize the chance of losing them while in the act of applying them. Here, I am coaching the one of the last steps in the arm bar (juji gatame ) from bottom position. A LOT of arm bars are lost at this final stage. As always THOROUGH KNOWLEDGE OF THE ENTIRE PROCESS OF THE ARMBAR FROM SET UPS TO BREAKING MECHANICS IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS AND THE ANTIDOTE TO FRUSTRATION AND DISAPPOINTMENT. Submissions are a chain of moves in a sequence - and as the old saying goes, a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. If you are losing more submissions than you like - IDENTIFY THE MAIN AREAS OF WEAKNESS IN YOUR CHAIN AND TRY TO BRING THOSE UP TO THE STRENGTH OF THE OTHER LINKS OF THE CHAIN.

Happy to announce a big super seminar in Singapore coming up in the future in conjunction with @evolvemma and @onechampionship Looking forward to teaching alongside Garry Tonon and Gordon and Nicky Ryan!

The mind leads the body: Whenever you are sparring your mind will have a given direction of focus. The most basic division is between SELF FOCUS and FOCUS UPON THE OPPONENT. Both are necessary for success but an important question is - what amount should I focus upon myself and what amount upon my opponent? I often see beginning students out A DISPROPORTIONATE AMOUNT OF FOCUS UPON WHAT THEY OUGHT TO BE DOING WITH THEIR OWN BODY AT ALL TIMES IN A MATCH. This is a perfectly natural mistake to make at the beginner level. The game is complicated and there are many ways to lose. You are juggling a lot of new information in a very stressful environment, so it’s natural to over focus upon how you should holding your own body so as not to be an easy victim, rather than focus upon the weaknesses and opportunities your opponent is offering. The opposite mistake is to be overly confident and focus too much on looking only for your opponents vulnerabilities WHILE BEING BLIND TO YOUR OWN. This can definitely get you in trouble also. Your path to mastery in Jiu Jitsu is largely bound up with finding a workable compromise between these two extremes. If you feel you suffer from an over emphasis in one direction, command yourself to mentally focus on the other at the start of each sparring round one day. You will immediately notice that THE CHANGE IN MINDSET WILL YIELD PHYSICAL RESULTS. You may not submit everyone but you will try more attacks if you make yourself actively look for the second by second openings your opponent offers. Conversely, if you command yourself to focus on maintaining sound defensive posture at the start of each round, you will immediately present a more difficult target to your training partners. Here, Frank Rosenthal shows a fine perception of his opponent’s body position, made easier by his well balanced posture. This reflects his confident attacking spirit - the ideal of Jiu Jitsu that you must strive for. When you train - don’t just train your body - train your mind - for it has dominion over your body and it is the inner workings of your mind that will determines how well your body performs the physical skills you work so hard to perfect.

Getting ready: @garrytonon is preparing to go back to fight for the fourth time in @onechampionship in Tokyo Japan on March 31st. The transition from Jiu Jitsu to MMA is always a long and arduous one. It has been about a year since his first fight now and his progress has been astounding - but still a long way to go. Despite the new direction we never forget where we come from and Garry is proud to carry the Jiu Jitsu/submission grappling flag into the cage. A big part of what we are trying to do is show that the power of submission holds applies in all domains and that locks and strangles can play the same role as KO punches in a fight - as devastating and highly effective weapons that can thrill an audience and end a fight at any time. On the other hand, we are realists and only a fool would claim that grappling is all you need in MMA. Training in striking is essential also, even if it is not your main weapon. It’s a fascinating journey and nothing is more interesting and challenging to me as a coach than the complex interplay between striking and grappling. Another day on the mats and in the cage - lots more to go 😊😊

Filming in Boston: Today I finished up the final installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM video instructional series - The Arm Bar (juji gatame). Then we began filming more material for the next series FUNDAMENTALS: GO FURTHER FASTER This represents a radical departure from the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. It is a gi series and our intention is to make a series showing a path to quicker progress through the use of a structure that builds a foundation of essential moves upon which the sport is based taught with a level of technical detail and conceptual insight that cuts down on the time spent to get to a strong level of performance. As such, the content is much more classical positional work - the foundation of the sport. It is positional excellence that will create the opportunity for submission brilliance further down the road for developing athletes. I always loved teaching fundamentals more than any other aspect of Jiu Jitsu - that is where the heart and soul of the sport is, so I’m having a blast with this material! I hope you get similar enjoyment when you get to use it on all your teammates! 😜😜 Heading home now on the train from Boston - tired but happy. Big day of training back at RGA tomorrow and looking forward to it 😊 Wishing you all the best from somewhere between Boston and New York City!

Concentration of force: Among the most foundational axioms of all forms of combat is that of concentration of force. The idea is to take a large percentage of our strength and apply it against a low percentage of an adversary’s strength at a vulnerable and important point where, if the attack is successful, the opponent will not be able to continue the fight. Jiu Jitsu, like all intelligently crafted approaches to combat, is based around this principle, most obviously through the use of submission holds, which are a very clear example of concentration of force in practical application. One of our favorite examples will always be the triangle (sankaku) which pits the strength of both our legs and hips against an opponent’s single arm and neck. It works not just one vulnerable point, but two (strangles and locks to the entire arm). Within the triangle family one of our big favorites is the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) which creates an especially impressive demonstration of concentration of force as you can see in this picture of outstanding junior squad member Nick Ronan. Note the total isolation of head and arm and the power restraining forces of the legs and hips that immediately create both a strangle threat and arm lock threat. This is the ideal of Jiu Jitsu. Make the study of concentration of force your life’s work in Jiu Jitsu

A study in greatness: The most important people in our lives are those who give us an example of what is possible so that we can lift ourselves higher. They don’t give us THINGS, they give us IDEALS; and those ideals can move us from within to become better people. Georges St-Pierre was the single greatest example of a positive athletic role model I ever met in my career. Every dojo or training partner he walked into or befriended was lifted by his appearance. Starting off as an unknown youngster from Quebec, he fought his way to the top of the fight worlds toughest division and beat the best of three generations of welterweights and then came back from an initial retirement to win the title at middleweight. Along the way he exhibited the highest standards of character and professionalism in an often wild sport. He ushered in the modern era of professionalism in preparation for MMA athletes to replace the traditional martial arts methodologies used by previous generations of competitors. Nobody did more to elevate the standing of the sport in the public eye as it grew from its bloodsport beginnings into the most popular combat sport in the world. He was an innovator who staked his career on the paradigm shift from single style specialists to what he stood for - integrated skills where the primary emphasis was on the interface BETWEEN skill sets rather than over emphasis on any one skill set. This enabled him to outwrestle wrestlers, outstrike strikers and dominate Jiu Jitsu champions on the floor. He was not the best at any one of those skills - he was the best at integrating them with a speed and direction that no one could keep up with. He defeated all his opponents, dominated every re-match he ever took and shut down the toughest opponents to a degree what was utterly astounding. It was the greatest privilege of my coaching career to be a small part of this great mans ascent to the top of martial arts. Through all the time i knew him and i have no doubt all the way into the future - He was a martial artist first and an MMA athlete second. This made him a perpetual student, a generous teacher and a truly noble fighter. Thank you, Georges, from all of us

With a well applied joint lock there is no such thing as failure: The very nature of joint locks is all or nothing - they either get the submission or they don’t - sometimes the dividing line is very narrow indeed. It is important that you don’t let this fact permeate into your thinking in a way that becomes destructive to your performance. While it’s true that the obvious outcome of a joint lock is black or white - submission or not; there are other important benefits that come from a well applied joint lock that occur even when you don’t get the submission. First, Sometimes your opponent simply refuses to tap. In these cases, continue the break and now his performance will begin to drop as the injury takes effect, leading to other routes to victory. Second, a threatening lock will elicit strong defensive reactions that enable you to go forward in other ways - towards a reversal, a new position, another submission hold etc. so that even failed joint locks can have excellent consequences if sufficiently threatening. Third, your opponent will now be much more respectful of your skills once he has felt serious danger and hence much easier to manage as the match progresses. These and other benefits of such joint lock attacks that don’t actually get a submission raise an important point - EVEN WHEN A POWERFUL JOINT LOCK ATTACK FAILS, THERE WILL BE TANGIBLE BENEFITS FOR YOU TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF. Don’t get dispirited if you don’t get the tap - instead, TRAIN YOURSELF TO LOOK FOR THE POSITIVE OPPORTUNITIES THAT ALMOST ALWAYS ARISE FROM THOSE ATTACKS AND SCORE WITH THEM. Here, Gordon Ryan comes close with a powerful heel hook attempt in a very close match - the lock ultimately failed insofar as it did not get the submission, but it forced a strong defensive reaction that under the rules of that particular match, scored the match winning points. Don’t concern yourself with the outcome of your joint locks - that’s up to your opponent - concern yourself with generating maximum breaking power and then a good follow up that takes you forward should it not end the match.

Strangles and self doubt: A very common phenomenon that I see both in sparring and competition is for an athlete to get into a good strangulation position, apply the strangle and then as it is starting to take effect, lapse into self doubt and unnecessarily release the strangle to adjust position, only to give the opponent a second chance at defense and have him escape. Remember, strangles take a little time and require constant application of force to be effective. Squeezing and releasing won’t get the desired effect - only squeezing and holding will get the job done once the strangle is properly set. Now, if you have set the strangle poorly, no amount of squeezing will be effective, indeed, a common problem is that of beginners setting a strangle badly and then squeezing for all they are worth And exhausting themselves. However, don’t let fear of this make you fall victim to the opposite error - THROWING AWAY A GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR A STRANGLE BECAUSE YOU DID NOT HOLD RESOLUTELY FOR THE TIME REQUIRED. You must train the sensitivity required to know when the strangle will interfere with blood flow sufficiently and the confidence to hold pressure long enough to get the win. Here Nicky Ryan works a variation of the rear naked strangle where he compressed the jaw back into the carotid arteries (mandible strangle). This requires even more sensitivity and confidence as it usually takes longer to get the strangle effect due to interference of the jaw bone. So practice the feeling of a well set strangle to the point where EVEN WITH EYES CLOSED YOU KNOW WHEN ITS ON AND WHEN ITS NOT, and once it’s on, go forward with confidence to your victory

Many will look - few will see: A sizable portion of any grappling match just looks like a profitless tangle of limbs leading to nothing but confusion. I’m sure you’ve all had the experience of trying to explain the appeal of grappling to non grappler friends. When they watch a match it just looks to two people aimlessly rolling about on the floor. Your job as an athlete and mine as a coach is never to WATCH the action, but always to INTERPRET it. You must train yourself TO SEE OPPORTUNITY AND DANGER EARLIER THAN OTHERS DO - for this is the surest way to success in the sport. You can train this skill daily by watching two other athletes spar and trying to ask yourself what you would be doing in their respective situations. This trains your mind to ACTIVELY INTERPRET events rather than what most people do - which is passively watch for the outcome. The idea is not to FOLLOW the outcome - but to CHANGE the outcome; and the best way to train this is active interpreting observation - a skill you can train every day - even when you are not training yourself.

If you can see daylight...
A basic demand in almost all grappling moves - particularly submission holds - is the demand for tightness of fit between you and your opponent - often called “connection.” The tighter the connection the less likely an opponent will be able to slip out of whatever you are trying to control him with. Now whenever you go to perform a given move, OVERALL connection is important, but LOCAL connection at certain key points is ABSOLUTELY CRUCIAL. When you study your favorite moves you must make a point of understanding where the most important POINTS OF CONNECTION are for that move and strongly emphasize them in your training and drilling. So for example, here I am demonstrating the early phases of an outside heel hook. I emphasize the right connection of my opponents shoe laces to my ribs through good elbow position. This will make heel slippage, a common problem associated with heel hooks much less likely and also make the transfer of the power of my hips into breaking power upon my opponent’s knee and ankle much more efficient. If you can see daylight around the opponent’s foot - the lock will never operate at high efficiency. Make these crucial local areas of connection your study, not just overall connection, and you will soon notice a difference in your finishing ability.

Coming to America: Though I was born in the United States, I was raised the first twenty three years of my life in New Zealand, the land of my parents. While studying Philosophy at the University of Auckland I successfully applied for the PhD program at Columbia University in NYC. Here I am at University of Auckland on my last day in New Zealand age twenty three rocking my best 80’s haircut and baggy pants 😂😂 My first exposure to Martial arts was watching the great boxers of the 1970’s and 80’s. I was obsessed with the conflicting styles of Ali and Frazier. Later, with the four kings, Sugar Ray Leonard, Thomas Hearns, Marvin Haggler and Roberto Duran (also honorable mention to Wilfredo Benitez and Mike McCallum). In college my attention went almost entirely to Mike Tyson. Among kick boxers, Dieselnoi and Samart Payakaroon were my main heroes. The study of these great fighters was my first passion in martial arts. In this time period, grappling was not really taken seriously as a fighting method. I had no idea that day in 1991 as I boarded the plane to the land of my birth that my whole conception of martial arts would soon turn upside down and that an entire new world lay undiscovered before me. To this day I still love to watch those old heroes of mine, but it is done in an entirely different context, with different eyes and for different purposes. Sometimes I wonder if I could travel back in time and talk to this twenty three year old me and tell him what I now believe about martial arts at fifty two, the younger man would think the older man was crazy or even foolish! New environments and perspectives are the greatest catalysts to growth - I am blessed to have lived a life in two nations and lived through different eras of martial arts. Unifying the lessons learned is a big part of my coaching work.

If your submission game is strong, it does not matter how far behind on points you are, how tired, beat up and demoralized you are - as long as you have a heartbeat and time left on the clock - you can win. For a grappler, submissions play the same role that a knock out punch does for a boxer - they make you dangerous at all times in a match no matter what the circumstances. Photo @jeffreyschu

Becoming dangerous from bottom position: In Jiu Jitsu Your first responsibility in bottom position is to get and then maintain your legs (guard) between you and your opponent. This can be a difficult and attention consuming task against a good opponent; so much so that there is a danger that you will overlook your second responsibility from bottom position - TO AGGRESSIVELY ATTACK FROM UNDERNEATH WITH BOTH POSITIONAL MOVES AND SUBMISSIONS SO AS TO CREATE AN ATMOSPHERE OF INTIMIDATION AND FEAR/RESPECT THAT WILL MAKE YOUR OPPONENT MUCH MORE TIMID IN HIS TOP PRESSURE. How do you make sure you don’t overlook that critical second responsibility? I always encourage my athletes to finish every act of guard retention with an attack. Initially these might have a low success rate, but as you gain in skill and daring this creates a habit whereby you don’t get locked into a defensive mindset where you just focus on holding guard, but instead always finish in an offensive mode. Learn to throw your legs into the attack with confidence and vigor. Ashi garami based leg attacks, triangles and arm bars are my favorites from bottom. All three involve aggressive leg work where you can shoot your legs into the attack as a boxer throws his hands in fisticuffs. Here, Stanley Rosa goes from defense to offense in a second during a guard exchange at the ADCC trials in California - now his opponent, who was offensive just a few seconds before this photo was taken, is one hundred percent defensive. Next time he engages the guard he will be much more reticent about applying passing pressure.

Gordon Ryan guard passing video release today!! BJJ Fanatics will release the the best No Gi guard passing instructional ever made today. Gordon Ryan has meticulously put together our approach to No Gi guard passing featuring all of his own innovative additions and special tweaks that he has used to dominate his opponents guards at the highest levels of competition. Passing guard in the blue basement, where everyone is a dangerous leg locker, requires that in addition to being able to pass, you must also be able to shut down leg attacks at the same time. Also, much of our grappling training is grappling for MMA, where there is a constant danger of opponents standing up on you as you attempt to pass, so a big part of our focus is on guard passing methods that ensure an opponent is kept down as we go to work. Also, we began our journey in submission only tournaments where guard passing scores nothing - so we had to create many submission attacks as we passed and play a dilemma game based around the dual threat of passes and submission. Mr Ryan’s video reflects these four demands. He has created a passing method that
1 - Will get you passing the guards of all your peers in record time
2 - will shut down leg lock dangers as you do it
3 - will make it exceedingly difficult for opponents to stand up as you do it
4 - will make you a dangerous passer who can simultaneously create submission threats as you pass.
Check out this game changing instructional video to see how the best gets it done - soon you will too! 😜😜 Link to BBJ Fanatics website in my Instagram story

As thrilling as the big stage is - in truth it is not there that the outcome of a bout is determined. It is in the lonely training halls, where no one watches and no one applauds. In dank gyms where you must perform without recognition or praise and the only audience is your own mind. On the worn and dusty mats, ring or cage where you spar with training partners the world will never know, in sessions as tough as any bout, that the world will never see. That is where your craft is mastered and the outer form that you reveal onstage is molded. Here’s to those unknown and thankless hours, days, months and years of lonely hardship. What you do onstage belongs to the world; but those countless hours of unwitnessed and unappreciated preparation are yours and yours alone. They, not the stage, represent your true character.

Heading to the Bronx to teach: Every Monday night for years now, I head up to the Bronx to teach at the school of my outstanding student Doug Pelinkovic at @bxmartialarts This weekend one of the Bronx students, Stanley Rosa, shocked everybody (except us 😉) by making a devastating run to the finals featuring his characteristic panther like movement and crushing submissions to take silver medal and show what a force he is. I love seeing this happen. He is raised at a local school and does 95% of his training with his classmates at that local school, but with passion and industry and knowledge he showed he can take on the best and prevail in style. There is both inspiration and a lesson in that for all of us. Can’t wait to get to the Bronx and catch up with the whole crew and swap stories!

I’m very excited to see that one of my favorite people in grappling, the great Keenan Cornelius, is releasing a big video production of his masterful lapel guard work. I believe Mr Cornelius is one of the most innovative and forward thinking athletes in Gi BJJ today. His innovative lapel guard has been tying up and controlling the toughest opponents at the highest levels in a way that is extraordinarily impressive. I got a chance to chat with him again at the ADCC trials and it sounds like a fantastic project! Check out the link to his video work in my Instagram story 😊

Beautiful day in LA: After the excitement of yesterday’s ADCC west coast trials today I taught a big seminar at my good friend and RGA comrade Shawn Williams school @5starmartialarts I went over the relationship between arm bar (juji gatame) system and leg system. It was a pleasure seeing people from all over LA come in and develop their skills together. I got to see my Armenian friends Sevak Magakian and Karen Darabedyan who competed against us with skill and distinction in the past. They came with their legendary sensei Gokor Chivichyan and dis very well with the drills. Now I’m at LAX waiting for my plane for the lonely red eye flight home to NYC. Arriving at 5:30am - straight to RGA to teach the morning class then teach all day and then the night class in the Bronx. Looking forward to seeing my students again but always miss LA when I leave. Wishing you all the best! Photo @Jeffreyschu

Leading by example: Yesterday was an incredible day of success for the squad juniors at ADCC West Coast trials with two golds and a silver medal along with other outstanding performances from other athletes that did not medal but show great potential for the future. I wanted to say a big thank you to squad seniors @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @garrytonon who assisted me through twelve hours of coaching. Mr Ryan is wearing a knee brace and stoically limped from mat to mat to help coach. Mr Tonon is in fight camp for his next MMA bout but set time aside to come out and help. Both coached brilliantly and helped take the squad through to one of its best showings. Both came out on their own time and expense to help the team. Nothing inspires like example and these two go out of their way to help build a team culture that builds a roomful of talent rather than an individual. I am blessed to have students like this. Some you know, many you don’t; but to paraphrase an old saying - IT TAKES A ROOM TO BUILD A CHAMPION. Thank you to my whole room and thank you Garry and Gordon.

Incredible showing at ADCC West Coast North American trials: The squad juniors came out in force today in what was quite possibly the largest North American ADCC trials ever today in Los Angeles, California. Nicky Ryan won gold in the lightest weight category with a stellar performance WINNING EVERY MATCH BY SUBMISSION (heel hooks and back strangles). Nick Rodriguez won gold in the heaviest weight division - incredible given that he is only a blue belt and used an extremely impressive array of positional and submission moves to take gold. Stanley Rosa has his best ever performance, representing Bronx Martial Arts Academy where I teach every Monday night with my senior student Doug Pelinkovic. He moved like a panther all day to take the silver medal with many crowd pleasing displays of technique along the way. It was wonderful to see the youngsters take center stage and show how it’s done - 90% Submission rate overall and not a single stalling call on the squad 😜😜 As always I am so proud of their achievements - hope you all enjoyed the show!! Tomorrow it’s MMA training for Garry Tonon and then seminar at @5starmartialarts at 11am - then back to NYC for Monday classes. Wishing you all the best from LA!! Thank to all my incredible students and thank you to all of you who follow our progress 😊😊

Heading to LA: Big weekend in California with the North American West Coast ADCC trials. Heading out to help coach and then a seminar Sunday morning at @5starmartialarts then a quick turnaround back to NYC to help Garry Tonon get ready for his next MMA fight. I don’t know if running around after these kids keeps me young or makes me old! 😂😂😂 As long as everyone is having fun and getting closer to their dreams and goals it’s all worth it! 😜😜

Back system - the battle for head position: Jiu Jitsu is a subtle art. Very often there appears to be a certain battle going on between two athletes, yet the thing that actually determines the outcome of that battle is something completely different from what most onlookers think. In the case of strangles without the gi (naked strangles - but that sounds a little strange 😳😂), particularly on the side opposite the strangle arm (what most people consider the “weak side”) there is a battle for head position that is probably the single biggest determinant of success or failure. Look at how Outstanding junior squad athlete Frank Rosenthal keeps his head between his opponent’s (10th Planet stand out Marvin Castelle) head and the floor. Failure to maintain this head position will almost always result in failure of the strangle. JIU JITSU IS A GAME OF PREREQUISITES - WITHOUT THE NECESSARY PREREQUISITES NONE OF THE MOVES WILL WORK AGAINST RESISTANCE. Your job as a developing athlete is to learn exactly what the main prerequisites to your favorite moves and develop the skills to satisfy those prerequisites every time to the point where don’t even think of the move you want until those prerequisites have been satisfied. Understand that often those prerequisites are not obviously related to the skill they set up - you must think deeply about WHAT REALLY MAKES THE MOVES WORK. When you do this, soon you will be applying perfect strangles like this one!

Thumbs up if you like strangling people with your legs! MMA star Sage Northcutt enters the system at a seminar I held in Singapore with @evolvemma The rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) is the second most important triangle in my sankaku system (front triangle is number one) and a fantastic way to utilize the impressive strangling power of the legs to finish highly resistant opponents. Unlike strangles with the arms, there is no need to penetrate under the jaw (a constant source of frustration for many athletes attacking the back) and in addition, a great set of alternative finishes if the strangle should prove ineffective. There is no clearer example of using your legs to overwhelm and control a portion of your opponents upper body - the ideal of all good Jiu Jitsu - that gets a thumbs up from all of us!

Seminar in LA with Shawn Williams: Very excited to be back in LA this weekend for the ADCC trials and a chance to see my old friend and comrade Shawn Williams at @5starmartialarts to teach a seminar at 11am Sunday February 10 It’s always a pleasure to show what we are working on and see if we can help improve your game. Check out @5starmartialarts if you are interested 😜😜

Professionalism and dealing with a crisis: There is always a chance in competition that something completely unexpected and detrimental can happen to you mid match - you must have a set of protocols in place to deal with it and have enough adaptability to get this protocols to work in every unique situation and a professional demeanor to apply them in a stressful environment. This weekend, Gordon Ryan had an epic match with João Gabriel Rocha. Near the end of the first period he went to elevate the big man just as Mr Rocha set his weight back and down. There was a sound like ripping canvas audible above the crowd and then time ran out. When Mr Ryan came back to the corner it was obvious from his gait that something was very wrong. When he came close he said matter of factly, “My left LCL is torn, feels like a serious tear. I have no stability in my left leg.” No emotion, no exaggeration. Whenever this kind of thing happens I always begin with one question - DO YOU BELIEVE YOU CAN WIN THIS MATCH? Rule number one of all combat sports is this - NEVER SEND AN ATHLETE INTO A MATCH IN WHICH YOU DO NOT BELIEVE HE HAS A SERIOUS CHANCE OF WINNING. If i don’t believe it myself during a match i will immediately throw in the towel. My approach is that you can always abandon this attempt and go back to the gym and improve and win in the future. Now often times an athlete will SAY yes, when they don’t really believe it to be the case. I always look at their body language when they answer and make my assessment. Mr Ryan looked me square in the eyes and said calmly - yes. Next step is is to use the remaining forty five seconds to reconfigure the game plan. Obviously standing grappling was out. Mr Ryan would have to walk to center without limping (revealing a problem) and sit to guard. His body was running hot so we figured he had another couple of minutes before his movement would be totally compromised. That meant in this rule set he had around two minutes to launch a serious submission attack to either win or score and then hold on with one leg, favoring guard retention via turtle rather than leg pommelling. Mr Ryan got up and did exactly that - professionalism in a crisis

Front triangles - Getting to an angle and breaking posture: The front triangle will always be the most important of the five main varieties of triangle in the sport of Jiu Jitsu due to the disproportionate amount of time spent on guard scenarios relative to other grappling arts. When using the front triangle from bottom position, the two biggest concerns are getting advantageous ANGLE and breaking your opponents POSTURE. The problem is that your opponent usually knows this and thus will do everything he can to prevent you doing this. It is very good therefore, to have a sound mechanical means of getting angle and KEEPING ANGLE AGAINST RESISTANCE. One of the very best methods is a scoop grip under your opponents leg to pull yourself around perpendicular to your opponent. Unfortunately this grip is not always possible due to an opponent’s positioning. An excellent substitute is to under the arm on the same side as your unsuccessful scoop grip attempt on the leg. This has the added benefit of keeping your opponents head broken down in poor posture. Here, Garry Tonon applies a particularly tight reinforced variation to lock in an extremely tight triangle finish on outstanding American grappler Javi Vazquez. Once a triangle is locked on in this fashion escape becomes extremely difficult. Once you lock your opponent head and arm inside your legs - remember - ANGLE AND NEGATION OF POSTURE ARE YOUR TWO MAIN CONCERNS. Focus on them and watch your finishing rate go up!

Heading back to NYC: Sad to leave Texas. It was a great weekend with @gordonlovesjiujitsu giving one of his gutsiest performances to take tight victory that was fought down to the last seconds while carrying an injury. Today Mr Ryan and I taught an awesome seminar at @gracieonejiujitsu I did the demonstrations while an incapacitated Mr Ryan went through a great question and answer session with the attendees where he showed the tremendous depth of his knowledge in Jiu Jitsu and training. It was a real pleasure connecting with the Dallas Jiu Jitsu people and showing our way of doing things. Can’t wait to come back to the Lone Star State. Congratulations to Mr Ryan and his great opponent João Gabriel Rocha for one of the best matches of the year. Congratulations also to @kasaigrappling for putting on another awesome show - these guys are taking grappling in all the right directions. And thank you to the fans in Texas and our gracious hosts here in Dallas who made it such a pleasure to come here and show some squad style Jiu Jitsu 😜😜 Now I’m waiting at Dallas/Fort Worth for my flight back to NYC tomorrow I return to the basement - lots more goals to reach for all of us - let’s get to work! 😊😊

Hard fought victory in Dallas, Texas! Gordon fought off injury and a very tough rival to take a closely contested victory here in Dallas tonight. João Gabriel Rocha is one of the toughest athletes in Jiu Jitsu today with wins over Felipe Pena, Rudolfo Viera and Erbeth Santos among many others. He has won two ADCC silver medals and had a nearly forty pound weight advantage - this was always going to be a tough match. In the first ten minute period, Mr Rocha performed a well executed uchi mata throw that took both athletes completely off the stage. Then Gordon Ryan came back with two beautiful guard seeps to take top position. Unfortunately he then badly tore his LCL in his knee. It was immediately apparent his movement had become compromised. When he came back to the corner to begin the second time period featuring points we noted that it would be prudent to go to bottom position and attack the legs. Mr Ryan did exactly that - scoring the best submission attempt of the fight with a fine outside heel hook that forced a strong defensive reaction from and Rocha and secured points. Now it was question of whether he would be able to hold on to the lead with an injured leg in the two minutes remaining. Mr Rocha did a great job of pressure passing as the seconds passed and tested Mr Ryan’s Guard retention to the limits. Time ended with Mr Ryan still ahead and another tough win in the books! We will have to see the extent of the injury now. Here we back stage with proud Dad, Gordon Ryan Sr and Rich Byrne, the CEO of @kasaigrappling who, along with Rolles Gracie, is doing such an amazing job of promoting grappling nationwide through their organization. Hope you all enjoyed the show!! I am sure these two great athletes will meet again with both looking for a decisive finish to resolve the tightness of this great match tonight

Weigh in complete: Gordon Ryan and João Gabriel Rocha weighed in for their big match tomorrow night. Mr Rocha came in at 263 pounds and Mr Ryan at 226 - his heaviest ever weight, but still nearly forty pounds less than his rival. Mr Rocha is one of the most impressive heavyweights in the world, with two ADCC silver medals, one in his weight class and one in in open weight. He has defeated BJJ legends such as Keenan Cornelius, Nicholas Meregali, Bruno Bastos, Joao Assis, Rafael Lavato, Erbeth Santos and Yuri Simoes. He is the great rival of Buchecha, the man most people believe is the current worlds best, and always has epic battles with him. Should be a fascinating clash of styles made all the more interesting by the size difference. It will be an honor to have a student go up against such a great opponent! Off to the gym now for light workout and then it’s all on tomorrow night! Wishing you all the best from Dallas, Texas!!

Going to the official weigh ins for Kasai Grappling - Gordon Ryan drives like he does Jiu Jitsu 😂😂😰😰😳😳 Wish me luck! 😩😩 Dodge Durango STS 5.7 L Naturally aspirated V - 8 engine 470 Horsepower!! American V8’s 4Eva!! Nothing beats the sound of old school American engines on the loose 😜😜 Looking forward to seeing everyone at the weigh ins!

Heading to Texas with the @kasaigrappling crew for the big show in Dallas Texas this weekend! It’s going to be a great event! On Sunday @gordonlovesjiujitsu and I will teach a seminar @gracieonejiujitsu - it will be a fun weekend! Now it’s off into the big blue sky! See you in Texas 😂

Movement and extension: The two fundamental prerequisites of submission holds are to generate MOVEMENT and EXTENSION in your opponent. Stationary and tightly contracted (limbs pulled in tight) opponents are very difficult to submit. Given that relentlessly seeking submission is the basis of my approach to Jiu Jitsu, big part of what I coach is the ability generate movement and extension and then feed off the opportunities generated by this. This photo shows an interesting situation. Garry Tonon, a master of using his own movement to create movement and extension in an opponent, has used elevation from bottom position as the means of creating movement and extension in his opponent, Kim Terra. Mr Terra is a highly skilled athlete and immediately recognizes the danger of extension and skillfully keeps his legs in a contracted state despite the powerful elevation - mindful of the leg lock danger from Mr Tonon. However, note always that if the movement is there, the opponent can never keep ALL his limbs contracted or he will fall over and lose position, so Mr Terra must keep his upper body extended even as he tries hard to defend his lower body. This choice makes perfect sense given the great proficiency that Mr Tonon has in leg locks - but it simply meant that now Mr Tonon knew he had to switch to upper body attacks. That is exactly what he did - soon after this photo he successfully applied a stranglehold for the win. You must be mindful of creating movement and extension in your opponents as the precursor to your final goal of submission. You must be able to get your opponent moving and extended with equal facility from both top and bottom position. Only then will the submission holds you train so hard to perfect be available for you to use as your opponent offers them.

Variations in intensity - the wisdom of the hunter: When it is time to attack an opponent with the submission holds you favor, make sure to VARY THE INTENSITY OF YOUR ATTACK PATTERNS. Sometimes it is good to attack with all you’ve got in combinations that put an opponent under severe pressure. Be aware however, that when you attack in this fashion, an opponent will immediately put up strong defensive shields and maintain them as long as he feels the danger. I often counsel students to relax their grips and attacks and make their opponents think the danger has passed. As soon as the defenses go down - new attacks break through much more easily. Consider predatory animals hunting prey - those species that inflict a poisonous bite, such as snakes, do not pursue their prey once the venom is injected. Pursuit will make the prey run as long as it can and create an exhausting chase. Instead, once the bite is made, it stops - the prey runs a short distance, seeing that it is not being pursued, sits down and rests - and dies in its place, allowing The predator to leisurely take its prey. So too with submission hunting in Jiu Jitsu. LEARN TO CREATE THE SENSE THAT YOU ARE NOT ACTIVELY PURSUING SUBMISSIONS - AND WATCH YOUR SUBMISSION RATE INCREASE AS YOUR OPPONENTS BECOME NEGLIGENT IN THEIR DEFENSE. Look at the relaxed, almost open grips of Nicky Ryan on the back as he creates a sense of safety that will open up another fast strangle when the opportunity arises.

You’ve got to start somewhere! I was going through some of my old relics from my early days in the USA and came across this gem. When I came to America in 1991 to enter the PhD program at Columbia I needed work to get some money together and worked as a bouncer for my first decade in New York. Early on in this adventure I became for a short time a body guard for a local money lender who went by the name “Fresh Money” - quite positively the greatest name of any person I ever worked for! He would hand out his card to all comers at local clubs as he networked. Being a man who carried cash for a living he was a target for attack and thus lived an interesting life to say the least. I always get a chuckle when I see his old business card and think back on the adventures I went through in those crazy early years 😜😂

The back system - Default principle: A central principle of attacking from the back is the default principle - WHEN BEHIND AN OPPONENT, YOU MUST CONSTANTLY THREATEN STRANGULATION SO THAT IF YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE HANDS AND CHIN SHOULD EVER FALTER OR FALL OUT OF POSITION - YOU WILL BY DEFAULT, TAKE THE STRANGLE IMMEDIATELY. Following this simple principle creates a lot of stress in your opponent. Often one can get so caught up in the constant hand fighting/arm trapping battle and the struggle to maintain overall position that we completely overlook an easy opening right there in front of us to simply slip into the stranglehold when the neck is exposed. Here, stand out junior squad member Frank Rosenthal shows a fine application of the default principle at a tournament in England that he competed in over the weekend. No need to trap arms when the neck is open - just go straight in for the kill!

Gordon Ryan taking on the big men: Next weekend in Dallas Texas, Gordon Ryan will step back on to the big stage in Dallas Texas at @kasaigrappling championships to take on the very powerful and distinguished Ultra heavyweight João Gabriel Rocha - ADCC silver medalist and long time rival of the great Marcus Buchecha Almeida. Mr Rocha will have a forty pound weight advantage - he is a very impressive performer on the competition circuit - he went a grueling twenty five minutes with Buchecha in his last big outing at ACB and lost a close decision. This will be a very tough test indeed and creates a classic contest between the smaller grappler with strong submission skills versus the bigger grappler with excellent positional skills. As Always, Mr Ryan has been training hard in preparation - looking forward to another Kasai show - they are doing a fantastic job of being the best athletes in the sport together in an exciting format and display. We are looking forward to this clash of styles against such a great opponent!

Triangles - Once it’s on - it’s on!! When I coach triangle strangles, I strongly emphasize the two stage approach of first locking a TRAP TRIANGLE (locking your ankles around your opponents head and arm rather like a closed guard) and then adjusting from there to the FIGURE FOUR TRIANGLE that actually strangles your opponent. This creates a very distinctive pattern of ENTRY AND CONTROL followed by ADJUSTMENT AND STRANGULATION. This two stage approach is, I believe, the most high percentage method of practicing and employing triangles in competitive situations. It does mean however, that there is a time lag between the trap triangle and the figure four - once you lock that initial triangle you can fully expect your opponent to go into maximum overdrive escape sequences that can take you on a wild ride that takes you anywhere from off the floor, through three hundred and sixty degree rotations to slams to powerful twisting shrugs. YOU HAVE TO LEARN TO MAKE YOUR ADJUSTMENTS DURING WILD RESISTANCE AND STAY THE COURSE UNTIL THE STRANGLE IS SET. Here, Nicky Ryan follows an opponent through powerful defensive movements to get his triangle submission in the US ADCC trials. Observe the single minded focus as he manipulates his opponents arm during a chaotic time, all whilst progressing further towards his goal. Try to map out your responses to the main directions your opponent can engage in once the trap triangle is locked. What would you do if you were lifted? Spun left? Right? This will help you in sparring as things happen very quickly so the faster your response kick in, the better.

The mount: One of the most cherished positional pins of Jiu Jitsu is doubtless the mounted position. It is a formidable platform for entering submission holds and even more formidable when striking is permitted. It (along with the rear mount) is the zenith of the Jiu Jitsu positional hierarchy. As such, there is a natural tendency among beginners to see the mount as a place to get to and STAY. This thinking is understandable as it it considered by most as the king of positions. However, I always coach my students to value transitions BETWEEN pins as more valuable in a submission grappling context than the pins themselves. MOVEMENT and EXTENSION are the essential prerequisites of submissions. If you get to a pin and remain static, submissions will be difficult. Try moving around from pin to pin - don’t see the mount as a pinnacle from which you cannot move for fear of lowering your value. See it as a good pin among other options and learn to transition in and out of it as the quest for movement and extension demand. You will soon find that submissions start opening for you a lot more frequently than when you get mounted and just try to stay there come what may. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a loose chest over chest positional strategy to encourage movement which he will follow to open up submissions

Developing a devastating triangle: Nothing pleases me more in the training room that the sight of a student latching on to a tough opponent and exhibiting genuine and well directed control over him until he can incrementally convert it into a submission. When it comes to triangle work - the mindset I want you all working on is that of THE TWO STAGE APPROACH. Don’t see the triangle as a single move, but rather as a move with two distinct phases. It begins with the TRAP TRIANGLE. This is the act of trapping your opponents head and one arm inside your legs and locking your ankles. At this stage (for front triangles from bottom position - the most common triangle scenario) you will be square in front of your opponent. Then when you have sufficiently controlled the situation, move on to the second phase, THE FIGURE FOUR TRIANGLE. This is where you switch from square to perpendicular angle while controlling posture and cinch a tight stranglehold. DON’T TRY TO BEGIN WITH A STRANGLEHOLD - begin with head control and only when that is assured do you move on to the strangle. Breaking your triangle attacks up into two distinct phases is the single biggest key to developing it into a devastating weapon with which you can dominate the mats. Here, Nicky Ryan, a young master of the triangle, latches on to a controlling trap triangle. Already he is planning the transition to phase two as his hand reaches to pull himself to a perpendicular angle and the strangle finish.

Linking systems: You all know the basic insight behind my coaching philosophy - BJJ is a systems based approach to unarmed combat. Classical BJJ is a 2-6 step system depending upon the circumstances of the fight (the simplest and easiest rendition to understand is the four step version I outlined on the Joe Rogan podcast). My approach is to refine this by adding SUBSYSTEMS within that overall system to increase athlete performance in high value domains and lower learning times. Best of all is when athletes learn to link those subsystems together to create devastating attack sequences that are very difficult to stop. Here, talented junior squad member Frank Rosenthal links back, triangle and Kimura systems in a beautiful display to take a fine submission win over the weekend. This is how I want you thinking about your technique- rapid but controlled application of movements you know so well that the application looks as natural as breathing. Stopping even one well practiced submission system is difficult - stopping all six in unison is EXTREMELY difficult.

Distance control: Whenever you go in to engage your opponent there will be a standoff distance where neither of you can get a grip on the other. It is from this distance that you will step forward and go into grip fighting and once grips are locked - the battle begins. It all begins however, with the control/management of that initial distance from which you began. LEARNING TO MANAGE THIS DISTANCE AND MAKE IT WORK IN YOUR FAVOR IS A BIG PART OF WHAT DETERMINES YOUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE IN THE INTIAL PART OF THE MATCH. You want to play with distance in a way where you can prevent your opponent easily getting his or her preferred grips on you, whilst jockeying for position and distance that enables you to safely and effectively get your own preferred grips. This takes some experience and skill. Make things easier for yourself by developing a clear understanding of
1 - What you want to avoid from your opponent.
2 - What you want to initiate your attacks with and what grips will be necessary to do that.
Try to avoid being static as you play the distance game, but don’t move around so much that can’t maintain the distance you need to attack. Here, Georges St-Pierre, the greatest master of distance in MMA I ever saw, plays the distance game in grappling (very different) with talented junior Frank Rosenthal. Both athletes have an idea of what they want and of what they need to deny the other fellow - now it’s time to step forward and engage!

The unique feature of triangle attacks - strangles and joint locks: I teach six submissions systems in my no gi coaching work
Back system
Leg system
Kimura system
Front headlock system
Arm bar system
Triangle system
Of these six systems, the triangle is unique insofar as it can be simultaneously BOTH A STRANGLEHOLD AND A JOINT LOCK. The great choice we have in the realm of joint locks is that between joint locks - an attack upon your opponents body - and strangles - an attack upon your opponents brain/consciousness. TRIANGLES LET YOU DO BOTH AT THE SAME TIME. Triangles immobilize your opponents grand and one arm and thus offer many ways to break that arm whilst you strangle them at the same time. It’s a terrifying feeling to be getting strangled and as you fight against that threat, feel your arm being attacked with Kimura, juji gatame arm locks, American locks and wrist locks. Here, Gordon Ryan, a master of the triangle, puts an opponent under fight ending pressure with a triangle hold that he has elected to finish with a juji gatame Arm bar breaking action to take a win at SUG grappling championships. To fully exploit the incredible power of the triangle, make sure you constantly practice it as both a stranglehold AND a joint breaker. Experiment with playing those two against each other - so that AS AN OPPONENT DEFENDS ONE, HE FALLS TO THE OTHER. Training in this way will create rapid progress in your triangle game!

Triangles: For decades Jiu Jitsu students and teachers have reduced their growth in triangle development by talking about “the triangle” as though there is only one type of triangle. What they really mean by THE triangle is the FRONT triangle. There is no question that in the sport of Jiu Jitsu, the front triangle (Omote sankaku) is king of the various triangles (mostly because guard position, the position most associated with front triangles, is so heavily emphasized in BJJ). However, there are other triangles out there that if given more emphasis would also figure heavily in the bout ending business. If the front triangle is king, then I would have no hesitation in naming the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) as next in line to the throne. It is a tremendous weapon from the back and I find it is the best triangle of them all for short legged athletes (like me 😊) as the angle automatically eliminates your opponents shoulder from the lock and makes it easier to capture the head and arm in an authoritative strangle. Here, outstanding junior, Frank Rosenthal applies a rear triangle so tight it looks like a tourniquet around his unfortunate opponents neck. If you currently lack confidence with front triangles - START WITH REAR TRIANGLES- and watch your success rate climb. As you learn more about the general nature of triangles starting from the back there is often a carryover to success from the front - and then the fun really starts!

Very happy to announce the release today of my latest Jiu Jitsu instructional video - the fifth installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series - THE TRIANGLE with BJJ Fanatics. I cover the use of the five main versions of the triangle with heavy emphasis of the king of triangles - the front triangle. I show how I teach them to the squad and how they use them in competition. This is among the most important of the submission systems we employ - both as a control mechanism and a match ender. It is among the most representative of all Jiu Jitsu techniques as it pits the strength of our hips and legs and the opponents head and arm - a fine example of strength asymmetry that allows smaller, weaker people to defeat bigger stronger people. I strongly emphasize triangle training in my classes at all skill levels. It not only increases submission rates across the board but more importantly heavy triangle training will GET STUDENTS IN THE HABIT OF GRAPPLING WITH THE LEGS RATHER THAN UPPER BODY - the single biggest step in speeding development in Jiu Jitsu athletes. I hope to see you working hard on your triangles and matching your lower body against your opponents upper bodies! There is a link to BJJ Fanatics website in my Instagram bio if you are interested 😜😜 wishing you all the best in your triangle development!

Angle and alignment: Jiu Jitsu is a game of prerequisites. UNLESS THOSE PREREQUISITES ARE SATISFIED, THE END RESULT YOU SEEK WILL ELUDE YOU. In the case of the front triangle (Omote Sankaku), quite a bit has to happen before the stranglehold is established. Two of the most important elements are ANGLE and ALIGNMENT. The more you position yourself at a perpendicular angle the easier you will be able to capture your opponent in a well locked triangle - particularly important for those of you (like me 😞) who have short legs. Another key element of the ALIGNMENT OF YOUR LOWER LEGS PRIOR TO THE ACTUAL LOCKING OF THE TRIANGLE. You want both of your lower legs POINTING IN THE SAME DIRECTION. Failure to do so makes it easy for a wary opponent to posture up and out of your lock. Look how Nicky Ryan, a young master of the triangle, works on both angle and alignment as he drills in the blue basement - in this example the alignment is so good the strangle is taking effect before he even locks his legs. So when you fight from guard and you see your opportunity to enter this great attack - think about the need for angle in your hips and upper body and alignment of your lower legs - soon your guard will be a veritable danger zone for your opponents!

Kimura attack! Georges St-Pierre locks in the distinctive figure four grip of the Kimura lock on Shawn Williams in training. Kimura is among the most versatile of submission holds and can be done in a vast array of circumstances. In bottom position however, it can be argued that half guard may be the most practical and effective position to start your training and learning. The angle and distancing, along with the usual circumstances of the situation often make it easier to get to the lock from half guard than it is from more aligned full guard situations. As always - focus on getting the opponents hand quickly behind his back - this will create a huge mechanical and tactical advantage for you that opponents will struggle to deal with.

Start with the head: People always talk about good posture when opening a closed guard. It’s important to actually define what good posture consists of. There are different postures you can use to open a closed guard, but the standard methods that work well in a wide array of situations almost always begin with FREEING YOUR HEAD. Most of your opponents will always try to subvert your posture by controlling your head. It is crucial that you begin the process by freeing your head so that YOUR HEAD CAN LEAD THE WAY TO STRONG POSTURE THAT CAN ENABLE YOU TO OPEN YOUR OPPONENTS GUARD. Look how Gordon Ryan has taken inside position with his hands so that he can free his head from the tenacious grip of Georges St-Pierre. Mr St-Pierre has to settle for an arm grip (still very useful) and you can see Mr Ryan’s head beginning to rise - highly desirable if you wish to stand up and open the closed guard. This is something you can practice every day. Have a partner grip your head and fight to get your hands inside and head free - your first step in learning to get up to your feet and open your opponents closed guard.

Assigning a function to each limb: When I coach I often assign a definitive function(s) to each of your limbs so that you know exactly what you ought to be doing with each in a given scenario. When you lack a clear sense of what each limb should be given at any moment it becomes very easy for Jiu Jitsu sparring to degenerate into a confused tangle of limbs fighting without purpose or direction. Nowhere is this more important than in the case of back attacks. So often I see people in good attacking position get deadlocked and frustrated due to a lack of clarity in what each of their four limbs out to be doing. Let’s begin with the upper body. You will need first a CONTROL hand that goes UNDER your opponents arm. It’s function is to connect you solidly into a cheats to back position and keep you there. Then you have a STRANGLE hand that goes OVER the arm on the other side. It creates an immediate submission threat to your opponent. You play the two together - one protects your own position, whilst the other threatens your opponent. Downstairs to the legs. Together they initially hook into your opponents hips to secure hip to back contact. If you have the length, you can make this more secure with a body triangle. At some point however, you will want to go from control to submission. That’s when we turn one of our legs into a TRAP leg, which hooks over one of the opponent defensive arms to facilitate strangles. The other leg generally remains as a CONTROL leg, keeping you hooked into alignment with your opponent as you work the strangle. Dividing up the work of all four limbs and assigning each a task makes for a very clear sense of direction in your work and also helps your coach call out information to you as you grapple. Try it in all the various scenarios you face in grappling and watch your efficiency improve!

Open wedges and closed wedges: Many of you will be aware that a big part of my teaching is bound up with the study of using our body to create IMMOBILIZING WEDGES around important parts of our opponents body to hold them in place while we perform a given move. A BIG part of what we call Jiu Jitsu is the action of setting these wedges around an opponent in a mechanically advantageous fashion - this one of the main basis of mechanical efficiency in our sport. The best wedges are generally CLOSED wedges, where our limbs lock into each other to securely hold the wedges in place. A triangle is a set of wedges around our opponents head and arm and it is CLOSED insofar as the locking of your legs mechanically locks the wedges in place. Closed wedges are not always possible however. More often we have to work with OPEN WEDGES and now we need a substitute method of holding them in place. Sometimes its body weight, sometimes it is simple muscular exertion. Here I am working with the arm bar (juji gatame) - standard variations of this are examples of open wedges. You can see I have to make up for the open wedges through good body positioning and muscular tightness around the head and shoulders. Directionality of force becomes extremely important now if the lock is to be effective against stout resistance. If you are a shorter limbed athlete like me, learning to work effectively with open wedges is extremely important. Every time you practice your application of them, have your partner try to pull out - that will immediately tell you how effective your wedge placement really is.

What will you do next? It is natural that when we perform any given move in Jiu Jitsu that we apply maximum effort and concentration into it - after all, only COMPLETED moves score points or result in submission. However, it is extremely important for your development that you create a sense of when you have the preconditions necessary to complete a move and when you don’t. We all spend far too much energy and commitment to moves that have long since ceased to be likely to succeed. You must be able to recognize the likelihood of a move succeeding and when it appears unlikely; TO HAVE A VIABLE PLAN OF ACTION TO FOLLOW IT UP WITH ANOTHER MOVE. During the application of any technique there must be In the back of your mind a clear plan of action to switch to should the initial attack falter. How much commitment you ought to put into the CURRENT attack will be determined by your ability to READ THE CURRENT STATE OF THAT ATTACK (do you have the necessary conditions to make it workin this scenario?) AND MAKE A SNAP JUDGMENT AS TO WHETHER YOU SHOULD CONTINUE WITH WHAT YOU HAVE OR PREPARE TO SWITCH TO SOMETHING ELSE. The onus is on you to develop a mindset that constantly asks WHAT IS THE NEXT STEP, rather than the more natural but less successful, “let me give everything I’ve got to this move come what may.” Here, Nicky Ryan goes with commitment after the leg of the great Keenan Cornelius in a spirited training session. The heel hook attempt is at a critical stage - the knee of Mr Cornelius is on the cusp of Mr Ryan’s knee-line. There is a choice now between adjustments to the current move, switching to a new move or abandonment to a neutral restart. Simply holding on grimly could actually offer counter attacks to a skilled opponent like this and so is almost never a good option. Next time you train- go on to the mat with the mindset of a person who fights hard for what they have, but with the wisdom of someone who knows to relinquish what they soon won’t have, so that you can go on to claim something better

Don’t settle for good enough: The sport of Jiu Jitsu allow two means of victory - points and submission. Points are allocated based upon the theoretical usefulness of the move in a fight situation where striking is possible. When you apply one of these moves, you score - how much you score depends upon how much dominance that move would offer in a real fight. Positions like mount and rear mount score the most because getting there in a real fight would very likely have dire consequences to your opponent. Now in a regular Jiu Jitsu competition where striking is not permitted, it’s tempting to use the points you have scored as the means of victory. You could after all, win simply by hanging on to the score you have gained and win on that. In many cases this is totally understandable. In training however, you must train yourself to GO BEYOND THE PIN AND ON TO ISOLATION OF A LIMB (neck, arm, leg) and SUBMIT your opponent. Remember, PINS occur at the TORSO, but SUBMISSIONS occur at the LIMBS, thus they have a very different set of operations underlying them. ONLY BY CREATING THE HABIT OF GOING BEYOND THE PIN AND GOING THE EXTRA DISTANCE OF LIMB ISOLATION CAN YOU BEGIN SUBMITTING PEOPLE. Begin building this habit in the dojo. The highest expression of Jiu Jitsu will always be submission victory. Every time you get dominant position, see it as an opportunity to exhibit that highest expression, rather than as a way to cling to a points lead and hold on until time runs out. Here, Gordon Ryan rests briefly at the world Championships Having briefly consolidated the pin, he will go hunting for the opponents neck - a few seconds after this photo was taken he did exactly that and won via strangulation. Don’t settle for less than the highest expression of Jiu Jitsu. Learn to take risks in the gym so that one day you won’t hesitate to take risks on the stage and people will admire both your technique and your confidence.

Opposing goals: Part of what makes Jiu Jitsu so fascinating is that is many situations the two athletes have diametrically opposed goals - WHATEVER IS GOOD FOR ME IS BAD FOR THE OTHER FELLOW AND VICE VERSA. So if if your goal is to constrict space, you can be sure the other fellow will be working overtime to create space. This can make for some very intense sparring situations where you can end up exerting a lot of effort but with little to show for it. It is important that whenever the match has moved into a situation where you both know what the other wants (the opposite of what you want), that YOU DON’T LET IT DEGENERATE INTO A VORTEX OF AIMLESS STRUGGLE. Take a step back and ask yourself how you can use this mutual stand off to advantage. This is the perfect time to GIVE your opponent what he or she is fighting so hard for switch to an alternative attack. So for example, If you are pinning an opponent from side your basic goal is to restrict space between the two of you as much as possible and create a tight pin. Your opponent knows this and wants the opposite - space between you that will enable him to generate movement towards an escape. As your opponent fights to get arms inside and create that space, give way to the pushing of his framing arms and move back a little to allow his arms to get OVER extended and offer an opportunity for quick arm lock finishes. The moment you get sucked into a battle royal over a simple goal in opposing directions there is a danger of TUNNEL VISION that will rob you of an ability to see other possibilities. All you will see is the simple two way struggle directly in front of you. Look at Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon doing positional sparring. Though it’s clear they have simple opposing goals (space creation vs space restriction), neither is going crazy to fulfill those goals, rather they work calmly so that they can exploit any OVERCOMMITMENT on the part of the other in this situation where both have opposite goals and both know the goal of the other.

Position and submission: Most students of Jiu Jitsu are told from their first class the relationship between position and submission - position first and submission follows. As you grow in sophistication you will learn that the relationship is more nuanced than this - sometimes we can threaten a submission hold and use the opponents defensive reaction to gain a better position. Probably the single biggest problem I see with developing athletes in submission only competition is a general failure to maintain POSITIONAL PRESSURE as they engage their opponent. This creates a floppy looking match where the two combatants roll around for limbs but with no attempt to control the TORSO first. This can have the effect of creating an undesirable meandering look to the action rather than what we should aim for - FAST AND DIRECT ACTION INITIATED BY POSITIONAL PRESSURE TOWARDS CHEST TO CHEST OR CHEAT TO BACK POSITIONS AND THEN DECISIVE ATTACKS TO THE LIMBS WHEN THE OPPONENT FIGHTS AGAINST THE POSITIONAL PRESSURE AND OVER EXTENDS HIS LIMBS. Here you can see Nicky Ryan put the great Masakazu Imanari under strong positional pressure to create reactions (look at the extended limbs) that enabled him to switch from limb attacks (legs) to chest to back position (strangles) - in the end he chose the latter - but the choice arose from the initial positional pressure. As much as we love the drama, decisiveness and action of submissions - never neglect the very thing that makes them possible at high level - positional pressure.

TRIANGLES (Sankaku)- the principle of MULTIPLICITY : So often I hear people in Jiu Jitsu talk about THE triangle stranglehold and it is very clear they are talking about the FRONT triangle (the most common version of the triangle in BJJ). There are FIVE main versions of the triangle
FRONT (Omote sankaku)
REAR (Ushiro Sankaku)
OPPOSITE (Hantai sankaku)
SIDE (Yoko sankaku)
REVERSE (Gyaku sankaku)
ONLY WHEN YOU LEARN TO USE ALL OF THEM WILL YOU MAXIMIZE YOUR POTENTIAL WITH THIS INCREDIBLE MOVE. Learning to use the multiplicity of triangles will enable you to get submissions that would have previously eluded you as oftentimes when you have one form of triangle that is failing, a simple shift to another version will get the breakthrough you seek. Don’t limit yourself to one dominant form of the triangle. The triangle system I teach is composed of all five major triangles and the interaction between them, along with the interaction with other submission holds and pins. Here, Georges St-Pierre works the transition from front triangle to opposite triangle (hantai sankaku) - a move greatly favored by the Ryan brothers - Gordon Ryan used it to strangle Ralek Gracie in competition. When you think about your triangle attacks, try to get out of the habit of thinking the triangle only refers to front triangles - while front triangles are the most important of the triangle family of strangles, that kind of thought process can blind you to other, very valuable alternatives. Why work with one great weapon when you can have five?

@garrytonon gets his Shoot Boxing (striking integrated with takedowns) rounds in today. It is always a fascinating thing to watch the skills of grappling mixed in with the skills of striking. Throughout history the vast majority of martial arts have fallen into one of two main camps - striking or grappling - yet nothing is more exciting, nothing is more effective and nothing is more illuminating than the mix of both together. Thank you to @sanabul for the excellent training gear worn by sparring partner @drewhooper_mma

Excited for upcoming seminars! I am always happy to get chances to teach outside the blue basement when scheduling permits. In January and February I will teach for the first time in Utah and Texas! First up is Utah, where on January 18 at Unified Jiu Jitsu in South Jordan. Check out @utahjitsmama to get information and tickets for Utah seminar. Then in Texas on February 3rd I will team up with Gordon Ryan to teach a big seminar at Gracie One in Dallas. Mr Ryan is super excited to show some of his own latest developments - i am always greatly impressed by the innovations of my students and Mr Ryan has been on a research mission lately - always adding new and deadly attacks to his arsenal. Check out @gracieonejiujitsu for information and booking for Dallas, Texas seminar. It’s always a pleasure to show our style to new friends - looking forward to both these events 🤗🤗 See you there!!

Excited for upcoming seminars! I am always happy to get chances to teach outside the blue basement when scheduling permits. In January and February I will teach for the first time in Utah and Texas! First up is Utah, where on January 18 at Unified Jiu Jitsu in South Jordan. Check out @utahjitsmama to get information and tickets for Utah seminar. Then in Texas on February 3rd I will team up with Gordon Ryan to teach a big seminar at Gracie One in Dallas. Mr Ryan is super excited to show some of his own latest developments - i am always greatly impressed by the innovations of my students and Mr Ryan has been on a research mission lately - always adding new and deadly attacks to his arsenal. Check out @gracieonejiujitsu for information and booking for Dallas, Texas seminar. It’s always a pleasure to show our style to new friends - looking forward to both these events 🤗🤗 See you there!!

Integrating systems - Triangle and Arm Bar systems: A huge part of my work as a coach is creating elaborate systems around a few high percentage techniques. When an athlete has sufficient infrastructure built around his or her best moves, it is unlikely an opponent will be able to follow the unfolding action and successfully resist. Things get even more interesting when you add the idea of INTEGRATING SYSTEMS so that as resistance builds to one, you switch to another. This creates pressure that is very difficult to withstand for even an experienced opponent. The last two installments of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series are Triangle (sankaku) and Arm Bar (juji gatame). Because these two moves both center around the use of your legs to control your opponents head and shoulders there is a LOT of interplay between the two of them. Look at how Nicky Ryan shows his arm bar and triangle mastery by effortlessly switching back and forth between them in live sparring. In thirty seconds he goes from arm bar to a special arm bar variation greatly favored by both Ryan Brothers, the shoulder sankaku, back to a different variation of arm bar (head scissor variation) on to a front triangle that he takes into a mounted finish. This is the ideal you want to aim for - movement both WITHIN a given system and ACROSS systems. In this way you can aim for the ideal of our approach to Jiu Jitsu - TO ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY WITH EQUAL EFFICACY UNTIL THE BREAKTHROUGH IS ACHIEVED.

Organized Knowledge: I am sure that most of you are aware that a big part of my coaching style is to make Jiu Jitsu matches into KNOWLEDGE WARS where the idea is to create sophisticated systems around certain high percentage techniques where if the match can be forced towards those techniques you will have a decisive knowledge advantage over your opponent - even if the opponent may have more knowledge than you (acquired over a longer period of training time) overall. A big part of this approach is bound up with ORGANIZING your knowledge into ordered and simplified chunks that can be remembered under the stress of competition. Remember: ITS NOT HOW MUCH YOU KNOW THAT COUNTS, BUT HOW MUCH YOU CAN RECALL UNDER STRESS. I always encourage my athletes and students to categorize, refine and order their knowledge as they work into coherent forms. That is why we have names for every move and every variation of those moves and sequential applications of each. Here I am getting my presentation ready for the upcoming triangle (sankaku) instructional video - making sure nothing is unclear or omitted. Taking and making notes and check lists works for some people (I am one of them) but not for all. That’s fine, just make sure that whatever method you use allows you to recall information quickly under stress - knowledge wars aren’t won by the forgetful or confused!!

Happy New Year!! Wishing all of you the best in 2019! May you have the imagination and courage to set goals worthy of your potential, the wisdom to formulate a solid plan to actualize them, the discipline to follow those plans through and the time required to let it all happen!! I hope you all get closer to your cherished goals both inside and outside Jiu Jitsu! 🤗🤗 Thank you all for your interest in what we do, our approach to the game and to self development through Jiu Jitsu. Wishing you all a great night and an even better year! 🤗🤗🍾🍾🤗🤗

Getting work done: Just finished fifth and final day of filming for BJJ Fanatics where we completed the ENTER THE SYSTEM series (Triangle system to be released very soon and then subsequently the Arm Bar system to complete the series) and began work on the upcoming BJJ Fundamentals series where I go over classical BJJ in a new light designed to deepen your insight into the sport and shorten your learning time in skill development. Today we worked on the Gi Strangle system that I teach. It’s a blast going over the fundamentals in a new way - this is the heart and soul of Jiu Jitsu and I love it! This was the material that hooked me twenty five years ago and I never lost my passion for it! Now it’s back to the bus station (trains all sold out 😞) and back to NYC - Looking forward to getting back to the blue basement for a day of teaching tomorrow!

Jacket required: Working our way through the first sessions filming the upcoming fundamentals of Jiu Jitsu series that will be released after the completion of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. The intention is give athletes a deep conceptual and technical understanding of the foundational elements of the sport in the traditional gi. The emphasis will be on strong positional skills and strangulation using the jacket. Loving the content so far and having a blast! The fundamentals are the heart and soul of Jiu Jitsu and my favorite thing to teach and train. We go back into action tomorrow! Wishing you all the best from Boston!! 🤗🤗

Finished!! After two big days of filming we just completed the final installment of the biggest selling Jiu Jitsu video instructionals of all time - the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. Today we completed the Arm Bar (juji gatame) installment. This is the sixth and last in the series. These six submissions systems, Legs, back, kimura, front headlock/guillotine, triangle and now arm bar are the main submission systems that I teach in no gi grappling and which my students did such an incredible job of applying in top level competition. The triangle system will be released next (early January) and editing of the arm bar footage will now begin. Thanks so much to BJJ Fanatics for their work in filming over the last two days. My students excel in the use of arm bar attacks - I hope that soon you will too!! 😜😜

The remarkable properties of the triangle: The triangle is among the most impressive moves in all of Jiu Jitsu. It has many manifestations and variations. One of the best and most unique features is that it is capable of being used as both a strangle and a joint lock at the same time. Usually we are given a choice when we go for a submission - it’s either a strangle or a joint lock - sankaku lets us have our cake and eat it too! Not only does it give us a choice - WE CAN USE THE THREAT OF ONE TO SET UP THE OTHER. For example in a front triangle shown here, the general rule is that the closer my opponents head to my head, the easier the strangle. The further his head moves away - the easier the armlock. Triangles allow us to use several different types of joint locks without releasing the stranglehold, creating real danger for the opponent. Learn to use this unusual dual submission threat of the various triangle variations to get your submission percentages rising!

Into the vortex: There are two modes of Jiu Jitsu that must be mastered as you go deeper into your Jiu Jitsu journey. The first concerns the ability to SHUT DOWN YOUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT. This is perhaps the most common approach to Jiu Jitsu. Most of your time on the mat will be devoted to taking an opponent to the floor, gaining top position and getting past his legs into pins and immobilizing him until you can strangle him or joint lock him. There is however, another modality - the opposite of the first - TO CREATE MOVEMENT THAT WE CONTROL BETTER THAN OUR OPPONENT DOES. This is the method of creating scrambles where at the outcome of the scramble we have advantage. Learning to enter into a scramble and emerge with advantage is one of the most fascinating studies in Jiu Jitsu. It looks like chaos - but if you enter with a plan and a skill set you can reliably emerge with profit. Here, Garry Tonon, the best scrambler I ever saw, creates a whirlwind of movement to throw off the great world Champion Gilbert Burns in an effort to turn an inferior position into a dominant one. Later in the same match he would go further and use a similar action to enter into a spectacular match winning leg lock, showing once again his expertise in this thrilling aspect of the sport.

Can an older athlete, working a busy professional career and many other demands from marriage and family etc train to be competitive with the best Jiu jitsu athletes in the world who are much younger and more athletic and who train full time? This is a question i am often asked. Most Jiu Jitsu practitioners are enthusiastic amateurs who try to train as much as they can around their commitments to spouse, family and career while factoring their age and physical condition into the equation. It’s natural to ask - how good can I really get under those circumstances in comparison to the best athletes in the world? My answer is this - how far you go will always be determined by your effort - but if you train hard and intelligently for long enough YOU WILL BE ABSOLUTELY SHOCKED HOW GOOD YOU CAN GET AS AN OLDER PART TIME ATHLETE FULL TIME PARENT, CAREER PROFESSIONAL. Here is a truly great example. This is my student Jason Lees, forty three years old, married and a highly ranked lawyer in a prestigious New York City law firm. He took on the outstanding BJJ world champion Muhamed Aly, one of the most athletic and physically gifted Jiu Jitsu players in the world at a Grapplers Quest US Nationals event in NJ a couple of years ago. After a brief spell of hand fighting and a single leg attack, Mr Lees performed a very nice ashi garami entry from standing and won in around forty seconds via heel hook from ashi garami - an incredible result for an older athlete who trains part time and juggles marriage and a very busy legal career as his primary interest. How many people can show up to work on Monday morning and tell their co-workers they beat a dominant professional world champion in their chosen sport? What an amazing example of a part time older athlete getting full time younger man results!! Don’t sell yourself short on what can be achieved if your training program is a good one and there is passion in your heart backed by discipline in your mind and patience in your soul. I hope this incredible achievement by Mr Lees inspire you as much as it does me. I have so many outstanding older students who I am sure can inspire you all to greater success in your own journey

1000 Instagram Posts! I wanted to thank all of you for taking an interest in my work in Jiu Jitsu - this week I passed the milestone of 1000 Instagram posts. For a decade I avoided social media but finally relented when I took on a trio of extraordinary students who were interested in the rapidly growing sport of submission grappling. Previously I was teaching Jiu Jitsu but mostly known as an MMA coach through Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman and the Ultimate Fighter TV show. When Mr St-Pierre retired and Mr Weidman opened his own school further away from Manhattan I switched attention to submission grappling and the notion of changing the way people thought about training to a systems based approach instead classical methods. In time interest in the squad grew and now I am hoping to expand and add to peoples training methods as we all seek improvement in the sport we love and to link methods of improvement in Jiu Jitsu to our life in general. I am very grateful to you all for your interest and support in my work. Special thanks as always to my incredible students. All of them are truly remarkable people who exude industriousness and innovation - without their courage, hard work and skill in exhibiting these ideas on the big stage I would be nothing. Thank you to all of my dear readers who put up with my random, long winded, paragraph-less (not sure if that’s a real word 😂) and disorganized ramblings - but if they help even a little in getting you a little closer to your goals and dreams in Jiu Jitsu and life - then it’s all worth it. Thank you so much.

Learning from videos: People often ask me if you can learn martial arts techniques from video. I truly believe that insights from video instruction PROVIDED THEY ARE REINFORCED AND DEVELOPED BY REGULAR TRAINING ON THE MAT CAN ABSOLUTELY ADD SIGNIFICANTLY TO YOUR SKILL SET. You may recognize this man - this is Placido Carl Santos - he is the demonstration partner in many of my videos and trains in Boston. One day we were filming some material for IBJJF legal leg locks and I showed him several variations of Achilles locks that I use, subtly different from the standard grips and body placement. Mr Santos took the lesson in the same way any viewer would and we moved on quickly to the next techniques. Then a few weeks later at a local tournament he got the chance to make use of the lesson. Here he is getting a quick submission victory via the Achilles lock he learned in the video shoot 😉

The two ways: Whenever you go out to battle an opponent there are two main approaches you can take with the application of whatever technique and skills you bring to the match. The first is a PROACTIVE approach where you look to initiate the moves and deliberately push the action towards what you want to do. The second is a REACTIVE approach where you let your opponent initiate and you take advantage of any opening created by your opponent’s attack to counter and get the breakthrough. Each method will always have its advocates. As a general rule proactive methods tend to do better in encounters with a short time limit whilst reactive methods tend to do better in longer encounters. However, it will greatly benefit your development to work hard developing your skills in BOTH approaches. This immediately DOUBLES the number of attacks you make in a given time frame and makes you much less predictable in your attack patterns. Here you can see Nicky Ryan approach an opponent. His focused look clearly shows he has an initial proactive goal which he will work hard to enforce upon his foe, but he will also have the creativity to read his opponent’s attacks as he gets close and be ready to go into his reactive counters as well. As much as it’s a good thing to focus on what you want to achieve, remember always that there are TWO people in a bout and it pays to be able to attack off the actions of BOTH people rather than just one.

The remarkable story of a remarkable man: This weekend in Anaheim California the IBJJF No Gi World Championships were held and Gordon Ryan thrilled the grappling world with a double gold medal performance. At the same event another competitor was making his own mark in a way that was equally impressive in its own way. Some of you may have wonder how it is that I have been teaching for over twenty years but it is only in the last seven that my grappling students have gained renown. Before the squad I was mostly known as an MMA coach. What you may not be aware of is that during this early time I had a room full of grappling killers that never competed - that was a major reason why so many MMA stars used to come to my classes years before the squad. Most of my early black belt standouts chose not to compete - perhaps it was because I taught Jiu Jitsu in a way that was not focused on grappling competition in those days - more in line with gym grappling where the focus was on getting submissions and fighting. The result was a room full of unknown killers that often gave serious grief to famous champions. One of the foremost among these men was the formidable Doug Pelinkovic, a former Karate champion who started Jiu Jitsu very late in his thirties. Despite having a very successful and busy career in real estate and a family of three wonderful boys, he always found time for training. Ultimately making his own gym in the Bronx @bxmartialarts where I teach every Monday night. Now fifty, Mr Pelinkovic decided he would do his first ever Jiu Jitsu tournament at the no gi World Championships! Despite having zero Jiu Jitsu competition experience he entered and won Masters 4 super heavyweight!! What an incredible Jiu Jitsu competition debut from a man who trains part time between work and family and who started the game late. I can’t wait to tell you more inspirational tales of success from this older athlete who to this day routinely mangles elite championship level athletes half his age. I can’t think of a better answer to my readers who ask me about whether students who started late or who are getting older can reach a high level - YES YOU CAN!

Double Gold World Champion: Gordon Ryan had an incredible weekend in Los Angeles at the IBJJF No Gi World Championships this weekend. He competed in both his weight class and Absolute divisions and won Gold in both - four out of seven matches by submission and defeating champion rivals Yuri Simoes, Roberto Cyborg Abreau, Jackson Souza and Patrick Gaudio along the way. It was a fine expression of the versatility of his game between submission and positional skill. For so long squad athletes were criticized as having only one skill - leg locks - this tournament did not allow our favorite leg locks but this was not a problem for Mr Ryan. His unrivaled mastery of back and armbar systems was on display along with his absolutely outstanding positional game. Nothing silences critics like success and this was indeed a tremendously successful weekend for this amazing young athlete who impresses me so much in so many ways but with his work ethic and insatiable desire to learn and experiment to gain knowledge above all else.

Young gun: The 2018 IBJJF Jiu-Jitsu world championships are on this weekend in Anaheim California. The blue belt competition was up first and Nick Rodriguez @nickyrod247 was one of the emerging stars. This powerhouse came to us from @smashpassjay who is a long time friend of Gordon Ryan. He only began Jiu Jitsu a short one ago and Jay sent him to the blue basement to work on his submission skills. He soon became a favorite training partner of Gordon Ryan and has been improving rapidly. Even though he is a good wrestler he usually begins all training in bottom position to work new skills. At the world championships he won every one of his matches by submission! He used his favorite finishes - kata gatame variations from front headlock and juji gatame arm bars - to take the gold medal. Keep your eyes on this athlete - what a great start to his Jiu Jitsu training and a real inspiration to all you blue belts out there!

Firas Zahabi back in the basement! It was great to see my black belt student @firas_zahabi back on the mats today! Mr Zahabi is a truly remarkable fellow who has become one of the foremost MMA coaches of the current era. He excels in all aspects of the game - we often speculate that if he had ever competed in MMA he would have wrecked a LOT of big names given what we see so often in training! Through all the years he has always had an abiding passion for Jiu Jitsu and often discusses advances we make in pure Jiu Jitsu and looks for adaptations to the world of MMA. Here he works entries to the back from bottom position with Nicky Ryan - himself just back from the UK after his big win over the great Masakazu Imanari. Mr Zahabi is very inventive in MMA technique and tactics - but he is equally inventive in other aspects of the sport. He has developed a remarkable method of workout recovery called the “TimTam” @timtamrecovery which massages tired and sore muscles and gets MMA athletes back in action during grueling training camps. Great to see him back on the mats and advancing every aspect of the sport he has done so much for 😊😊

Divide and conquer: Some days the task of mastering the many skills of Jiu Jitsu can seem a little daunting - there is an awful lot to learn and new elements seem to emerge all the time. When I see someone struggle to pick up a new move they are working on, I usually encourage them to divide whatever skill they are learning into components and then TRY TO MASTER EACH COMPONENT IN ISOLATION FIRST before putting them all together into a complete skill. This kind of focused training generally makes most tasks easier to understand. Here I am teaching the back system. Often I divide the various skills required into upper body and lower body. By kneeling behind my partner Rather than sitting with hooks in (as you generally would in a competitive match) I can focus entirely on the initial hand control/neck penetration aspects that form an important component of the overall system. This is a simple example of taking a broad and complex skill SET and breaking it down into a series of component SKILLS each of which can be practiced in isolation until mastered. Then they are finally combined and you now are on the way to a genuine skill set that you can use in competitive situations. This week why don’t you take something you are personally working on and try to break it down into sensible components. Work on the components until they feel natural and see how you now perform the actual overall skill - let me know how your work goes!

It all starts in the gym: So many people ask me how Nicky Ryan made such fast progress in developing his mastery of the back attack system our athletes use. Well, it’s the same FOR ANY PERSON AND ANY SKILL. It is a question of IMPLANTING KNOWLEDGE and then transforming KNOWLEDGE into SKILL through physical training. Hard physical training without prior knowledge of what to do is not very productive and the gains you make in performance take a very long time. Knowledge without physical training reduces you to an armchair authority who can’t perform the things you know. When you start with knowledge of what you OUGHT to be doing and train hard to GET YOURSELF DOING IT, then you will see fast and efficient progress. Mr Ryan started with a solid grasp of the back system theory and then spends large amounts of time practicing it in practical sparring rounds. Unsurprisingly he is highly skilled in back attacks as a result. Whatever your aspirations in Jiu Jitsu Improvement - see it as the transformation of KNOWLEDGE into SKILL. Begin with a clear sense of what you are supposed to do ( your coach is your main guide) and then put in the hard and often frustrating work of turning it into a physical skill. Take the time to master it in the gym and one day you will be able to express it on the stage!

Nicky Ryan victorious!! Seventeen year old Nicky Ryan took on grappling and Leg Lock icon Masakazu Imanari in Wales today at the Polaris Professional grappling championships for the 145 Pound world Title. Mr Ryan won brilliantly via rear strangle using a special variation in the back system we utilize. Initially he went in to test the legs of the man the Japanese call “Tenth Dan in Leg locks” and got several solid attacks with heel hooks before opting for the back and the security of strangulation. Here he is backstage with his belt - another amazing performance from this young man. His discipline and drive in the camp leading to the bout were, as always, an inspiration to the room he trains in and led to this, his greatest victory so far.

Big win for Frank Rosenthal in Texas! Junior squad member Frank Rosenthal continued his winning ways tonight at the Onnit Invitational 10 in a super fight against 10th Planet Headquarters stand out Marvin Castille tonight. He used the back system in overtime to strangle his opponent into submission under standard EBI rules and take another great win. Mr Rosenthal has been training very hard and he is a fine example of hard work combined with a plan to get to a goal.

A man that made a difference: There are few people who can claim to have changed the nature of the sport that they play. Maurice Smith is one of the few who can. When MMA first burst into public view in the early 1990’s it was the Jiu Jitsu and submission grappling athletes who dominated the action with unknown ground work and submission holds. Then came the wrestlers who used tremendous physical conditioning with unstoppable takedowns and powerful ground striking to dominate the sport. Standing striking martial arts were disparaged as ineffective in the face of these grapplers and wrestlers. All that changed when Maurice Smith used a devastating arsenal of strikes to beat champion grapplers and wrestlers in matches that shocked the world and which showed very clearly the huge value of striking training as part of a MMA program. This helped usher in the modern era of MMA where athletes look to synthesize all the main skills of the various striking and grappling arts. As always someone needed to show the way before others would follow. What a pleasure to see this MMA legend at Renzo Gracie Academy today still looking like a powerhouse after all these years!

Michelle Nicolini came in to work out with the squad today as athletes prepare for No Gi World Championships coming soon! @miznicolini is eight time world champion and one of the greatest Jiu Jitsu athletes of her generation. Sometimes I am asked who would be the best role models for female athletes - in truth I make no distinctions in this area - I consider top level female grapplers such as Michelle Nicolini and Kyra Gracie (Jiu Jitsu), Ryoko Tani (Judo), Saori Yoshida and Kaori Icho (freestyle wrestling) to be equally inspirational to ALL Jiu Jitsu athletes - not just women. Consider for a moment a females perspective in learning and practicing Jiu Jitsu. Literally every time they go to practice the overwhelming majority of their training partners will be massively bigger, stronger and heavier than them. It would be like you or me walking into a gym as a white belt and every single one of your training partners was a hulking three hundreds on steroids. Imagine how hard it be to learn and perform even the most basic moves under those circumstances. You would have to evolve very efficient mechanics, mostly incorporating your legs, just to survive - and this leg dominant/high efficiency approach is exactly the one we should ALL be aspiring towards if Jiu Jitsu is, as we claim, to be about smaller people defeating bigger people. Due to considerations like these I often study top level female grapplers in various sports and often find they offer valuable insights into problems everyone faces and must overcome. It was a pleasure and honor to see one of the very best get ready for a another shot at a world title today.

The return of Nicky Ryan: Nicky Ryan returns to the big stage in England this weekend at @polaris_professional Polaris 8 grappling event. He will take on Japanese Leg Lock icon Masakazu Imanari. Squad senior Garry Tonon defeated Mr Imanari previously via heel hook but this is a very different situation as Mr Ryan is considerably smaller and only seventeen years old. As always, Mr Ryan has prepared with maturity beyond his years and is well prepared. Can’t wait to see these two high level submission experts go to work!

In a self interested world the only thing that will make someone interested in you is the scarcity and demand for whatever SKILLS you possess and which they find desirable. For most people the only way you can acquire and build those skills is PRACTICE. You can overlook or skimp over many things in your life but one thing you cannot brush aside is your practice time. That time must be sacred to you, for unless you are born with extraordinary good fortune - and the vast majority of us are not - it is only your SKILLS that make you valuable to other people and thus able to advance in life and it is only PRACTICE that creates skills. Remember too that all skills are highly PERISHABLE and that any diminishment in practice will soon result in diminishing skills. So if there is any time in your life that you should truly cherish and protect - it is your PRACTICE TIME - for that time will be the one thing that takes you to your goals and dreams and keep you there. There will be a veritable horde of distractions, demands and interferences as you grow that will conspire to rob you of your practice time - understand that this is one of the most dangerous robberies of them all as it will take from you the one thing that can make you successful - your skills. Protect that time as you would your health, loves and savings for it is every bit as important.

Filming the ENTER THE SYSTEM: TRIANGLES instructional video: Just finished filming the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video series featuring the triangle system that has been used so successfully by my students in competition. I have always had a special affinity for the triangle and believe it plays a tremendous role in athlete development not just as a submission hold but also as one of the best ways to get athletes used to attacking with their legs - a core characteristic of good Jiu Jitsu. Here we are playing around with triangle attacks against a seated guard - I have not done this move since my hip replacement so this was a fun experiment 😂. Now I’m on the train back to NYC - arriving at 2:30am and then back to training in the blue basement early in the morning 😜😜 Wishing you all the best

Change of seasons - changing the game: At Penn Station NYC - Heading up to Boston on the train to film the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series of instructional videos which cover the training methodology, tactics and techniques that my students exhibited so brilliantly on the big stage! It’s a cold North Eastern winter here now - the hot summers that we filmed the leg, back, front headlock/guillotine and kimura systems are a distant memory! I am really looking forward to this video - you all know I have a particular love of the triangle stranglehold (sankaku jime) and always encourage all my students from professionals to newbies to work hard on developing this skill early and often. I always get a special pride when they finish with it in competition and all my students excel in its use - yes - even the short legged ones! 😜😜 Looking forward to seeing @bernardofariabjj and the @bjj.fanatics team along with @fujisportsus representative and Olympic silver medalist @judosilencer Travis Stevens. As always the emphasis in this video will be on giving you a complete system to apply the triangle- remember - IT IS THE DEPTH OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF FEW TECHNIQUES AND YOUR ABILITY TO PUT THEM IN A COMBATIVE CONTEXT THAT WILL DETERMINE YOUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE WITH THEM - everything I teach is done in this manner. My aim in these videos is to change the way the game is taught and understood - in particular YOUR game. Fours hours heading north and then we get to work! Wishing you all the best! 🤗

Gordon Ryan releases strength and conditioning video: I am very pleased to see ADCC world champion and four time EBI champion Gordon Ryan has released a video on strength development for grapplers. It is produced by @bjj.fanatics and features the routine he used prior to winning gold at the world championships. The whole question of strength and physical attributes in Jiu Jitsu is an interesting one. We are constantly told to not use strength and focus only on technique. This is good advice in your early development but don’t kid yourself - physical attributes such as strength, speed, flexibility etc play a BIG role in the outcome of competitive bouts. As such, Jiu Jitsu athletes have a vested interest in developing whatever potential their body has to the maximum degree possible relative to their aims and ambitions in the sport. I never met a Jiu Jitsu athlete whose game got worse by getting a little stronger, faster or more flexible, on the contrary, I have seen MANY whose competitive prowess increased by investing in time developing their physical attributes just as they do their technical skills. Remember - whenever you engage in combat with another person you are fighting two things - THEIR SKILLS AND THEIR ATTRIBUTES. If you want to improve your performance on the mat there are two ways to go - SKILL DEVELOPMENT is always going to be first and the most important, but don’t underestimate the second - ATTRIBUTE DEVELOPMENT. Your body is the vehicle that expresses your skills - THE BETTER CONDITIONED YOUR BODY IS TO DO SO, THE BETTER THAT EXPRESSION WILL BE. Check out Mr Ryan’s method - it helped create the most successful debut performance in ADCC world championship history - I hope it can help you too!

Start strong to finish strong: In any session of Jiu Jitsu, whether in the gym or on the big stage, there are constant cycles of contact. Athletes will engage with each other, make physical contact and exchange various moves and tactics. In the vast majority of cases, neither athlete will be able to get a decisive finish and they will eventually break contact and then the whole cycle will begin anew, with CONTACT, EXCHANGE and BREAKING CONTACT. These cycles continue until either a decisive finish is achieved or time runs out. It is important to understand that this cycle always begins with contact - grip fighting and tactical positioning are keys here. YOU MUST ENTER AND MAKE CONTACT IN A WAY THAT CONFERS ADVANTAGE FOR YOURSELF AND NEGATES ANY ATTEMPT BY YOUR OPPONENT TO DO THE SAME. Don’t be naive and just walk forward into an ambush of grips, tactics and moves. The battle begins before you even grip up with your opponent. Your stance, motion and tactical positioning must correlate with what you want to. Then you must fight for grips, first DENYING THE GRIPS YOUR OPPONENT WANTS AND THEN ASSERTING THE GRIPS YOU WANT. Look as Garry Tonon approaches his opponent from top position how carefully he positions his feet and how he denies his opponent a working grip with his legs whilst holding a stance that maximize his options and minimizes those of his opponent. START THE BATTLE EARLY AND THE VICTORIES COME EASIER - START LATE AND THE DEFEATS COME QUICKER AND HARDER.

Sometimes you are just 100% f**ked: One of our favorite training methods is to begin in poor position and work our way out to develop a good sense of submission resistance. It’s not easy to do this in a room of killers - so there is usually a lot tapping most days! Over the years I have seen some incredible escapes from seemingly hopeless situations - Garry Tonon earns his nickname “the slippery salmon” every day - he and Gordon Ryan pull off semi miraculous escapes on a daily basis. When you play this game however, there are going to be many times when you bite off more than you can chew and it’s wise to tap early and tap often. Here, lightweight Ethan Crelinsten heroically gets himself into a nightmare scenario with back system master Gordon Ryan. Mr Ryan rewards him by pinning not just one arm helplessly behind his back - but TWO! This creates the horrid result of complete defenselessness and at this point there is nothing to do but laugh and tap. Keeping a playful demeanor is important in this kind of training as there is potential for injury and dejection if you take it too seriously. Just do what Mr Crelinsten does - laugh and try again with a better plan next time. Remember - there will be days where you are the hammer but just as many when you are the nail. Those nail days will be much more manageable if you regularly practice being under severe pressure and have to work your way out of a minefield of submissions.

Looking back: Getting nostalgic in the NYC subway - heading home from the Bronx where i taught a local seminar at my buddy Tito’s school. It’s fun coming home from 238th Street Station - I have not been up here since my early days working as a bouncer in the early 1990’s. So much change in both the environment and myself - it’s good to reflect at times like this and see where you came from and where you are headed. One of my earliest NYC memories is from here on these tracks. In 1991, a desperate man blocking the subway at the above-ground section of the tracks between 125th and 137th street on a freezing cold night - the few passengers on the train at that late hour screaming and cursing at him to move or jump so the train could continue. Eventually he walked to the side of the tracks and silently jumped over the rails to his death on the street below. The passengers went quiet - death has a way of shaming the rambunctious into silence. I remember thinking “this ain’t New Zealand” as I peered through the window and he fell into the freezing darkness. It was an early lesson on our need for creating a positive infrastructure of friends and comrades around us - when those leave, so often hope soon follows. Now it’s a different world and a chance to reflect on what was and where
I’m going. Always grateful for the lessons of the past, both the dark and the light, and hopeful for the future.

Vampires: A crucial lesson in Jiu Jitsu and in life is this - You cannot TAKE an opportunity until you SEE an opportunity. All day every day we all have incredible opportunities on and off the mat go right past us and we simply don’t see them for what they are. In a moment the opportunity is gone and lost forever. Only when your MIND identifies an opportunity can your physical body step up and act upon it. In this sense a BIG part of getting submissions in Jiu Jitsu is mental - it begins with the mental action of recognition of opportunity. Every day I coach I see fleeting openings for submission that pass most people by. We all need to train our minds in VIGILANCE TO OPPORTUNITY and the CONFIDENCE TO ACT UPON IT. Increasing your finishing rates is NOT just a matter of developing physical skills. You can have all the arm lock skills in the world, but if you don’t recognize an opportunity for an arm lock when it’s in front of you, you won’t even ATTEMPT it, let alone succeed with it. You all know that i put an extraordinarily heavy emphasis on strangulation. A big part of success is a CONSTANT FOCUS ON THE NECK AS A TARGET. I train my students to see the world like vampires. When a vampire walks into a crowded room he does not see a hundred PEOPLE, he see a hundred NECKS. So too on the mat - WHEN YOU WANT TO WORK YOUR STRANGLES - train yourself to see NOTHING BUT NECKS. You will be amazed to see how your success rate will improve with only a change in mentality...
📸 @behr_dan

Learning from my videos: Often I am asked what is the best way to watch and learn from my instructional videos. Instructional videos have been around from the earliest days of the arrival of Jiu Jitsu in North America. They all followed a similar pattern. They were a collection of an outstanding athletes favorite moves, usually within a given general topic domain, say, guard passing. Despite being present for decades, they had only a sporadic effect on the development of most students - a kind of “flavor of the month” effect where a popular current move was offered in an introductory and rather random fashion and you tried to copy it as best you could. When I went to create instructional videos I wanted to completely split away from this traditional model and instead, capture what is doubtless one of the major themes of my teaching; that DEEP AND COMPLETE EXPLORATION OF A FEW TECHNIQUES WILL GARNER FAR GREATER RESULTS FOR A STUDENT THAN SHALLOW TINKERING WITH MANY RANDOM TECHNIQUES. I teach in terms of sub systems where A GIVEN TECHNIQUE IS EMBEDDED WITHIN A COMPLETE FRAMEWORK OF SUPPORTING SKILLS THAT MASSIVELY INCREASE THE CHANCE OF THAT TECHNIQUE BEING SUCCESSFULLY APPLIED AGAINST SKILLED RESISTANCE. As such, my videos were radically different from the norm. Instead of being a forty five minute sampling of moves they were up to ten hours of highly detailed analysis of every skill required to get a few winning moves to work against the best athletes in the world. The idea was to move away from sampling videos and offer genuine coaching videos that could have a real impact not only on your game, BUT EVEN HOW YOU THOUGHT THE GAME. Because the videos are so different in format and style - I recommend watching them differently. Watch them sections at a time. Only the most zealous students can watch for hours and stay focused. I generally recommend watching a section or two and trying to work those lessons into your next session on the mats. Use it as you would a series of private lessons that you can repeat at will over months and years to get to the level you want. Just as you never learn by reading a book, but only by RE-READING IT, so too with these videos.

Setting a strangle: A big part of our approach to strangulation is TO GET AT LEAST FIFTY PERCENT OF THE STRANGLE SET BEFORE YOU EVEN CONNECT YOUR HANDS/ARMS. Whenever you go to employ a rear strangle without the gi your two arms work in unison. One is the actual STRANGLE ARM that encircles your opponent’s neck. The other is a SUPPORT ARM which solidifies and supports the strangle arm usually via figure four grip or palm to palm grip. Our contention is that your opponent should already be feeling the effects of a strangle from just the one strangle arm encircling the neck - quite often the one handed strangle proves to be enough by itself and there is no need to lock hands/arms - we just finish one handed in the position of this photograph. At championship level however, it is usually necessary to bring the support arm into play to create stronger pressure. Make sure that before you do there is sufficient initial pressure from the strangle arm that the addition of the support arm FINISHES the strangle rather than INITIATES it. Failure to set the strangle hand properly is rarely atoned for by the addition of the support arm. Develop the skill of sinking the strangle arm first and then applying the support hand as A MEANS OF FINISHING A JOB ALREADY STARTED BY THE STRANGLE ARM rather than as the cause of the strangle. Here you can see my partner is already under pressure of strangulation before I have even released the other hand - finishing from here will be easy. There are other approaches to rear strangles (strangling over the mandible for example), but this is always the preferred method.

Happy Thanksgiving Day!! Giving Thanks to you all for your support and interest in our approach to the game! Wishing you all a great day of feasting and overall decadence in preparation for hard day of training tomorrow! 😜😂🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Pleasant surprises: Most days at in the basement are pretty much the same - they have to be - all human greatness is predicated on the idea of routines that build skills over time. Without regularity and routine none of those attention getting skills would ever be developed. Every so often however, the gods of fate throw us a pleasant surprise. Today it was the arrival of one of my favorite people in all of MMA - Demian Maia. He came by to say hello and get a quick strength and conditioning workout. This incredible fellow carried the flag for Jiu Jitsu in MMA so brilliantly for so long - he will always have a special place in the heart of Jiu Jitsu players around the world. He arrived just as Gordon Ryan was beginning his MMA workout hence the nature of the photo. Exciting news from Mr Maia! He has plans to begin a podcast in Brazil starting early next year! A little known fact about Mr Maia is that he was a journalism major in University. He is thus well prepared to start a really outstanding podcast interviewing friends and figures from MMA - I would listen just hear him talk about his career and training stories! Anything else would just be bonus! Keep up to date with this great man @demianmaia and follow his fights and media work. The podcast will be in Portuguese but the YouTube version will feature subtitles 😊 So it was was not just a pleasant surprise for us - but with this news - a pleasant surprise for all of you too! Best of luck to this great man who did such a fine job of representing our sport in the cage - he hopes to fight again in the next UFC in Brazil - that’s a fight I would never miss!

Homeward bound: At the airport in San Francisco waiting for connecting flight back to NYC! Can’t wait to get back on the mat with the squad and all my students in the blue basement Wednesday morning we are back in the saddle - lots of big projects coming up and lots of dreams to be realized! See you there! 😜😜

Last day in Australia: It’s been a fantastic journey that began in Singapore cornering Garry Tonon and seeing third win in MMA for @onechampionship while coaching the super seminar for @evolvemma gym. Then on to Australia to see my dear Mom and family along with seminars for @johndonehuejj @acsamelbourne @vt1martialarts and @kmamartialarts - here i am teaching the last seminar - a night seminar at VT1 gym in Sydney. I was greatly impressed by the progress of Australian grappling. Far from the usual centers of grappling they are growing in skill and numbers. They carry a great enthusiasm and optimism into the game which is already beginning to create champions with many more in the future I am sure. I am sad to leave - so many good people and good memories down here; but I am thrilled to get back home and get the basement fired up with action again. Tomorrow the long flight home and the mixed feelings of sadness and excitement at the airport. Thank you to everyone who came to the seminars - I hope you enjoyed a look at our approach to the sport and that it can help you get closer to your own goals and dreams.

Catching up with old friends in the land of Oz: After a day of teaching big seminars for @kmamartialarts here in Sydney Australia I got a wonderful chance to catch up with two of my favorite colleagues, Greg Jackson and Carlos Machado who by chance were in town. So good to catch up and talk shop with these two and relive old stories and crazy times 😜😜 Both men are an encyclopedia of knowledge and experience that is a privilege to have access to. Now I get ready for tomorrow at VT1 gym night seminar. Wishing you all the best from Sydney and hope this day took you just a little closer to your hopes and dreams in the sport #kaizenftw

Whenever I am in Sydney Australia I always love to see the crew at VT-1 martial arts and catch up! This week I enjoyed teaching group classes and private classes - they have windows and sun light!! I had to run downstairs to to the basement periodically to remind myself of home 😂😂 These guys are awesome and do a fine job of building local talent and growing the sport in positive ways!

Bottom guard position Jiu Jitsu - the essentials of grip, kuzushi (off balancing), distance management, and angle: The TECHNIQUES of bottom guard position in Jiu Jitsu are limitless and often overwhelming to learn - but the essential CONCEPTS of the position are few in number and easy to understand. You must be able to secure an effective working GRIP upon your opponent, generate KUZUSHI to open him up, manage distance well enough to create enough SPACE through framing to move effectively underneath him, create advantageous ANGLE to press an attack home. Whenever you feel overwhelmed by the number of possibilities for technique, go back to the concepts- ONLY WHEN THE GROUNDING CONCEPTS ARE SATISFIED WILL THE TECHNIQUES BE POSSIBLE - so keep them at the forefront of your thinking and let the techniques take care of themselves in time. Here you can see Nicky Ryan exhibit many of these essential bottom guard concepts to make a perfect entry into cross ashi garami from bottom butterfly guard

Reflections on Garry Tonon: Garry Tonon’s recent win in @onechampionship MMA fight takes him to 3-0 in around six to seven months of professional fighting. Even more remarkable is that his sum total of serious MMA training has just passed the eleven month mark. While he still has a long way to go he has made incredible progress in that short time. An interesting thing to consider is this - prior to his first fight, GARRY TONON HAD NEVER BEEN IN A FIGHT IN HIS ENTIRE LIFE. he never had a street fight, never fought even in school - THE FIRST TIME SOMEONE THREW BLOWS AT HIM WITH BAD INTENTIONS WAS HIS FIRST MMA FIGHT. Think about that - fighting is scary enough in itself but imagine your first ever experience of someone trying to really hurt you is thousands of miles from home in front of twenty thousand people with all your friends and family watching! I think it’s fair to say most people would melt under those circumstances. Yet Mr Tonon looked very relaxed and fluid despite zero experience. It’s easy to explain this in terms of character and say simply that Mr Tonon succeeded because HE HAS A GIANT SET OF BALLS. Fair point - he does. The real reason however, and one that is of the greatest importance to all of you now and for the rest of your lives is this - NEVER UNDERESTIMATE THE INCREDIBLE POWER OF THOROUGH TRAINING TO PREPARE YOU FOR EVENTS AND SITUATIONS THAT WOULD ORDINARILY CRUSH YOU. I don’t have faith in many things - BUT I HAVE LIMITLESS FAITH IN THE ABILITY OF TRAINING OVER TIME TO MAKE ORDINARY PEOPLE DO EXTRAORDINARY THINGS. Garry Tonon has remarkable personal courage - I will always be the first person to say that - but much more important than his courage is HIS WILLINGNESS TO INVEST IN TRAINING TIME AND ENERGY SO THAT WINNING HABITS ARE BUILT. Let me tell you in all honesty a message that you must carry with you throughout your Jiu Jitsu career. WINNING HABITS WILL WIN YOU MORE FIGHTS IN A YEAR THAN COURAGE WILL IN A LIFETIME. You can neglect many things in your life and get away with it - but not your training #worksmarter&harder2win

New video instructional release today - ENTER THE SYSTEM -KIMURA: I am very happy to announce that BJJ Fanatics is releasing the next installment of my ENTER THE SYSTEM video instructional series today - KIMURA! Kimura plays a big role in our approach to Jiu Jitsu. We use it constantly as both a devastating submission in itself, or as a gateway to other systems such as back system, arm locks(juji gatame) or triangles (sankaku) or legs etc. It is arguably the most readily available of all the major submission systems - anytime an opponent reaches for you and your head an arms are higher than his - kimura is available- and in a sport where the whole idea is to get a hold of people and grip them, that will happen a LOT! I have included a link in my Instagram bio above for those of you interested in buying the video from BJJ Fanatics - it will give you a great insight into our approach to the Kimura game! 😜😜 As always, it is video whose main intent is to give you a deep training resource that you can come back to for years as a guide to training. It is much much longer than most instructionals as it is a systematic guide designed to take you from the moment you make contact with an opponent all the way to submission and offers a systematic approach to overcoming all manner of resistance along the way. As always there is a heavy emphasis on CONCEPTS that provide a GENERAL SENSE OF DIRECTION, juxtaposed with a great amount of precise DETAILS that enable you to IMPOSE THAT DIRECTION on a tough opponent. Take charge of scramble situations and create fear in your opponents with one of the most versatile and devastating of all the major submission holds - Kimura!

Jiu Jitsu in Melbourne: Had a blast teaching at my friend John Donahue’s awesome gym @johndonehuejj here in Melbourne and then dinner with my family afterwards- it doesn’t get any better than that 😊😊 Always great to get home and see the sport growing! Tomorrow I teach a different topic at @acsamelbourne Nemesis MMA - hope I can help the local talent go further! Looking forward to seeing you on the mats!

On the road again: Waiting for my flight to Melbourne at Changi International Airport - looking forward to coaching at @johndonehuejj and @acsamelbourne and catching up with local Jiu Jitsu and my family 🤗🤗 It’s been a privilege to watch Garry Tonon’s development in MMA - it’s still early days but this hard working young man is making great strides in the worlds toughest sport. It is such a joy to come out to Asia and be part of @onechampionship and see their growth as an MMA organization and teach at @evolvemma gym and see people pick up on our approach to the sport. Can’t wait to return! Hope you all enjoyed the show! Make sure you tune in to @kasaigrappling for Gordon Ryan against the talented champion Matheus Diniz and up and coming juniors Ethan Crelinsten and Frank Rosenthal going in among some of the most highly ranked lightweights in the world in a tournament format! It’s going to be a great show! See you all in Melbourne! 🤗

Victory in Singapore! Garry Tonon won his third MMA bout here in Singapore this evening to extend his unbeaten record. The match was spent mostly in standing position where Mr Tonon took time to work his developing striking skills. At one point in the first round he suffered a cut under the eye - in Asia there is sometimes more pressure to stop fights when there is bleeding, so when the second round began he wisely began looking for the takedown. In a scramble on the floor he went back to one of his greatest grappling strengths - front head system mastery. He made a quick entry to a high elbow guillotine - his opponent Jung Song Lee skillfully got his back to the ground to stop the initial attack - but the great advantage of a systems based approach to submissions is the ability to get around resistance by going to the next step in the system. A second stab at the high elbow got the breakthrough and Mr Tonon won halfway through the second round. It has been just six months since Mr Tonon’s MMA debut - he only began his MMA training around four to five months prior to that debut. He has come a long way in a very short time. Here we all are after getting Mr Tonon’s cut nicely stitched by the @onechampionship medical staff. Wishing you all the best from Singapore! Hope you enjoyed the show!!

MMA star Sage Northcutt works back and triangle systems: we had a blast here in Singapore today working back and triangle systems and got an unexpected visit from Sage Northcutt @supersagenorthcutt who I have not seen since his days at Tristar gym. He did a fine job of working some complex moves - here he works the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) - looks like he killed his partner with it! 😂😂 He is a fine athlete and quickly picked up these new skills. Garry Tonon successfully made weight at 155 pounds - his first outing at the new weight for @onechampionship . Now he is feeding like a lion back at the hotel! 😂😂 I just finished teaching for the day at @evolvemma - I will go back and see if he left any scraps for me 😂😂 Wishing you all the best from Singapore!

Versatility: Among the most versatile of all the major submission holds is KIMURA. it functions equally well as a submission in itself and as a gateway to other submissions and other positions, depending upon how it is used. Used as a submission hold it is arguably the most devastating of them all - it often results in total dislocation/separation of the elbow in gruesome ways that instantly end bouts. As a gateway to the back it is one of the absolute best means of taking control of a scramble situation and turning it into a winning position such as back control. It is probably the most readily available of all the major submissions. Almost anytime your opponent reaches for you with his arm lower than yours - it’s on. As such, it is a true squad favorite. Here Garry Tonon uses a kimura variation primarily as a temporary pinning tool to move into another position. By creating a viable submission threat he distracts his opponent from his real intentions. If his main move should fail he can always go back to the original kimura. Learn to see kimura opportunities in scrambles and take advantage of them whenever you can - you will immediately make yourself more dangerous to your opponent and create a dual threat between the kimura itself and the other possibilities it offers.

Changing the game: It’s wonderful to see how much better students around the globe are improving in leg lock work. Here in Singapore I am teaching a super seminar to people from all over the globe at @evolvemma Years ago it would have been difficult to teach advanced material to a group of strangers as most people were unfamiliar with even the basic principles of keg work. Nowadays things are very different and it’s great to see a room of strangers quickly assimilate information and work as a team to improve their skill - it’s an exciting time to be a coach! Wishing you all the best from Singapore!

Setting the goals: First day of @evolvemma super seminar here in Singapore. Whatever form of training you engage in - ALWAYS START WITH A CLEAR SENSE OF WHERE YOU WANT TO GET TO. Here we begin with an outline of what we want to accomplish over the week of work together. Then it’s a matter of adding the details to get to the goal. When it’s time to make progress, nothing will dismay you more than hard work in the wrong direction that leads you no closer to your goal, and nothing will make you happier than setting a goal, working intelligently towards it and finally attaining it. Thus must you start every enterprise great or small with the question of where you want to get to - only then can you commit yourself fully to the time and effort required to get there.

Big win for Ethan Crelinsten at North American ADCC trials today: A superb performance today by Ethan Crelinsten to win gold at ADCC trials. I will have to check with Tom DeBlass but I think this may have been the largest number of entrants for a weight division in trials history! At the end of the day Mr Crelinsten was the only undefeated contestant - winning all matches except the final by submission - an incredible performance by this young man. Gordon Ryan did a fine job cornering him and other junior athletes for a great days work by these talented youngsters!

On the road again: At JFK waiting for my flight to Singapore to help Garry Tonon prepare for his third MMA bout against Sung Jong Lee on November 9 for @onechampionship. Mr Tonon continues to impress me with his work ethic, creativity and drive towards his goal to excel in his new sport - but every fight gets tougher as an athletes climbs higher. This will be his first bout at a new weight of 155 pounds (his previous two bouts were at 170 - his actual daily weight). In addition I will be teaching a five day super seminar for @evolve gym on our approach to Jiu Jitsu. Hoping to create a bunch of leg breaking, neck strangling maniacs out there 😜😜 Then it’s on to Australia to see my beloved Mom and family and catch up with my Jiu Jitsu friends in Melbourne and Sydney. Australian grappling is really progressing so that should be exciting! As always I will miss NYC and my dear students in the blue basement - but I will be back soon and can’t wait to see improvements when I return! Wishing you all the best from JFK - train hard, train safe and train with a well crafted plan!

All or nothing: One of the toughest aspects of the submission game is its all or nothing nature. NOBODY CARES ABOUT SUBMISSIONS THAT ALMOST WORKED, THEY ONLY REMEMBER THE SUBMISSIONS THAT WERE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED. You can do ninety nine percent of the work well, but if you fail on the last one percent you failed as completely as someone who only did five percent of the work well. It is critical then, that be strong all the way through the entirety of the move from set up through execution and on to the finish. This is why I generally prefer systematic, methodical approaches to submission. Don’t get me wrong - I love a fast and spectacular entry into a submission as much as anyone - but entries that rely on speed and surprise are difficult to apply with regularity on good opponents. In the majority of cases, step by step control will outperform any other style of submission application. Take your time and check off each step in the check list. STAY FOCUSED UNTIL THE END - it’s not over until they tap. Here, talented junior squad member Robert Degle @Robert Degle bjj works methodically from the back in his first Fight2Win show. A few seconds after this photo was taken he won via strangle; yet if you look now he is calmly and systematically working his way through the steps of the back system. There is no hint of excitement, exuberance or anxiety - just a job to be done and the knowledge of what that job consists of along with the discipline to see it through to the end - that’s the mindset I want you working with as you play the submissions game

Very happy to see the incredible success of Kasai grappling @kasaigrappling in NYC - they are now officially sold out for their latest show November 10!! I have always believed that if grappling shows were done right they could get a big crowd pumped with excitement- Kasai is showing how to do it! Very excited to see junior squad member Ethan Crelinsten get on stage with the big boys in the 145 pound tournament loaded with some of the most illustrious names in grappling. Gordon Ryan takes in the might Matheus “King Kong” Diniz the current 185 pound Kasai champion in what should be a titanic match up! Congratulations to Rich Byrne and Rolls Gracie on the success of their show! They are doing great work! I will be in Singapore with Garry Tonon getting ready for his third @onechampionship MMA bout but will be following the action at Kasai! Hope you all enjoy the big show!

Bright lights: One of the biggest issues athletes have is translating the skills they develop in the gym to the big stage. On the face of it, it should not be an issue. The lights, noise and crowd don’t change things physically. No matter where or when the stage, a triangle is still a triangle, an arm bar an arm bar. What changes is our mental state. We feel MORE IS AT STAKE when a crowd is watching. We all have a sense of pride and the thought of failure in front of a crowd stings. Athletes aren’t afraid of pain, suffering and in many cases, even injury. WHAT THEY FEAR IS FAILURE. When we are fearful of consequences we naturally tend to restrict our actions to only those moves and tactics we have the most confidence in. This has an immediate negative effect on our game as you now will only employ a much smaller set of moves than you usually do - it’s as though you just lost half of your game. In addition, fear will make you second guess yourself whenever opportunity arises. Where normally you would jump without hesitation upon an opportunity, now you hang back. By the time you act, the opportunity has passed. Thirdly, fear and anxiety will manifest itself physically as higher than usual muscular tension. This will result in quicker fatigue than usual, breathing problems and slower, clumsier movement. You will be aware of this as it is happening and it will compound the feelings of fear and anxiety and create a worsening cycle where performance degenerates even faster. Avoiding this fall off from gym performance to stage performance is a big part of contest preparation. Obviously it’s a huge topic, and arguably the topic about which there is the least agreement as to what the solution is. One day I would like to talk about it at length. In general my approach is always to de-emphasize the difference between gym and stage. To remind the athlete that most of the differences, lights, noise, crowd etc are illusory insofar as they make no physical difference upon performance and that any negative change in performance is almost entirely the result of our own mental states rather than the event itself.

Australian tour: After teaching the Singapore super seminar @evolvemma November 5-10 and cornering Garry Tonon for his third fight at @onechampionship MMA, I will go to see family and friends in Australia - hopefully avoiding local wildlife. I am delighted to be able to join my old friend and Aussie Jiu Jitsu icon John Donahue in Melbourne on November 11 Sunday at 2-5pm @johndonehuejj for back system and Nemesis MMA @acsamelbourne Monday night for leg system. Then it’s off to Sydney to see my dear Mom (Mum) and then teach a super seminar at @kmasalievski KMA martial arts - they have just announced another session as the first two day session was sold out - check with them to get in the next session if you missed out or feel like extra 😜 In between I shall join old friends at @vt1martialarts with Liam Resnekov and do what I can for local Jiu Jitsu scene. Can’t wait to see you all and catch up with Australia’s incredible growth in Jiu Jitsu! In the meantime I will get The squad ready and practice crocodile wrestling, snake catching, shark nose punching and kangaroo kick counters to ensure my safety while there 😂😂 See you all soon! 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺 PS One day I’m going to have the time to get to New Zealand I promise!

Stay composed - think it through: I always emphasize the idea of problem solving in Jiu Jitsu. The whole sport is essential a battle between your ability to create problems for your opponent whilst solving the problems he or she creates for you and do so a faster rate than they can so that ultimately you create a problem that they cannot solve in the time available. As with any act of problem solving - ANXIETY AND EMOTION DON’T HELP YOU GET TO SOLUTIONS, in fact they usually interfere with that. Jiu Jitsu requires that you do all your problem solving under great stress - no matter what the stress level - YOU MUST CONDITION YOURSELF TO MAINTAIN THE CALM DEMEANOR REQUIRED FOR PROBLEM SOLVING ACTIVITY. It starts in the gym. If you cannot recall what happened during sparring, if you can’t control your breathing, if you feel emotional during the sparring - these are all signs that a calmer physical and mental state is required. Getting there takes time and training. When someone has you in a tight strangle or joint lock it’s natural to feel anxiety, but I assure you that freaking out want get you out of trouble. Only a rational and effective plan of action will - and to arrive at that it helps to be calm enough to figure it out. Here, Ethan Crelinsten is in a scary looking situation with Georges St- Pierre attacking his legs, but his expression is the same as if he were reaching for a cup of tea. As much as Jiu Jitsu conditions the body to move and act in certain ways, it also must condition the mind to act and behave in certain ways if an athlete is to reach their potential

Angle and level: In almost all combat sports there is a need to gain some sort of advantage prior to attack. Two of the best forms of advantage are ANGLE and LEVEL. Attacking from front on almost always gets you strongly countered, but if you can create angle and change levels in some way, you will often be able to successfully press home an attack. Normally level change refers to the act of LOWERING ones level, but if you are flat on your back in some form of supine guard position this is not possible - you are on the floor already. In these cases the level change goes in reverse - your hips RISE UP FROM THE FLOOR. When this is combined with angle - magic starts to happen and submission breakthroughs start happening much more often. Look at Nick Ryan getting both angle and level advantage as he works for upper body submissions from closed guard. The combination of the two creates tremendous wedging effects around the head and shoulders that makes it very difficult indeed for an opponent to pull free. Train yourself to constantly look for angle and level advantage wherever you are - whenever you attain them you will be considerably more dangerous to your opponents

Getting ready: Garry Tonon is preparing for his third MMA bout for @onechampionship in Singapore November 9 against talented Korean MMA fighter Sung Jong Lee. Mr Tonon has been training hard in his new sport - so much new ground to cover but it’s a fascinating journey! Though there is much that is new, the core principles of unarmed combat are always the same - it’s just a matter of training new skills to express them differently in a new context. Always so much going on as everyone prepares for their upcoming matches in grappling, but MMA has a different flavor and asks more from the athlete in terms of breadth of skill. Looking forward to this final week of hard training in NYC and then back to Asia!

The multiplicity principle: An extremely important general principle of Jiu Jitsu is the multiplicity principle. It is seen in many different areas of the sport. The essential idea is this - FOR ANY GIVEN MOVE THERE WILL BE MANY LINES OF RESISTANCE SO IT IS EXTREMELY VALUABLE TO HAVE MULTIPLE VARIATIONS OF THAT MOVE TO BYPASS THAT RESISTANCE WITHOUT ABANDONING THE MOVE AS A WHOLE. The more variations you possess of your favorite moves and positions, the better you will be able to overcome the resistance your opponent offers. Here, Garry Tonon shows his usual masterful back control. Note how he makes use of many variations of leg position as he works the back position. If you limit yourself to one or two back positions it will be easy for experienced opponents to escape. When you can seamlessly switch from one leg configuration to another in response to resistance - using a multiplicity of rear mount leg variations to follow your opponents back you will be able to stay in good position long enough to get the submission breakthrough you seek. For all your favorite moves and positions - research the many subtle variations and configurations so that you can change the character of the move/position, but maintain the same position/move overall.

Getting ready for Australia! Immediately after Garry Tonon’s fight in Singapore @onechampionship and my super seminar at @evolvemma I will head to Australia to see my family and catch with the Australian Jiu Jitsu scene 😊😊 I will probably go first to Melbourne and teach (tentatively) November 11 Sunday afternoon at John Donahue’s school (Back attacks) and then a different topic at Nemesis MMA on Monday evening November 12. After than I will head to Sydney for a big two day seminar for KMA martial arts @KMA salievski on Saturday and Sunday teaching back attacks and leg attacks. Apparently the initial seminar at KMA completely sold out so we will run a second one day seminar on Sunday afternoon for those who could not get tickets for the initial offering - contact KMA for details. In addition I will be teaching friends at @vt1martialarts in Sydney with Liam Resnekov. It will be great to see old friends in Australia- it’s amazing how far Aussie grappling has come since last time I was there - hope I can help it go even further!

Here is a great clip of outstanding grappling and MMA athlete Erin Blanchfield in training at RGA. Ms Blanchfield first started coming to train with the squad in the blue basement from Silver Fox academy in New Jersey and wanted to prepare for an EBI grappling show. She was just eighteen at the time and entered EBI 12 female flyweights as an unknown among several world champions. She stunned everyone by winning the event - the youngest ever to do so. Her primary interest however, is MMA where she is unbeaten and signed with Invicta. On November 16 she fights again. Here she is going through her MMA training and grappling training in NYC. It’s amazing to see her work ethic in operation every day. She comes all the way from New Jersey to toil in two sports every day. Keep up with this amazing young woman as she climbs to the top @blanchfield_mma and exhibits daily the purposeful action that over time produces champions and makes dreams reality. Video by @kahl_one

Georges St-Pierre/Chris Weidman and bottom position: Two of the most impressive athletes I ever had the honor of working with were Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman. Both were UFC champions and both were outstanding wrestlers capable of taking down anyone in the basement very easily and yet, every time they came to train, THEY ALMOST ALWAYS PULLED GUARD AND WORKED FROM BOTTOM POSITION. Why? They KNOW they can take down anyone here and recognize that the value of a Jiu Jitsu room is its Jiu Jitsu skill - so they work exclusively in that domain and thus maximize the value of the session to their development. So often I see a Jiu Jitsu athlete training with a wrestler and just pull guard straight away. Doing so means you miss a fine opportunity to work your standing grappling/takedown skills. Of course there may be times you have to pull guard, perhaps for safety reasons in a crowded training room, or because you have a match coming up soon and you want to mimic your plan for the match etc But under normal conditions use your partners for what they are best at to maximize your development. Mr St- Pierre and Mr Weidman did it for years and both became fine Jiu Jitsu practitioners as a result. Of course they could have played a negative game and just avoided going down to the floor but they did not - THEY IMMERSED THEMSELVES IN THE SPORT THEY WISHED TO LEARN EVEN THOUGH INITIALLY IT PUT THEM AT A DISADVANTAGE. They did not care about that - only about their long term development- and in time, both became great champions. Follow their example - immerse yourself in the new skills of a different grappling style and let your skills grow by letting your concern about winning or losing go.

The single greatest attribute that a coach can build in a student is SELF RELIANCE. You can have a great team behind you, the best coaches, legions of fans, sponsors , whatever you care to name - but at the end of the day the athlete walks on to the stage ALONE. He will be tested alone and his ability to trust in himself, develop himself, motivate himself and assess himself will be what determines success or failure on the big stage.

Multi tasking: As much as we value focus in jiu jitsu it should be quite clear to you that there is a strong demand in many situations in jiu jitsu for you to work on several different tasks at the same time if you are to be successful. In the case of the back position, you must be able at a minimum to satisfy the basic demand to maintain the overall position, while at the same time working diligently to actually attack. In practice, and especially when utilizing the back system methodology that we employ, we have to simultaneously work to hold position and also battle through our opponent’s hands to set up strangle attacks. As you gain in sophistication you will add more and more tasks into the equation - a battle for head position, for left vs right side etc etc. You must master the skills of prioritizing the tasks (position generally takes priority) and of working in two or more at the same time. Here, Georges St-Pierre does a fine job of working control of Nicky Ryan’s hips with his legs to stay aligned and keeping head on opposite side of his strangle arm to exert strong control from head to hips. While all this is going on he is engaged in a sharp hand fight with Mr Ryan. This is exactly the kind of practice you must engage in to master this critical aspect of the sport. Multi tasking at the office is one thing - but doing it preserve yourself from a powerful strangle is quite another!

Get everything in place first - then go: A common problem in the application of submission holds is the tendency most people have to attempt the move before they have the preconditions necessary for the success of the move set in place. Any given submission has a set of preconditions that will make it work. Failing to establish these prior to attempting the actual is asking for failure. You must learn the preconditions for your favorite submissions and have the diligence and patience to set them in place first and only then apply the submission. This will help you in two important ways. The first is physical. When the preconditions are well set your physical performance of the submission will be much cleaner and tighter. The second is psychological. When the preconditions are well set you will enter into the submission with much greater verve and confidence and display the commitment necessary for submission holds at high levels. Look at how Garry Tonon has established perfect head, wrist, elbow and leg positioning before he commits to falling into a bottom position high elbow guillotine. He can fall into the move with full confidence knowing that everything is in place before he enters. Know what you need PRIOR to entering your favorite submissions. Then watch your confidence steeply rise as you enter and enjoy your increased success afterwards.

Back system - two approaches to strangles: When it is time to attack strangles from the back, there are two main approaches. The first is the STRANGLE FIRST approach. Here the idea is to penetrate your opponents chin/neck with your strangle hand as soon as you get to the back and then subsequently get the usual control elements afterwards. The second approach is CONTROL FIRST. Here the idea is to stabilize and control the position first and then work methodically for the strangle second (in our case, by using the hand fighting system we are known for). If you wish to excel in back attacks it’s important that you excel in both. The great problem most people have when attacking from the back is setting their strangle arm in place. You can either use speed to get it set, or control that pins your opponents defensive arms down so you can get your strangle arm set. When Georges St-Pierre fought Micheal Bisping he saw a fleeting opportunity and used the strangle-first speed based method to take the exposed neck and took a brilliant victory. Nonetheless, both are necessary for back strangulation mastery, so here he is today working his control based method with Nicky Ryan and Gordon Ryan - two masters of this approach. Remember - as a Jiu Jitsu athlete your strangle arm is your equivalent of a boxers knock out punch - take pride in your ability to use it in different ways to get the decisive win.

The great under performer among the submission holds of jiu jitsu: There are around fifteen to twenty families of submission holds, each with many many variations in technique and entry. These core submission holds are seen all the time in competition. Arm bars, triangles rear naked strangles etc. are constantly seen successfully applied in all levels of competition. There is however, one well known and foundational submission hold that has a truly miserable success rate. In fact, in twenty five years I cannot think of even a single example of it working successfully in black belt competition at the world championship level gi or no gi. This must make it the single worst performing submission hold among the various foundational submissions in our sport. Most of the other submissions perform brilliantly, but the success rate of this one is utterly feeble - can you guess what it is? It is the Americana lock (ude garami). The only example of it being used successfully that I can recall is by Jon Jones on a badly battered and exhausted Vitor Belfort in an MMA fight. This is very unusual - most core moves of the sport have excellent success rates. The American lock is unquestionably a core lock of the sport. Often it is the first lock we learn and a staple of beginner classes everywhere, yet it scores so few victories that I would understand if an instructor simply stopped teaching it above white belt level. Interestingly the American lock is actually very strong and potentially devastating once it is applied. The failure is not MECHANICAL, an American lock will break an arm just as surely as a kimura or juji gatame or any other (in fact I would argue that the breaking potential of a well applied American lock is superior to most other joint locks) So why the failure to be successfully applied in competition? If it’s not mechanical, the failure must reside in SET UPS/ENTRY and in ability to COPE WITH RESISTANCE/COUNTERS. Do you think this great failure of the submission family can be rehabilitated? Can we improve our set ups to make this lock work in competition? Or is it destined to be forever the under performer of jiu jitsu? Let me know your thoughts!

The pattern of all progress: Be aware that your progress in jiu jitsu and almost any other skill you care to learn proceeds in a very predictable fashion. This pattern is true for both your overall progress in the sport and also for your progress in any given skill within the sport. It will begin an initial RAPID PROGRESS phase as you embark on developing a new skill. This is an exciting time as your level increases quickly and everything is new and exciting. Then you will encounter a slowing of progress that develops into a PLATEAU/FRUSTRATION phase. Here you run into recurring problems and walls that don’t have easy answers. This phase can be very long in many cases. At some point we get to the SUDDEN BREAKTHROUGH phase. A workable set of solutions to the problems we encountered is found and the cycle returns to the rapid progress phase and continues on as a cycle of uneven development. Once you become cognizant of this cycle you will not become disheartened by the reality that there will be times that you feel like you are not going forward at all. Let this knowledge give you optimism in these periods and know that the next phase will come. However it is crucial you under stand this vital point - EVERY POSITIVE CHANGE IN THIS CYCLE COMES FROM A CONCERTED EFFORT TO CHANGE THINGS ON YOUR PART. Change does not come about magically - YOU MUST ACTIVELY MAKE IT HAPPEN BY CHANGING YOUR APPROACH. Don’t expect to get change by doing the same things you have done previously. Understand this fundamental cycle of skill training and let it give you the critical mix of optimism and realism that will get you closer to your goals.

Guillotine attacks: Breaking your opponent’s alignment and structure: A critical part of success in jiu jitsu is reducing your opponents strength by misaligning his spine. This is particularly important in guillotine attacks. If you can put your opponents head and neck into an unnatural, misaligned position you will greatly degrade his ability to defend himself and prevent the strangle. In a well applied guillotine there is a concerted attempt to turn your opponents head and neck into a structurally weak position. Here you can clearly see this in operation as Garry Tonon applies a devastating high elbow guillotine on Kim Terra, the very talented brother of Caio. You can clearly see the turning of the head into a forced and unnatural position that shuts down effective defense and greatly facilitates the strangle. This is achieved mostly by the interplay between your hips and the elbow of your strangle arm - you can see this interplay very well here. Look to add this notion of rotation into an unnatural position to improve your guillotine game - it’s not much fun to drill but the results will assuredly brings smile to your face! Keep working your front headlock/Guillotine game - it is a huge part of your submission potential in no gi grappling

Going beyond position - The limb isolation principle: Traditional BJJ puts positional dominance as the most fundamental goal of the athlete. The reasoning is very sound. Traditional jiu jitsu was predicated on the idea that jiu jitsu was for fighting and if one got to a dominant position one could use strikes to open an opponent up to facilitate submissions. In a pure grappling match however, strikes are not permitted. Many people settle for just getting good position and winning by the points accrued. However, if you wish to become a submission specialist you must go beyond simply pinning opponents in dominant position - you must in addition master the skill of ISOLATING AND CONTROLLING A LIMB. Only when a limb is isolated and controlled is submission possible. This skill, like any other, must be trained diligently. If you wish to improve your submission rates, When you get to a dominant position GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE and work to ISOLATE A LIMB. This is one of the absolute most important general principles of my approach to jiu jitsu. In a real fight you create pressure to open up submissions by STRIKING but in a grappling match you create pressure to open up submissions by ISOLATING A LIMB. The mantra I preach to my students is this: IN GRAPPLING YOU ONLY BECOME DANGEROUS TO YOUR OPPONENT WHEN YOU TAKE HIS BACK OR ISOLATE A LIMB (or best of all - both). This is one of the founding axioms of my approach to grappling training and coaching. Look at Gordon Ryan mounted on the great Josh Barnett. Most people would consider it a huge accomplishment to sweep and mount such a powerful adversary, but Mr Ryan is not satisfied with this at all and immediately begins to work Mr Barnett’s elbow up above his shoulders to isolate it away from his torso. Years of training in our approach makes this a reflex the moment we get to a dominant position. Make if a reflex in your game and I promise you your submission rates will dramatically increase.

Stay with it: One of the most common things I see when coaching is students giving insufficient development time to a new skill and abandoning what could have been a great addition to their arsenal by giving up before they should. Early in Garry Tonon’s time working with me I noted he had no real attacks from front headlock/guillotine. This was unacceptable in my eyes. A strong guillotine attack is not only a devastating weapon in itself, but a tremendous means of opening up a defensively strong opponent to other forms of attack such as back strangles and leg attacks. I thought the high elbow guillotine would be a fine starting point - it is an extremely strong strangle that confounds many of the traditional defenses to guillotines and was well suited to Mr Tonon’s dynamic movement oriented game. It was a a big part of my early training in jiu jitsu as it was the favorite move of one of my main mentors, Matt Serra in the 1990’s. In addition, the great Marcelo Garcia has shown its effectiveness on many occasions at the highest levels. Initially the results were rather poor. Mr Tonon really struggled with the move and on several occasions told me he was not interested in further study of it. I insisted and we kept working on both mechanics and set ups. Mr Tonon is usually a student who sees a move on Monday and by Tuesday is performing it flawlessly so this was a very frustrating experience for him. In time he developed one of the very best high elbow guillotine attacks I ever saw and it became one of his best weapons that he used often in competition and training. Remember - NO MOVE IN YOUR ARSENAL IS BORN INTO MATURITY - THEY ALL REQUIRE A TIME OF NURTURE BEFORE THEY BECOME STRONG. Don’t give up too quickly on what you perceive as a move with great potential. Keep trouble shooting and solving the problems you experience and give it time. That move which today you curse and bemoan may well in time be the move that your opponents fear the most and which you rely upon more than any other. Nothing great is built in a day and many things that became great started inauspiciously. Work hard and intelligently - but exercise patience also.

The two ways: When unarmed humans fight, there are two main ways they can inflict sufficient damage upon each other to attain victory. The first is through the use of KINETIC energy - moving a hard part of the body at speed towards a vulnerable part of the opponent’s body. The second is through the use lever and fulcrum to apply BREAKING FORCES on joints or CONSTRICTING FORCES on arteries. Traditionally the history of martial arts has always divided these approaches to combat into striking arts- boxing, Muay Thai, karate, Tae Kwon do etc etc and grappling arts, jiu jitsu, Judo, wrestling styles, sambo etc etc. The fusion of the two in MMA is the purest and most complete and the one which makes the greatest demands upon the athlete in terms of broadening their skill set. I am always grateful that my sensei Renzo Gracie always encouraged me to remember the link between jiu jitsu and fighting. This made me always put a very heavy emphasis on submission holds in my jiu jitsu teaching as this is the grapplers equivalent of a KO punch. It was in this fascinating interface between grappling and striking that I first worked with Georges St-Pierre and now with Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan who are now both beginning this new journey from one skill set to another. Here, Garry Tonon warms up in the OneChampionship cage shortly before his most recent fight - working on his mixed grappling/striking skills on the floor where athletes get the best opportunities to display the two ways to victory in unarmed combat working in unison.

Having fun training Shane McMahon of the WWE @wwe @shanemcmahonwwe - he is an outstanding athlete and shocked us with the speed with which he picked up complex moves! I have always loved reading about the old time link between Pro Wrestling and submission grappling. Many of the old time pro wrestlers were excellent grapplers who could do choreographed shows and real matches with equal efficacy. There was a much smaller gap between choreographed matches and real matches in those days. Mr McMahon is exploring that area now - learning the submissions we use and doing a fine job picking up strangleholds and joint locks! These big men move incredibly well for their size and are masters of stunt work, high amplitude falls and slams and showmanship - I am confident they could learn to slap on submission holds with style in a short time too!

Overseas adventures: Very pleased to announce three big overseas projects coming up in November. First, Garry Tonon will return to @onechampionship MMA in Singapore to fight Korean MMA fighter Sung Jong Lee on November 9th. That week I will teach a super seminar going from November 5th - 9th two classes a day at @evolvemma gym in Singapore showing the squad style to people traveling in from around the world to learn our approach to the game. After this I will travel to Australia to see my dear Mom (Mum in Aus/NZ 😜) and family and catch up with all my jiu jitsu friends in the Land Down Under. I will teach a super seminar in Sydney and probably in Melbourne if I can get organized! I always love to see how far Australia and New Zealand have progressed in jiu jitsu and would love to do anything I can to assist that development. Mr Tonon is training very hard as always and will be looking to show his progress in MMA skill - this is his first fight at 155 pounds and I am preparing a comprehensive teaching program for Singapore and Australia- I will release more details on the Australia tour soon! Can’t wait to see you all and work to help get you to the next level! Until then, wishing you the best from NYC! 🤗🤗

Changing the instructional video game: Dinner with the great Bernardo Faria and Michael Zenga of BJJ Fanatics. We have some fascinating projects coming up - technique in jiu jitsu changes every year, but TEACHING METHODOLOGY has been largely static for generations- we aim to change that! Big plans for the future - can’t wait to share with you all! Wishing you all the best from NYC!

Benefits of a system based approach to learning martial arts: most of you know that one of the foundations of my approach to coaching jiu jitsu is that of a systems based method rather than the classical move-based approach. The idea is to create sub systems within the classic BJJ system that give a comprehensive and coherent guide to action in specific scenarios that can be learned very quickly and confer a considerable knowledge/skill advantage over an opponent who might otherwise have a considerable OVERALL experience advantage and yet a DOMAIN SPECIFIC experience/knowledge disadvantage in these specialized scenarios. We are all familiar with the idea that someone can have vast knowledge in one area, but be completely lacking in another. Essentially we try to create this situation in jiu jitsu. It begins with a solid positional/fundamentals game - you can never skip that step - and then we get into specific scenarios and build detailed systems and training programs around them. Since there is so much focus on these, experience and proficiency can be accrued relatively quickly in these domains and garner exceptional results in a short time frame. Seventeen year Nicky Ryan showed the results of this kind of training over the weekend. He took on Japanese MMA Hideo Tokoro, who has over sixty MMA fights with wins over grappling icons such as Masakazu Imanari. Yet Mr Ryan was able to secure the back and finish in classic squad style using our method of arm trapping that makes even very experienced opponents vulnerable to strangles. You can clearly see the extent to which his opponent’s defensive arms are pinned down leaving nothing to defend the following stranglehold. Remember - THERE IS MUCH MORE TO THE MOVES THEMSELVES THAT DETERMINE SUCCESS OT FAILURE IN JIU-JITSU. Very often it is THE INFRASTRUCTURE AROUND THE MOVES that determines their value.

After all the action and controversy at UFC 229 on Saturday my favorite moment was Derrick Lewis’ interview with Joe Rogan 😂😂😂 Had the pleasure of watching with @benaskren with whom I taught a great seminar earlier in the day. He is a great athlete, a superb teacher and a great fellow.

The surest sign: A coach always wonders how far a student will go to get to their potential. In truth the degree to which you will rise to your potential is proportional to your willingness to invest time, energy and intelligent planning into your development in the skills required to get where you want to. One of the surest signs of a strong commitment to your growth is the time it takes for a student to return to the gym to renew training after a major competition. I’m not so impressed when an athlete comes back immediately after a loss - everyone feels like training hard after the sting of a loss. Its when they come back immediately to train and grow after a big WIN that impresses me most. Most people will relax and lay off work after a win - but the truly ambitious just see that win as a stepping stone to a still greater self and get back to work and growth as soon as possible.

Ryan brothers dominate in Las Vegas: Gordon and Nicky Ryan were on fire at the Quintet 3 Team Grappling event last night. Nicky Ryan was up first, in a super match with Hideo Tokoro, Japanese MMA star who has gone the distance with Royce Gracie and has an interesting fast paced and scrappy style. Quintet has some strange and seemingly arbitrary rules - heel hooks are forbidden and their passivity/stalling criteria make little sense, so the plan was constant movement to upper body finishes - Nicky Ryan did exactly that - displaying a beautiful back system mastery to trap Mr Tokoro’s arms helplessly and finish the strangle in a few minutes. Then the team competition began. The match up I was most interested in was Gordon Ryan against the great Josh Barnett. Mr Barnett is a legend in both grappling and MMA and represents the art of Catch Wrestling- the traditional American style of submission grappling. He has fought brilliantly against jiu jitsu players in the past and always impressed me with his effectiveness. I know very little about this fascinating historical style, I must improve my knowledge in this area, but I do know that it shares several philosophies in common with our approach to grappling and is very different to classical BJJ - so this was going to be interesting. Mr Ryan quickly swept and mounted Mr Barnett despite a 25-30 pound weight difference and in an ensuing scramble locked a triangle strangle to take an incredible win over a legend. Then Gordon Ryan went on a tear, submitting almost all his other opponents as the event progressed, including visiting team mate Craig Jones via back system strangle and jiu jitsu legend Vitor Shaolin Ribeiro via special arm bar variation that Mr Ryan developed himself. He took his team to victory largely by himself in a truly outstanding performance. These incredible brothers just keep improving and show that the will to learn and grow is the basis of continuing success on the big stage. I am so proud of their diligence, hard work and creativity as they walk the long path to mastery.

Can you learn from a video? This is a question I am often asked. My answer is an unequivocal - YES. I truly believe that video is among the single most useful additions to any jiu jitsu athletes coaching inputs - whether it be study and analysis of great players, technical advice from experts or video self analysis of your own game - all can play a major role in speeding your development in the sport of intelligently allied to physical work in the dojo. Here is a fine example at work. Phil Schwartz @phillschwartz10p is a talented 10th Planet blackbelt on the West Coast who always had a game heavily influenced by traditional 10th Planet strong points like rubber guard and “truck” cross body rides etc. he became interested in the leg lock game after watching the success of the squad in EBI competition. Intense study of the ENTER THE SYSTEM: LEG LOCK videos along with his own hard work drilling and practicing in the gym quickly garnered him some serious improvements. Here he is in action at the recent Washington State NAGA competition where he took gold with three well applied inside heel hooks - in particular this superb example where he used text squad style double trouble principle to control both legs to subvert his opponent’s defense and pave the way for a fine finish. Note the impressive control over his opponent’s movement that allows him to pick the time and method of finishing at his discretion - a superb example of taking theoretical knowledge from a video source and getting great practical results. Well done Phil!! I am happy to see your success and hope it inspires others to see the value that video input can play in an athlete’s development. Hope I get to see more success from you and other students in the future! 🤗🤗 Wishing all my long distance video students the best from the basement where it all began!

The inestimable Matt Serra: One of my most important mentors in my development was Matt Serra. He was an inspirational senpai to all of us on the mat. He is also one of the great characters of the old Renzo Gracie Academy. This guy can light up a room any time any place. This afternoon he came in to catch with the crew. Like all jiu jitsu players, there is nothing he likes more than a discussion of techniques. Here he is playing around and staying current with some reverse X Guard entries into cross ashi garami/inside heel hook finishes. His commentary while drilling had us all in stitches. “What is this? Double trouble? DOUBLE TROUBLE? AM I NOW PART OF THE DEATH SQUAD!!!”😂😂😂😂 Training with Matt Serra was always educational and tough - but the comedy shows afterwards always made our day and made it easy to come back tomorrow for more!! Here we are, Mr Serra, Garry Tonon and myself making leg lock work fun 😜😜😂😂 As much as we all love hard training - it’s a treasure to have personalities like this in the gym to keep it all fun!

My two guillotine mentors: One of the reasons why I put such a heavy emphasis on guillotine training for no gi jiu jitsu is because I saw with my own eyes so many times in my early years of development the incredible effectiveness of a well applied guillotine by two of my most important influences - my sensei, Renzo Gracie, and my senpai, Matt Serra. Both men had outstanding success with guillotines, but in very different ways. Mr Gracie developed the arm in guillotine as his favorite move (tokui waza). He did so at a time when many people thought the move could not possibly work. Experimentation and ultimately success in competition proved them wrong. Though he had a vast array of moves, whenever he was in a highly competitive sparring session that was his go to move. Mr Serra, was an early user of the high elbow guillotine (we actually used to call it a Serra guillotine in those days!). On so many occasions I saw him submit famous visiting blackbelts (when he was just a purple and brown belt!). Mr Serra was extremely agile and from bottom position, jump up and snap his opponent’s head down and lock this devastating hold and either fall back or stand up to finish - even when it did not get a finish it was so threatening that opponents were very reluctant to pressure forward and pass against him. It was a fascinating thing for me to observe as a student - that two people could employ two very different guillotines and get so much success either as a submission or as a severe threat that set up other attacks. There are many great guillotine specialists out there - I was very fortunate to have two right in front of me from the start! They taught me the essential lesson that once you master a version of the guillotine you will be dangerous at any moment in a match and can turn the direction of a match in the blink of an eye from almost any situation.

One day after class we were all sitting around as we always do, making fun of each other and discussing very silly topics very seriously - when it became apparent that Nicky Ryan had NEVER SEEN THE MOVIE BLOOD SPORT!!!! There was a cry of mixed horror and rage from Garry Tonon - I have never seen him get so emotional! 😂😂Mr Tonon immediately laid down the law - no more lessons for Mr Ryan until he watched Blood Sport or some equivalent JCVD movie - to which Mr Ryan replied, “who is Jean Claude Van Damme?” ☠️☠️ Fresh cries of horror and rage from Mr Tonon!! ☠️☠️💀💀☠️☠️ Pandemonium broke out on the mats as it turned out several other squad members had also failed this basic requirement of martial arts training! It took me several minutes to convince Mr Tonon not to instantly demote Mr Ryan back to white belt!! Out came the iphone and the guilty parties all had to watch a YouTube highlight of Blood Sport before next class!! 😂😂 I guess Nicky can’t be blamed - the movie came out almost fifteen years before he was born! 😂😂 What are your martial arts movie favorites? Do you think jiu jitsu could ever translate well to movie fight scenes? Has anyone succeeded so far? If not, why? Watching Blood Sport again reminded me of how under represented grappling arts were in mainstream martial arts thinking in the eighties - it was a paradigm of punching and kicking - how much has changed since then!

A sense of direction: When you have a clear sense of direction and know exactly what you want to do in a bout and have the skills to get it done, you will not only be a difficult person indeed to stop - you will usually get what you want in very little time. Here is Frank Rosenthal going on a leg lock rampage this weekend - ending his match in seconds via outside heel hook. I always look to coach A STRONG FIRST MOVE THAT WILL EITHER GET AN IMMEDIATE BREAKTHROUGH OR CREATE OVERLY DEFENSIVE REACTIONS THAT WILL SET UP SUBSEQUENT MOVES. Very often a well performed strong first move will be all that is required. All my students excel in creating pressure from the outset even when the opponent knows what to expect. This often results in very quick victories like this leg lock blitz. You must train this aspect of the game - know what you want and practice until you can get there quickly - the results can be astounding

Juniors on fire at Rise Grappling Invitational! Last night the squad juniors put on an amazing team display at the growing Rise grappling show in New York. First up was leg locking ace Robert Degle who blitzed his opponent in ten seconds via heel hook. Newly promoted black belt Frank Rosenthal clearly took that as a challenge - he took on an athlete that flograppling ranks number five in the world no gi and heel hooked him in less than ten seconds! Then Ryan Quinn stepped up to win the 185 pound tournament. Nick Ronan had a tough physical match with a Pan Am brown belt double champion and won a thriller in overtime using back system to get the strangle for the win! In the main event Jason Rau took took on the outstanding Mansher Munch Khera and showed his leg locking mastery with several beautiful entries into the legs along with bottom sweep attempts that took him to a tightly contested judges decision win! Before all that, young Trinity Pun, just thirteen years old, showed her skill and tenacity to take a hard fought draw - big future there! Gordon Ryan did great work as cornerman along with my mentor Matt Serra, where Mr Ronan and Mr Rau began jiu jitsu and still teach and train. Great stuff from these outstanding athletes! Always so proud of their development and growth and the story that all of you must write - of someone following their passion and crafting a plan to get there and showing the discipline to stay the course. Well done! 🤗🤗 Legs and back system FTW!

I am very happy to announce the release of my latest installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series of instructional videos THE FRONT HEADLOCK/GUILLOTINE. BJJ Fanatics has finished the editing process and everything is ready for release. If you are interested the link to their website is in my instagram bio. The front headlock/guillotine has always had a strong presence in no gi grappling - there is a reason - it’s among the most readily available moves in the sport and the finishes available from this position are devastating if applied well. We have our own distinctive approach to the position, based as always, around a step by step approach that takes you from all the necessary prerequisites through all the different options needed to overcome resistance and the central problems you will encounter in the position; and then the technical details needed to maximize efficiency in finishing. Thanks as always to my teachers and mentors who got me started on this journey and all my brilliant and hard working students who have shown this approach so successfully in competition and expanded upon it as they make their journey. Wishing you the best on your own front headlock/ guillotine journey!

Great morning training with @chrisweidman along with @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @wonderboymma Three of the most talented athletes I ever met. The application of jiu jitsu to MMA is a theme that my sensei, Renzo Gracie, always encouraged me to pursue and emphasize. I am blessed to do so with such talent as this. What an introduction to aspects of MMA training for Gordon Ryan - working with titans from the start!

Art and martial art - start with a sketch: When teaching I always keep in mind the analogy of the artistic painter. The painter BEGINS WITH A SKETCH and then fills in all the details over time to arrive finally at a beautiful painting. So too, The martial artist must approach every skill that he or she learns in a similar fashion. It’s tempting to jump straight into details, afterall, we are told so often it’s the details that make the difference. I believe it’s essential however, to begin with a general idea of the underlying PURPOSE and CONTEXT of the move first, and once this is clearly established, THEN move into details. Details without direction is just so much noise that won’t improve performance. Start with WHAT are you trying to accomplish and WHY this is a good thing and WHEN you employ it. Then start with an overview of the move and finish with details. So like the painter - BEGIN WITH A SKETCH and in time let the painting fill out the picture into a work of art that all who see it will admire. Here I chat with outstanding youth athletes Mikey Wilson and Liam Zeh before drilling begins - creating an outline that will give the practice session a sense of direction and purpose that they can build towards over the training time.

Gold medal front headlock/guillotine: I constantly push my students to excel in the use of front headlock/guillotine attacks. My reasoning is that it is always available, is highly effective and even when it fails, it elicits such a strong defensive reaction that it functions as a tremendous gateway into other great attacks. All of my students work hard at the skill, in particular Gordon Ryan. Mr Ryan was always devastating in the gym with his front headlock and guillotine attacks. Like all my students he even developed many of his own variations and tricks. Interestingly, Mr Ryan had a similar problem that several of my other students had - he was so successful in his main attacks to leg and back that he never got an opportunity to use his front headlock game outside the gym. Before ADCC I told him this was a good thing as few would be expecting any danger from that direction and the rules of ADCC heavily favor standing grappling/takedowns which increase the opportunity for front headlocks/guillotines even more. In the biggest match of his career so far - ADCC finals for the gold medal - he pulled out his unknown front headlock game during a standing wrestling exchange with the great Keenan Cornelius. Mr Cornelius used all his defensive skills, creating a wild series of rolling attacks, but Mr Ryan followed him through everything and finished mounted with a devastating strangle to take gold. It was an incredible example of the power of a hidden weapon, of systems based training to surpass high level resistance and of the immense tactical value of strong front headlock/Guillotine attacks. If you feel you want to increase your submission rate, invest time and study into the most readily available submission opportunity in the sport - the front headlock/guillotine. There is a reason so many great jiu jitsu athletes have made this move a centerpiece of their game - with study and training - so can you

This ain’t his first rodeo: Check out my sensei, Renzo Gracie sleeping just before his most recent MMA match in @onechampionship in Manila Philippines where he won via submission. Not many people can relax shortly before a main event fight - this photo was taken between Garry Tonon’s victory and Mr Gracie’s bout. So often you will see people expend vast amounts of energy unnecessarily before a fight. Energy is a precious resource - spend it as you ought to spend money - carefully and with an expectation of a return on your investment. Set a time for the beginning of your warm up and put whatever energy into it that feels right for you - but as much as possible, outside of your planned warm up, reduce energy expenditure through stress, worry and expectations to the greatest degree possible. Recognize that endless worry and physical tension won’t benefit your body performance. The only hard work before the fight should be the planned and structured warm up - prior to that - relax as much as you can. Obviously this is an extreme example of this - but it’s something to build towards as you gain experience.

One step at a time: A feature of most of the moves of jiu jitsu is that they can usually be divided up into sequential steps. Until one step is successfully completed, the next cannot be made. In most cases, when a step fails, one has to abandon the move and either start again from the beginning or try something else. This step by step feature makes teaching and learning rather easy. As you go higher in the sport you must learn to use this step by step character to your advantage. Once you begin the first step, a knowledgeable opponent will have a good idea of what you will want to do next. The step by step nature of the sport makes many of our moves predictable to BOTH players. It is important then, that you use subterfuge on occasion to make yourself unpredictable. I will often enter the first step of a given move with aggression to try to elicit a predictable defensive reaction from an opponent who now expects the usual second step of the sequence - and then apply an unexpected second step that slips past whatever defensive structure the opponent built for expected next step. When you first begin your jiu jitsu study, the step by step approach to learning is a great learning aid; but as you advance it can become a liability insofar as you become predictable. Make sure you constantly look for ways to disguise your real intentions by committing strongly to a given move and then having several alternative second steps quite different from the usual one. In this way you will always be an unpredictable and tricky opponent, but at the same time have the solid foundation of a strong step by step game.

Principles versus techniques: The underlying PRINCIPLES of jiu jitsu , and indeed, all combat sports, are as fixed and permanent as the night sky; for they are rooted in the unchanging strengths and weaknesses of the human body. The TECHNIQUES of jiu jitsu on the other hand, change with the speed and fluidity of the waters of a river, as they are based upon the minds of men who forever seek competitive advantage over each other through insight, study and innovation. Accordingly, stay true to the basic principles at all times, they will give you sound direction with the reliability of a compass; but recognize that techniques must be in flux, with constant change and innovation in response to a changing landscape.

As a coach or mentor there are two things I can never give you. Two things that only you can provide. The first is a deep underlying PASSION for what you do. I can deepen that passion, fuel it, strengthen it - but only YOU can CREATE it; and you either have it or you don’t. The second is the ability to PULL THE TRIGGER when opportunity presents itself. I can teach you all manner of techniques, tactics, game plans, risk calculations, strategy, drills etc etc. but in the end, at the crucial moment, ONLY YOU CAN MAKE THE NAKED CHOICE TO PULL THE TRIGGER. In jiu jitsu and in life - much can be offered to you - but these two things, passion and the ability to seize the moment and pull the trigger, these two must come from within you - they are yours and yours alone.

Follow the journey: The most exciting times in your growth in martial arts are the early days of your development. Every lesson seems to offer insights, moves, tactics and strategy that changes your entire point of view. Garry Tonon is going through that phase now in MMA. Today he worked with British UFC middleweight standout Tom Breese @breesemma and @aidenleemma. I first met Mr Breese at Tristar gym in Montreal where he was working with my students Georges St-Pierre and Firas Zahabi. He was a brilliant boxer learning to merge this skill with wrestling and grappling - now he has his own gym in Birmingham England teaching MMA and our approach to grappling. It’s amazing to see his progress and self development every time he visits. He continues his amazing progress in the UFC with another big bout coming up soon! It’s always great to see athletes trading knowledge in mutually beneficial ways - Mr Tonon helps Mr Breese with grappling and Mr Breese helps Mr Tonon with MMA. Both athletes have a tremendous amount to offer in the future. Following their journey as they progress towards their goals will help and inspire you as you progress towards your own goals. We are all beginners at something - it’s a phase that gives rise to much frustration and vexation- but one day you will see that it was those hard times that made you who you are in the sport. Always know that you are not alone in starting out - even the best grapplers start as neophytes in the new sport of MMA and go through the whole beginner cycle a second time. Don’t get frustrated by measuring your progress only by results - measure by your personal growth and you will come to see this as the happiest time in your journey.

The three kings of the scramble: Most of the time in jiu jitsu we are looking to create situations where we have greater control over our opponent’s ability to move than he has over us. Unfortunately our opponents are actively doing the same and are usually just as good at this as we are. The inevitable result is that we spend considerable amounts of time, perhaps the majority in many cases, in SCRAMBLE situations, which we will define as dynamic situations where neither athlete has a greater capacity to control the other’s movement than their opponent does. It is my belief that in any scramble situation - THERE ARE THREE TYPES OF SUBMISSION/CONTROL METHODS THAT ARE ALMOST ALWAYS AVAILABLE AND THE MOST EFFECTIVE - these are KIMURA, FRONT HEADLOCK/GUILLOTINE and ASHI GARAMI based leg locks. In any dynamic, free flowing situation where neither athlete has decisive control - YOU WILL BE ABLE TO ENTER INTO AT LEAST ONE OF THESE THREE SUBMISSION ENTRIES. I put a heavy emphasis on all three in my coaching for this reason (among others). It is almost impossible to get into a hard grappling match for two or three minutes (and usually a lot less) of movement and exchange without exposing the opportunity for one of these three submissions/controls. Proficiency in these three areas of the game is critical to your success in scramble situations. Of course there are many other moves and tactics that work well in scrambles - but in the sport of jiu jitsu/submission grappling, THESE THREE ARE KING. Make sure you work them relentlessly paying particular attention to how you would employ them in quick moving situations. Doing so will give you a clear and effective sense of direction in any scramble.

Enthusiastic amateurs: Much of what I write about is the development of professional athletes in grappling and MMA. The reason for this is because they exemplify the main themes that I push - of PASSION as the bedrock of development, of DISCIPLINE/ PERSEVERANCE as the sustainer of development, of INTELLIGENT PLANNING as the determinant of your speed and amount of development and of the CONFIDENCE and courage to take a risk on stage as the means of showing your development. But let’s get something straight. Professional athletes are very much the minority in any class - including mine. The vast majority of my students are ordinary people just like you who have a job, family and many responsibilities and commitments that come before jiu jitsu. Unlike a professional athlete, they cannot invest all their time and effort into the sport but must instead give it as much time as they can among their other commitments. I have always been very proud of the fact that I have many students who fall into this enthusiastic amateur group but whose skill level is shockingly high - to the point where they can absolutely go toe to toe with great professional athletes and give them a very hard workout indeed. My goal as a coach is to make the ENTIRE ROOM strong, as THE STRONGER THE ROOM OVERALL, THE STRONGER THE ELITE ATHLETES COMING OUT OF IT. So often I am asked whether someone training part time can attain a good level of jiu jitsu despite having a busy job, family, perhaps being older etc. my answer is always a resounding YES! I know because I see it every day. A good example comes from this weekend at the IBJJF Pan Am Championships. Most people were greatly impressed by the performance of Gordon Ryan in taking double gold - but there were two double golds that day. Forty three year old Ryan Bier, married father of two, working a very demanding job in the medical profession also took first place in both his weight and absolute masters division. I am always hugely impressed by people who get to a very high standard as amateurs working around their main commitments. I SEE JUST AS MUCH PASSION AMONG THEM AS I DO AMONG THE PROFESSIONALS - they are the heart and soul of the sport.

Frank Rosenthal strangles for the win!! Outstanding junior brown belt Frank Rosenthal @frankrosenthal11 won his super fight against 10th Planet standout black black belt Ricky Lule with an expertly applied stranglehold from the back in standing position at the Onnit Invitational in Texas. Mr Rosenthal has been on a competitive tear lately, with most wins coming by way of his signature inside heel hook finish. This time he wanted to show his growth and go upper body - that’s exactly what he did. Hard work on back system details paid off against his tough opponent. There is always a certain look of MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS in a well applied submission and Mr Rosenthal certainly shows that here! Great weekend for the squad between No Gi Pan Ams IBJJF and Onnit EBI rules. Hats off to Mr Rosenthal doing what we all should - identifying goals, formulating a plan to attain them, working hard to make them reality and managing/taking the risks to get them done on the big stage! That’s the formula for jiu jitsu and life itself!

Double gold for Gordon Ryan: Gordon Ryan entered the Pan American No Gi championships this weekend in NYC - his first foray into IBJJF competition as a black belt. Despite a rule set that he is still learning he won both his weight division and the absolute - every match by submission. The biggest question of the tournament was what would happen when Mr Ryan matched with the outstanding Atos team champion Kaynan Duarte. Mr Duarte greatly impressed us a year ago at the ADCC world championships and has gotten even better since then. They did not meet in their weight division when Mr Duarte was upset in a close match prior to the finals. Instead they met in the Absolute finals in a very close and tactical match with Mr Ryans pressure proving decisive near the end of the bout when he he utilized the back system once again to win via submission. It was a day of upper body finishes as Mr Ryan used Kimura system and back System to get the breakthrough in every match. When the squad first emerged I would constantly hear people describe them as one trick ponies - I knew that was not true as I teach to attack the whole body - now more and more people are starting to see the same. Great to see Mr Ryan’s family support with proud Mom and Dad. Congratulations to Mr Ryan on another stellar performance and thank you to IBJJF @ibjjf for running such a large show with so many athletes in such an efficient manner and getting such a talented pool of competitors in NYC.

Visitors: It’s always fun having talented visitors come by the academy. This weekend the No Gi Pan Am Championships is being held in NYC so many great jiu jitsu athletes came in for training including two of my favorites @samuelbragagb and @talitaalencarbjj They had a great time working out with the squad and getting ready for competition day. Wishing best of luck to all the Pan Am athletes especially Samuel and Talita!

Like old times: Had a great morning out in Long Island training @chrisweidman along with @gordonlovesjiujitsu and @jasonraubjj89 and friends. Helping Mr Weidman prepare for his UFC title run and victory was a great highlight of my life. When he opened his gym with his primary coach Ray Longo in Long Island there were much fewer opportunities to work together, so it was great going out today and getting back on to the mat! Mr Weidman is unquestionably one of the most gifted athletes I ever worked with. It was fascinating seeing how he has evolved in training methods and approaches. His upcoming rematch with the great Luke Rockhold will be an incredible test for both athletes. Looking forward to more training with this team out on Long Island as fight day approaches!

Passive learning: Normally we think the learning in jiu jitsu is done when WE perform the move on a partner as the active agent in the exchange. I am a big believer in the idea that we can learn a LOT about a given move when it is performed upon us. When a move is performed upon us we get a tremendous amount of feedback about the effectiveness of our partners application of the move. If we are focused and attentive, we can learn from what what we feel to be correct/effective and incorrect/ineffective in their application. From blue belt to early blackbelt I was the main demonstration partner for most classes taught by my sensei, Renzo Gracie. This was an incredibly valuable stage in my development. It gave me from an early period the FEEL OF PERFECTLY APPLIED TECHNIQUE ACROSS A VAST SPECTRUM OF MOVES. It was then my task to REPLICATE WHAT I FELT. I always felt that though it was sometimes a painful experience 😜 It was one of the best learning modalities I had. WHEN YOU ARE THE PASSIVE PARTNER IN DRILLS - DON’T TURN YOUR MIND OFF. Stay focused and identify the good and bad in what your partner is doing and replicate the good whilst eliminating the bad. I promise you it will help speed your learning. BE AN ACTIVE PARTNER EVEN WHEN THE MOVE IS BEING DONE TO YOU - not resisting, but mentally active thinking about the mechanics of the move. A good example of this way of training occurred this weekend. A very talented jiu jitsu athlete @matheusgonzagabjj purple belt world champion, trains with Bernardo Faria and kindly offered to assist in making the Kimura video instructional as the demonstration partner (Uke). After a weekend of having kimuras applied to him he noted his own performance of Kimura greatly improved. He took in all the details despite never performing a single repetition of the move. Later in the week he got his chance and was shocked at his own improvement. Here he is working through a fine Kimura from side position. You can see already the massive tension in his partners arm and shoulder girdle that a well applied Kimura can easily generate. All that remains is to trap the head and move into finishing position - a fine example of passive learning

What do you look for? As a coach my biggest concern is the quest to get an athletes level of performance as close as possible to their potential in the least time. As such, I spend a lot of time looking at and monitoring the performance of the people I coach. I am often asked - what do you look for? Well, obviously there are a lot of things, but among the most important is THE ABILITY TO GET THE SAME JOB DONE WITH LESS EFFORT. Remember, it’s not just that you get the job done that counts; but also HOW you get the job done. There is a LOT of repetition in jiu jitsu training (or any other skill) so a very clear indicator of progress in a student is that he or she IS ACCOMPLISHING THE SAME TASKS AS EVERY OTHER DAY, BUT DOING SO WITH LESS EFFORT AND GREATER EFFICIENCY. The key to this vital form of progress is first, learning when to exert strength and when to relax. Within any match there are many opportunities to lower your energy expenditure- don’t go one hundred percent one hundred percent of the time. You will simply exhaust and defeat yourself. Second, remove any extraneous movement. Third, don’t get tunnel vision and hammer away uselessly at heavily defended points. Whenever you run into walls of resistance ask yourself if there is a way AROUND them rather than THROUGH them. Fourth (and most obvious) The better your mechanical application of technique the less brute force you will need to apply per move. Thinking in these terms will quickly bring your energy expenditure within acceptable bounds in training and competition and manifest one of the most important forms of progress that indicates that your training is working well.

As long as there is memory among the living - there will forever be life for people, times and places who no longer are 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Kimura! When you mention the word “Kimura” to a BJJ student, they normally think of the powerful armlock and hold that is so often seen in competition - but of course there was also the man himself - Masahiko Kimura - one of the greatest Judo athletes of all time, after whom BJJ adherents name the move. Mr Kimura was a renown master of standing throws and ground grappling. On the floor he was most known for his twisting arm lock skills. The Japanese call it gyaku-ude-garami. Usually I like to preserve the original Japanese terms for moves out of respect to the old masters who gave this noble sport its birth, but “ude garami” is too phonetically similar to “ashi garami” and when I’m coaching in a noisy, confusing environment in competition or the gym I can’t risk confusion, so I use the term “kimura” like most others. Today is a special day - it is Mr Kimura’s birthday! Of course he has long since passed away and resides in the pantheon of the grappling gods. I am a huge fan of his so today all my classes were on Kimura! It was great to see new generations of grapplers learning from our illustrious past and innovating and developing for the future. The only reason current generations show so much talent is the fact that they profited from the toil and lessons learned from previous generations. Thanks to Mr Kimura and all the other great historical figures of the various grappling arts who built the foundations upon which we all stand as we work towards our own future goals and dreams.

Big weekend of filming in Boston: I had a great weekend filming another installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series with BJJ Fanatics. This time it was KIMURA ATTACKS. Joining me was the great world champion Bernardo Faria @bernardofariabjj @bjj.fanatics who has recently completed his own video on one of his specialties- no gi pressure passing which should be released soon. Always a pleasure to head up to Beantown and show our approach to the sport. Kimura is such an incredibly versatile move. It functions equally well as a submission hold and as a restraining hold that sets up other forms of attack. My students have long used it as a gateway to other systems as well as a devastating attack in itself. Now it’s back on the train to NYC in time to teach tomorrow and help get everyone ready for upcoming competitions! Hope you all had a great weekend - wishing you all the best!! 🤗

Great day of work today at BJJ Fanatics in Boston: I took the train back to Boston to film the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series - this time it’s KIMURA ATTACKS! It was a pleasure meeting @nicholasmeregali this outstanding young athlete has astounded the jiu jitsu world with his skill and competitive fire - he is also a great character! Today I worked with @matheusgonzagabjj who was and exceptionally good demonstration partner and @bernardofariabjj and @michaelzenga We start work again tomorrow morning to get this project done!

Short term goals/long term goals: Goal setting is among the single most important elements of making progress in any activity- jiu jitsu is no exception. It’s important that we distinguish between our short term, medium term and long term goals. You can set your own time parameters on these. I usually work in one month (usually the minimum time required to make concrete and measurable differences in performance), three-six month (you can realistically bring in an entirely new and important skill in this time), one year (you can radically change your game in this time frame) and five years (you can completely reinvent yourself or start from scratch and attain an extremely good level in this time) time intervals and base my goal setting around these - you can choose your own. The important thing is that you run these distinct goals concurrently and coherently. Don’t choose goals that obviously conflict with each other and don’t focus on one time frame to the total exclusion of others. An athlete who has greatly impressed me with realistic and purposeful goal setting across different time parameters is outstanding Australian grappler, Craig Jones. He came here several months ago with short terms goals of match preparation and improvements in back and mount performance, both offense and defense. Training twice a day every day with the squad he did exactly that. What a great example of coming in with a goal and working hard within a plan to get it done. He leaves today to compete and travel - returning late November for more training and development on long term plans for next year! You can all take inspiration from this young mans example - divide your goals by time and make plans as to how you can realistically reach those goals - then demonstrate to yourself and your team mates that you have what it takes to stay the course and get it done. We will miss this fellow down on the basement - great training, Craig - see you in November! 🇦🇺🇺🇸

Knowing what to look for: Have you ever watched two high level grapplers battle with each other and tried to figure out exactly what each was trying to achieve as they grappled? This is quite possibly one of the most useful activities you can perform outside of your own physical training. This is a very pure form of training your mind in jiu jitsu. When you first begin, you will see only the broad outlines of what they are attempting. Soon however, you will start to see patterns of behavior that occur regularly in certain situations and what was once chaos starts to become a little more predictable - this is a good sign that you are getting better at seeing the second by second goals of each athlete and the physical means by which they are attempting to get to those goals. In time you will learn to see what most people do not - this is what you want. Once you recognize the patterns of behavior you can begin the see ahead of time what they will do as they enter into a scenario - at this stage you know what to look for and thus you will see it. When teaching, I try always to point out the placement and function of the body when performing certain moves - quite often students will come to me afterwards and say that they had always seen my students do this but either not really paid attention to it or not known it’s purpose - my goal as a teacher is to get you to be able to see these things on your own - but this takes time and it’s good to get a little help at the start. Remember that even a little time a day invested in watching great grapplers in action along with ACTIVE ATTENTION on your part will make you a better athlete in short time. Don’t just WATCH the action - SEEK TO UNDERSTAND IT - with the goal of one day being able to PREDICT it. This is in my opinion the single best form of mental training for performance improvement you can partake in.

Using your head: Most people know that jiu jitsu requires us to use all four of our limbs, both legs and both arms, with equal dexterity and skill in order to perform the moves and tactics of the sport. In order to go further than the others, you must recognize the great importance of our fifth limb in grappling - our head/neck. We use our head physically in four main ways in jiu jitsu - PUSHING, PULLING, BLOCKING and WEDGING. The head is incredibly effective in all four roles and often proves to be the difference between a good application of a moves versus a great application of a move. Good head positioning and manipulation is one of the most important features of superior jiu jitsu athletes - you must make a serious study of it if you wish to reach your potential in the sport. There is a reason most good grapplers have a thick and powerful neck - IT’S BECAUSE THEY USE IT HEAVILY EVERY DAY THEY TRAIN. Whenever you feel you can use your head to advantage in grappling - do so - you will be pleasantly surprised how it raises your performance. Here, outstanding junior Ethan Crelinsten uses his head in an unusual fashion - most people erroneously believe the head can only be used to PUSH. In fact the chin can be used to pull - that is exactly what Mr Crelinsten is doing here, working to pull his head up into a better strangle position - clearly it worked well as a few seconds later he won this match via strangulation in fine style. Remember - you are engaged in a sport of FIVE LIMBS, not four - look to incorporate your head/neck more than ever into your game next time you step onto the mat.

Opposing interests: An interesting feature of any zero-sum game like jiu jitsu (a zero-game is one where every advantage you create for yourself must create an equivalent disadvantage for your opponent and vice versa - in short - the better you are doing the worse the other fellow is doing and vice versa) is that it creates very obvious opposing demands among the two athletes. Look at these two photos of the Ryan brothers in training. In one, Nicky Ryan plays bottom position against the formidable passing pressure of Georges St-Pierre. In the second, Gordon Ryan plays top passing game, utilizing one of his favorite methods, a body lock guard pass. You will see immediately the diametrically opposed interests of the two brothers based upon whether they are top or bottom position. When in bottom, our primary interest is in CREATING AND MAINTAINING SUFFICIENT SPACE TO MOVE INTO BOTTOM OFFENSE. As such, Nicky Ryan’s stance and posture is built around framing and extension to be able to move effectively under his opponent. Contrast this with top position, where the primary goal is that of REMOVING SPACE AND CREATING IMMOBILIZING WEDGES AROUND THE BODY TO FACILITATE PASSING THE LEGS OR, HAVING PASSED THE LEGS, PINNING THE UPPER BODY. You can see these totally opposed interests very clearly on these two photos. Once you see clearly that whatever is good for me must of necessity be bad for you, it is very clear what we each need to do in any situation (though be wary of fakes and feints that can take advantage of this kind of simplification 😉). Always remember the very nature of the game - zero-sum where our respective interests run directly contrary to each other. This will answer many questions for the beginner when unsure of what to do in any given scenario.

Variations in intensity: When you have a training room full of talented athletes many assume that every sparring session must look like the world championships. In fact I much prefer to limit the amount of really hard sparring the athletes partake in. Of course it’s good to go hard every so often and test yourself, especially when competition is coming up. But continuous hard sparring lead to two undesirable effects - injury and technical stagnation. When we fight hard against someone of similar size and skill level we usually have to fall back on our favorite moves to prevail. Only when we spar in a less competitive setting do we relax a little and try new moves and tactics and thus make technical progress. Surprisingly then, you will often see more outright physical intensity in a beginners class, where the students lack the technical depth to play a finesse game and have to go as hard as they can, than you will in a more advanced class, where the athletes know how to control their pace. In fact, even in a room full of killers like this, the majority of your sparring sessions should be with people below your skill level so that you can work on new skills in a setting conducive to learning. There is always a chance to go hard when you need it - but don’t neglect your experimental sparring - for that is where much of your progress comes from. Here, Gordon Ryan spars with Craig Jones, even in this case, unless there is a specific need for intensity, the primary emphasis is on skill development rather than banging heads and going as hard as possible

Heading back to NYC: Had a great time teaching here in Reno Nevada at @renzograciereno with old comrade Max McGarr who is doing an incredible job taking the teaching of Mr Gracie and myself to new territory 🤗🤗 Heading back on long connecting flight to NYC for training with the squad back in the blue basement of hope and despair Monday afternoon - got some superstar guests in the room for training 😜 See you there!

Leg locks in the desert: Had a wonderful day teaching at RGA Reno - the new dojo of Max McGarr - an outstanding teacher at RGA New York for many years. He is spreading our methodology out here and doing a fine job!! It’s great to see that as i travel and teach around the nation the overall level of competence in lower body submissions that i witness in seminars is definitely increasing - you guys and gals are studying hard and getting better! 😜😜 Happy to see! Tomorrow I head back to the blue basement for another week of training with the squad - lots of goals, lots of ambition and consequently- lots of work to be done 😜😜 Hope you have a great Labor Weekend!

On the road again: Heading to Reno Nevada out of JFK to teach a seminar at the school of long time friend and RGA colleague Max McGarr. It will be a crazy weekend for travel over Labor weekend 😜😜 Great week of training for the junior squad members- they are doing such a fine job working towards their aspirations - that’s what it all about for all of us. When you have a free moment this weekend, take the time to set some goals, some short term, some medium term and some long term. Then ask yourself what will be required to make them happen. Even a small amount of time spent this way can have a vast impact on your future development- remember it not just about how hard you work - the world is full of people who worked extremely hard but achieved little. It’s about the marriage of hard work and intelligent planning that give DIRECTION to the work. Give it a try this weekend. Wishing you all the best! See you in Nevada! 🤗🤗

Coach the big picture first: The growth and development of any given technique in our repertoire follows the same pattern as the growth and development of our physical bodies. A technique starts off weak and vulnerable, unable to survive on its own. Then it grows into early development where it begins to mature into early adulthood. Finally it enters into a mature phase where it can not only survive on its own, but work with others, improve itself and rise to prominence. When first coaching a move to a student - I always begin with the big picture. What is the general nature of the move? What are it good and bad points? What are the main things to focus upon? What are the broad movements required for its execution? Sketch the outline first - THE DETAILS CAN ALWAYS COME LATER. Just get them moving in the general directions they need. Just as an artist begins with a sketch and only then brings in the complexity of colors fill the canvas and create a masterpiece over time, so too, The martial artist must begin with the rough outline of the move and over time ADD DETAILS AS A PAINTER ADDS COLOR TO COMPLETE A PICTURE. In all technique development , start with general movement and over time refine it with precise movement. Don’t be obsessed with precision at the start - that will come later. Here I work with talented youth athletes Liam Zeh and Trinity Pun on back system details - they already have excellent performance with the general movements so the process of refinement now begins...

Attacking the back - surrounding and immobilizing the head: There are many effective ways to control and attack from the back, but one of the most important if your goal is strangulation is that of forming an effective circle of wedges around your opponents neck that inhibits head movement and positions you to strangle at a moments notice. The fundamental desiderata in these cases is to ALWAYS MAINTAIN YOUR HEAD ON ONE SIDE OF YOUR OPPONENTS HEAD AND YOUR STRANGLE ARM ON THE OTHER. This essential configuration must be locked in place by your CONTROL HAND which goes under your opponent’s armpit to either snare his wrist/hand or lock up with your strangle hand. The combination of tight head position on one side, strangle arm on the other, all locked in place by the control hand makes for a superbly controlling position from where escape is difficult, you are just inches away from a devastating strangle at any moment and from where it is easy to add additional lower body control by hooking your legs into your opponent’s hips or even locking a tight body triangle around his waist. Practicing this fundamental head and arm positioning as the basis of your back control leading to strangles will soon pay dividends in your submissions game.

I am very pleased to announce my participation in another super seminar alongside the great Ben Askren - @onechampionship MMA champion and wrestling icon and Olympian. I will cover jiu jitsu aspects focusing on the squad approach to leg locking and back attacks, whilst Mr Askren covers wrestling applications to grappling and MMA. It will be held October 6 in Schenectady New York. As always, looking forward to showing our approach to jiu jitsu to a new audience!

The stunning power of jiu jitsu upon the uninitiated: In our daily training we work with people who are well initiated with the skills of jiu jitsu. As a result, almost every move we attempt is quickly and deftly countered. This makes it an endless struggle for improvement and innovation if we are to prevail in the training room. Sometimes we forget what it is like to use jiu jitsu on someone who has little or no experience of the kingly art. When it happens, it’s often a surprise just how easy it is to use the techniques and tactics of jiu jitsu to completely and easily overwhelm naive opposition - so much so that jiu jitsu appears like some super power that renders even strong men helpless. I always smile when I think of my own early days in the sport when I would flop around hopelessly while men half my size would easily trap me in holds that i had no idea where even happening, let alone how to escape them 😂😂 These expert versus neophyte displays are instructive to both - to the neophyte they teach what is possible with time and training and give a sense of belief in what they will one day be capable of. To the expert they are a pleasant reminder of just how effective the basic moves and concepts of the sport really (despite our everyday frustrations in the dojo) and a humbling reminder of where we began and what we would eventually devolve back into if we ceased training. Here, my student Claude Levy instructs members of a special anti poaching unit in Africa some jiu jitsu - they use it often, even though they usually use their firearms to deal with opponents armed with semi automatic weapons and hunting rifles, during the arrest and restraining elements of their work they like to use jiu jitsu. Here, Mr Levy runs them through takedown to back control and demonstrates to an amused audience what we all felt on day one of our jiu jitsu careers! Do you remember your first experience of jiu jitsu? What were your thoughts after sparring with a more experienced teacher/opponent?

Looking forward to Singapore super seminar with @evolvemma in early November! The squad always trains at Evolve when we are in Singapore so it’s a pleasure to teach there. Hope to see you there!

A force for good: I am always enthralled by stories of jiu jitsu being used as a force for good in our world. One of my favorite stories comes from my dear student Claude Levy. He is a remarkable example of a student who has a very busy and demanding career (he is a very successful metals trader) yet who always finds time to work hard on his jiu jitsu skills. Mr Levy is also a lifetime practitioner of Muay Thai and Karate - a formidable combination with jiu jitsu. Raised in Africa, Mr Levy often returns home where he charitably trains an African anti poaching force who protect Africa’s big game animals from the constant threat of poachers. These brave men often get into running gun battles with the poachers. Of course most of their training is centered around firearms, but they have found jiu jitsu to be an ideal method of restraining and physically controlling perpetrators in the field during capture and arrest. Mr Levy teaches them whenever he can and the team loves it! Here you can see a security team going out on armed patrol in the magnificent African veldt at sundown. Next is Mr Levy coaching our back attack system (note the nice arm trap to facilitate strangle that you see the squad perform so often!) Here are some of the incredible elephants they protect on this particular area of operations along with basic ground grappling training and team photo) It makes my heart swell with pride to see a student take our teachings and for no reward help those who themselves do good in the world protecting these great and majestic endangered animals from wanton destruction. I am always gratified to see jiu jitsu grow, but to see it grow in ways so beneficial to good people in need as an act of friendship brings a special joy in our sport and its growth.

Strangling with your legs: A strange thing about the back attack system that I teach my students is that the most well known component of it - the strait jacket - was so successful in competition that audiences rarely got to see the other components of the system. As a result most people have a rather limited view of the back system as just a series of hand/arm traps leading to rear naked strangles. In fact, there are four auxiliary systems designed to assist whenever the main strait jacket system fails. One of the most important is the rear triangle - ushiro sankaku- which enables you to use the impressive power of the legs to strangle opponents. This immediately gets you around one the more common problems associated with rear strangles - the difficulty of penetrating under the chin/jaw. The very nature of triangle strangles, using the shoulder to assist the strangle does not require that you get under the jaw to be effective. In addition it offers a multitude of back up attacks if the initial strangle is defended. All of my students excel in this technique as it is a big part of our training. Here, Gordon Ryan and Craig Jones practice their ushiro sankaku finishes. Their long legs make front triangles one of their favorite techniques- both of them excel at it - but the rear triangle is very effective even for short legged athletes due to more favorable angles and positioning.

A sense of progress: I always tell my students - if happiness is what you seek - stay away from jiu jitsu!! Of course it’s a joke, but like most jokes, there is truth in it. Jiu jitsu can be a path to endless frustrations, perplexities, doubts, physical pains etc. Ask any jiu jitsu gym owner what his biggest problem with students is and you will always get the same answer - retention. I find the biggest reason why jiu jitsu has such a high attrition rate comes down to the mind set of the student. Anything good in life will be hard work - jiu jitsu is no exception. It’s easy to get frustrated at the amount of time and effort it takes to improve. This is compounded by the fact that AS YOU IMPROVE, SO DO ALL YOUR CLASSMATES. So you rarely get a sense of getting better than them. If we think in terms of gaining happiness in jiu jitsu through competition with others, you will be doomed to misery and frustration as you all progress at roughly the same rate. The resultant frustration often makes people quit. A much healthier approach is to constantly look for GROWTH as the source of happiness in the study of jiu jitsu rather than competitive progress. A growth centered mindset does not ask how we do against our classmates - BUT AGAINST AN EARLIER VERSION OF OURSELVES. Once you internalize the quest for progress happiness is much more attainable. A little reflection reveals that in most cases (unless you are suffering from serious injury) we know a lot more, and can satisfactorily perform a great many more moves and have a deeper sense of tactics etc now than we did say a year ago. Structure your training around this mindset. Constantly set small goals for yourself to accomplish that are concerned with acquiring a new technique, improving an old one, or combining techniques together in new ways. The worst feeling in jiu jitsu and in life is that of STAGNATION. Focus your mind and training on incremental progress against yourself rather than others and the feelings of frustration and stagnation that are the most likely to make you stop training are much less likely to occur.

Restricting options: The pattern of all good jiu jitsu is the same - JIU JITSU IS THE ART OF SYSTEMATICALLY AND PROGRESSIVELY RESTRICTING YOUR OPPONENT’S OPTIONS THROUGH TACTICS, GRIP AND POSITIONING. AS MORE AND MORE OPTIONS ARE ELIMINATED HIS MOVEMENTS BECOME MORE AND MORE PREDICTABLE AND IT BECOMES PROGRESSIVELY EASIER TO ANTICIPATE HIS REMAINING MOVES. THIS PROCESS CULMINATES IN SITUATIONS WHERE HE IS LEFT WITH JUST A FEW UNDESIRABLE OPTIONS OF LIMITED EFFECTIVENESS AT WHICH POINT YOU END THE MATCH. The moment you put hands on an opponent you should be thinking in terms of controlling him in ways that create predictable reactions. As control increases, his options with regards tactics and movement decrease until they reach a point where submission victory is inevitable. It is this ability to restrict options down to a few predictable responses that makes the use of SYSTEMS possible in jiu jitsu. Here you can see a superb use of aspects of the back system - in particular the main strait jacket system that enables Ethan Crelinsten to completely immobilize a very tough and talented Junny Acasio and leave him with so few movement/defensive options that the resultant submission win via strangle seemed easy. Note the excellent head position of Mr Crelinsten and the elimination of Mr Ocasio’s defensive arms and hands and the deliberate use of what most people call the “weak” side of rear mount - in fact both sides are only as strong or weak as your use and understanding of them. In this case the understanding is strong and thus so was the finish.

Friendship first: We all have our own reasons for walking in the door for our first jiu jitsu lesson, but the reasons that keep us COMING BACK inside that door day after day, year after year are more interesting to me. Of course we all seek skills and improvement in the kingly art of jiu jitsu - but I sincerely believe that the single biggest reason is the unusual strength of friendships that we form as we work at our varied speed towards common goals. Our experience as we make that journey has so much in common with our peers - so much desire, frustration, happiness and sadness that we become very close over time. Whilst every match you have, whether in competition or in the dojo, is an individual affair; almost all your preparation for those matches is a group affair among like minded peers who probably know more about you than anyone outside your family. Every day I see remarkable stories of sacrifice and camaraderie among training partners that are rare outside the training hall. When Craig Jones got notice to take on Rousimar Palhares, his friend Mikhael Yahaya came all the way from Melbourne Australia to help preparation and corner him if necessary. Such a massive journey to help a friend with no prospect of reward. He trained alongside Mr Jones every day with the squad in the lead up and helped in every way he could despite having the pressure of his own match to prepare for. He was there in the warm up room and cornering Mr Jones on the night. After training today with the squad it’s back on the long long flight back to Melbourne. I am always so impressed by this kind of selfless help that I see so often among jiu jitsu athletes. Of course there are exceptions, but for the most part, the positive effects of shared experience, sacrifice and goals makes for strong human relations that I don’t see much outside of combat sports. I am certain all of you have many similar experiences of people around you that you know you can count on - cherish those people - in a world of superficialities and image they are among the most substantive and real gifts that we have.

Very excited to announce another super seminar in Reno Nevada at Renzo Gracie Reno - the school of Max McGarr - a distinguished black belt instructor at RGA in NYC for many years. He has opened a great school in Nevada where he does a fine job showing our approach to jiu jitsu. Can’t wait to give our fans a detailed look at our systems based approach to jiu jitsu and training methodology. September 1st at Renzo Gracie Reno - three hours of leg attacks and back attacks starting at 10:30 am. Contact Renzo Gracie Reno for details! All welcome

The day after: Great to see Kasai 3 @kasaigrappling competitors Wagner Rocha and Marcin Held stop by the blue basement to talk about future projects and catch some technique and training. It’s always impressive how competition often builds camaraderie. At the end of the day we all lead similar lives and have similar goals and dreams. There are far more similarities between athletes, styles and schools than there are differences, so it’s natural that friendships and respect grow easily even between rivals. It was a fine chance for the squad juniors to see elite competitors up close as they work towards their own goals - just as all of you work towards yours - same idea - just a different place and environment.

When the action’s over: The time immediately after a tough match, whether on stage or in the gym, is always instructive and important. Last night at @kasaigrappling 3 Australian grappling star, Craig Jones fought to a tough tactical win over Rousimar Palhares. Initially Mr Jones expressed disappointment in the match - like all true submission grapplers, he greatly values action leading to a decisive finish. He tried hard to make that happen, but the conservative leg positions both athletes had to maintain due to the danger both presented to the other, combined with a massive size and strength advantage for Mr Palhares, meant that it would a tactical win rather than decisive one. It’s important in these after match situations to assess what was good and bad. Remember that not every match will be highlight reel of action. The important thing is that every match represents some kind of growth and improvement in the athlete. Understand that improvement comes in many different forms. In the case of Mr Jones last night it was about mental aspects of the game. He took on one of the world’s most dangerous and strongest grapplers, giving up a huge size and strength advantage, with total confusion and disarray in the week leading up to the match as to what would happen and all far from home - yet he went out and attacked as best he could to battle to a tight tactical win. This was a win for the young Australian’s athletic maturity. Under tough and intimidating circumstances he showed the improvements in his quiet, understated but impressive mental toughness- that is one of the best kinds of growth an athlete can experience and which will benefit him or her the rest of their career. When you come to judge yourself after your matches - don’t be too kind, but don’t to be too harsh either. Remember that not every match will be fireworks but that EVERY MATCH HAS SOME ELEMENTS OF POSITIVE GROWTH FOR YOU WHICH WILL HELP BRING OUT FIREWORKS FOR FUTURE MATCHES. Focus on those, incorporate them into your training and step forward to your next challenge knowing you are a better athlete

On the train coming back from Maryland to NYC after the big seminar 😊😊 - watching the juniors step up at @kasaigrappling 3 show! Well done to all of you! Nick Ronan won a well controlled decision, Frank Rosenthal lost a heartbreaker in golden score sudden death over time - but a great performance nonetheless, and Ethan Crelinsten won over Junny Ocasio, an extremely tough and talented competitor from NYC, showing his ever growing back system mastery with a beautifully performed sequence to the back with squad signature arm trap to tight strangulation with our distinctive rotational finish mechanics! Amazing! This qualifies Mr Crelinsten for the next Kasai 4 featherweight event! Amazing win for the young man from Canada who travels so far to train and compete! Gordon Ryan and I are freaking out on the train and people are staring at us like we are total maniacs! 😂😂 So proud of these guys and their success and individual brilliance showcasing our approach to jiu jitsu! Looking forward to seeing Jason Rau, Jon Calestine and Squad buddy from down under Craig Jones! Hope you are all enjoying the show as much as us!

Teaching one of the biggest seminars of the year in Maryland - Two hundred strong learning leg and back systems. So proud to watch Gordon Ryan teaching like a college professor to a fascinated audience and showing jiu jitsu maturity far beyond his years. Thank you so much to the people of Maryland and surrounding districts for their enthusiasm!

Excited for Kasai Grappling 3 Tomorrow night! A great night of grappling tomorrow night in NYC @kasaigrappling in the Hammerstein Ballroom. The headline bout will be between outstanding Australian grappler Craig Jones and Brazilian powerhouse Rousimar Palhares. Mr Palhares was supposed to weigh in at 185 pounds but showed up at 218, apparently unaware that he had to make a weight limit. Mr Jones will probably weigh a little over 200 pounds. They have very different body types, demeanors and styles, so it should be a fascinating match. Mr Jones has been training in the basement with the squad - in addition to being one of the most talented grapplers on the circuit, he is also a genuinely good person - wishing him the best of luck in what will doubtless be one of the most anticipated matches of the year. The squad juniors are out in force - doing what we like to see - working on their skills and letting hard work, skill development and ambition get them to a higher level. Ethan Crelinsten, Nick Ronan, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau all take on very tough opponents in this elite level event as they continue their drive to the next level. Two former RGA students, Gianni Grippo and Jon Calestine will showcase two very different styles in a great match up as well. Congratulations to @kasaigrappling for getting a such a great card in such a great venue. While the athletes work hard to take themselves to a new level, Kasai are helping take the sport as a whole to a new level. Thank you for giving all these outstanding athletes a venue to showcase their skills.

It starts before you even make contact: The moment you slap hands in a competitive match - it’s on. Even before you make contact you should be scheming for advantage. Too often we just lackadaisically reach for grips without thinking and take a “let’s see what happens” approach. This is fine for daily training with friends, but make sure that kind of thinking does not permeate into your actions in a more competitive setting, for it will quickly expose you to problems. Even as you approach an opponent you should be looking for advantage and positioning yourself accordingly. As you approach, you should be FORMULATING A PLAN and POSITIONING YOURSELF TO ENACT IT. If you cannot see an opening, this is the time for minor delaying tactics until you do formulate a plan or see an opening develop. Remember always, THE FIRST CONTACT YOU HAVE WITH YOUR OPPONENT IS VISUAL CONTACT - use that to begin the battle for advantage from the outset.

The component principle: A very important principle of coaching jiu jitsu (and almost any other skill) is THE COMPONENT PRINCIPLE. The idea is that EVERY SKILL OF JIU JITSU CAN BE BROKEN DOWN INTO COMPONENT SKILLS, WHICH, WHEN BROUGHT TOGETHER INTO A WHOLE, BECOME THAT SKILL. This simple insight has big ramifications for anyone trying to learn and/or coach the sport. It means that whenever we come to learn or teach a new skill our first step should be to break in down into its component parts and then to study each component in detail. In this way we gain a deeper understanding and mastery of the entire skill. Now there is a point of diminishing returns here. If we just keep breaking it down into pointless minutiae we get needless complexity that does not benefit the performance of the original skill - so put a limit on the breaking down element - once you no longer derive performance benefits in the overall skill - stop. Now start working each component skill. You will soon see that THERE ARE SKILLS WITHIN SKILLS and that MUCH OF WHAT WE CALL MASTERY IS THIS ABILITY TO IMPROVE EACH OF THESE COMPONENT SKILLS AND THEM PUT THEM BACK TOGETHER SEAMLESSLY INTO AN OVERALL SKILL. Whenever you find yourself struggling with a new move - go back to this insight. It helps a lot to feel some sense of progress as you train - even if the overall skill eludes you for a while, you can make progress in some of the components and feel validated as you keep working towards getting the overall skill.

Can’t wait to teach this super camp in Singapore at Evolve Gym @evolvemma 🤗🤗

There are a lot of uncertainties in any grappling situation - but there is always one certainty you can stake your life on - EVERY GRAPPLING EXCHANGE YOU EVER ENTER INTO WHETHER IN TRAINING OR COMPETITION WILL BEGIN WITH GRIP. The skills of GETTING, MAINTAINING and USING an effective grip and CORRELATING IT WITH YOUR INTENDED PURPOSE is probably one of the least taught skills in the sport - YET IT IS PROBABLY THE SKILL SET MOST RESPONSIBLE FOR VICTORY AT ELITE LEVELS. At elite levels, EVERYONE IS HIGHLY SKILLED AT THE TECHNIQUES OF THE SPORT, so it is the PRECURSORS TO THE TECHNIQUE THAT SEPARATE THE GOLD MEDALLIST FROM THE OTHERS. Of all the precursors to the successful application of technique, few, of any, are more important than GRIPPING SKILLS. Yet strangely, they are the least taught. Do yourself a favor - next time you watch elite grapplers in action, switch your focus from the techniques they score or finish with, and instead, FOCUS UPON THE GRIPPING SEQUENCES THEY USE TO ENTER THOSE TECHNIQUES. I promise you that your study, though it may not be the most exciting, will have very positive results upon your mat performance.

The single biggest problem that beginning jiu jitsu students face: When people begin the study of jiu jitsu they often see it as a matter of learning a sufficient number of moves in sufficient detail to be able to hold their own on the mat with their classmates. Certainly there is a lot of truth to this. When coaching however, I see the main problem a little differently. The human body has some fundamental and very important ASYMMETRIES. An obvious example is the left side/right side asymmetry. People are either right handed or left handed and will be stronger and more coordinated on their strong side. Another extremely important asymmetry is that between UPPER BODY AND LOWER BODY STRENGTH AND COORDINATION. We are all much stronger in the lower body than upper body. If I asked you to walk several times across the dojo you could do this easily and with little effort. If I asked you to walk several lengths of the dojo on your hands in a handstand, even if you had the balance skills to do so, it would be a strenuous and tiring workout. If I asked you to sign your name on paper with your hand, you would do so easily; if I asked you to sign your name holding the pen in your toes it would be a real struggle. HUMANS ARE MASSIVELY STRONGER AND LESS COORDINATED IN THE LOWER BODY THAN UPPER BODY. This has clear ramifications for jiu jitsu. We must learn to grapple predominantly with our lower body (legs). This means we have to overcome the lack of lower body coordination that most of us bring into the sport. As a beginner, YOU MUST PUT YOUR PRIMARY FOCUS UPON DEVELOPMENT OF COORDINATION AND DEXTERITY IN YOUR LEGS SO THAT YOU LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH YOUR LEGS IN ORDER TO MAKE USE OF THEIR SUPERIOR STRENGTH AND ENDURANCE. You must overcome the natural beginners tendency to grapple with the upper body and learn to let your legs do most of the work. Every time you drill moves, BE MINDFUL OF LETTING YOUR LEGS DO THE MAJORITY OF THE WORK INVOLVED. There is no shortcut here - it will take time; but let me assure you that FORMING A STRONG CONNECTION OF YOUR MIND TO YOUR LEGS (knowledge to action) WILL BE THE SINGLE BIGGEST DETERMINANT OF YOUR PROGRESS IN JIU JITSU

The originals: Most people these days know me as a grappling coach working with the squad. In fact, the first part of my career - long before the squad - was the interface between jiu jitsu and MMA. It began with the young Georges St-Pierre in his quest to become UFC welterweight champion and went from there to the incredible title run of Chris Weidman to take on and defeat the other main contender for UFC greatest of all time, Anderson Silva. In that time i has the honor of working with so many incredible visiting athletes such as Rory MacDonald, Frankie Edgar and Roger Gracie - it was only when Mr St-Pierre retired and Mr Weidman opened his own gym deep in Long Island that I switched to focus to pure grappling with the squad. I consciously avoided social media throughout this time. These MMA fighters were genuine superstars so there was no need for me to write about them and their achievements. When the squad began, first with Eddie Cummings and then Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, they were unknowns in a fledgling sport, so I joined social media to see if i could help get them recognition for their amazing achievements in the grappling world. From there the squad grew and interest in our philosophies and methods expanded. Still, I never forget where I came from and the thrill of those early days in MMA. This is a shot taken during the mature part of Mr St-Pierre’s career, when Mr Weidman was making his remarkable unbeaten run through the middleweight division with his eyes on Anderson Silva (an epic story that we can all draw inspiration from). Practice is over and UFC athletes @georgesstpierre @chrisweidman @davidbranch32 and @johncholish relax with @renzograciebjj and JZ Calvacante @gesias and Magno Garma and other RGA athletes. Great training days - different priorities, same passion, different problems, same methodology of solutions. I am blessed to have been a small part of that time and those people - their quests, drive, brilliance and hard work carried me far higher than could have done alone. Your training roots will give rise to future flowering branches as you grow and change in the sport- cherish and remember them.

The great divide: There are two approaches to winning in jiu jitsu. The first are PROACTIVE methods. Here the idea is to INITIATE THE ACTION. You set the goal and start the work towards it. So if I favor arm bar attacks, I will begin with set ups that PUSH THE ACTION TOWARDS ARM-BARS. This stands in contrast to REACTIVE approaches. Here, I passively observe my opponent’s actions. He initiates and as I observe I see OPPORTUNITY ARISE IN THE COURSE OF THE ACTION. I then match the opportunity with the appropriate technique and score. Let’s understand something very important about these two different approaches. Proactive approaches generally require A SMALL SET OF FAVORITE MOVES ENCASED IN A LARGE COLLECTION OF SET UPS THAT ENABLE YOU TO FORCE THEIR APPLICATION AGAINST SOMEONE EXPECTING THEIR USE. Reactive approaches on the other hand, generally require A LARGE SET OF MOVES TO COVER ANY SITUATION OUR OPPONENT PUTS US IN, BUT VERY LITTLE SET UP AS THE OPPONENT CREATES THE OPPORTUNITY FOR US. This means the stylistic difference between the two can be quite dramatic. Proactive games are all about creating the conditions for a few favorite moves. Reactive methods are all about patience, pacing, sensing opportunity and having the breadth of technique to cover whatever opportunity emerges in front of you. There have been great champions using both approaches - and indeed - great champions who merged both approaches together. Understanding which approach you want to master will help give you a sense of what kind of training program you must adopt to make good progress.

Soul of a champion: This past weekend saw one of the greatest UFC champions ever lose his belt in an extraordinarily close bout after a record eleven title defenses. This post is not about the match, how it should have been scored or whether Demetrious Johnson is the best pound for pound fighter in the world. This is just about how we all can improve ourselves by looking at Mr Johnson as a role model. When I first started seeing Mr Johnson at UFC events he showed inconsistent brilliance. He beat Japanese Superstar Norifumi Yamamoto to show he was a great talent. Then in his next match against Miguel Torres he showed great takedowns but then got swept into mount on multiple occasions. Yet despite the early flaws - EVERY TIME HE WENT OUT TO COMPETE YOU COULD LITERALLY SEE THE FLAWS BEING REPLACED BY NEW STRENGTHS. He had the work ethic and in conjunction with his coach Matt Hume, the wisdom to see what needed to be improved and the best way to do it. This was an athlete who was not satisfied with winning. He recognized that only flawless wins would give him the resources he would need later at championship level. The second great trait that I saw in him was his overall positivity. Mr Johnson had a hard upbringing and many personal difficulties in his life that he never talks about. He could legitimately feel encumbered by them - but never does. I have never met a person so strong in his ability to see positive elements in challenging circumstances. For him, everything was a blessing and a test of his character to be surpassed through self improvement. This is a man who dominates the circumstances of his life through his positive attitude rather than allow the circumstances of his life to dominate him. We don’t know much about the future - but for person with traits like these - it’s always forward

I am very excited to announce that I will be teaching at the Evolve Gym super camp 2018 in Singapore November 5th to 10th. Over the five days there will twice daily training culminating in a three hour seminar Saturday - twenty three hours of work to cover techniques, tactics and training methods that will not only create performance increases, but enable you to make progress on your own long after the camp has finished. @evolvemma is hosting this event with people from all over the world coming in. This is an exciting opportunity for me to help spread our approach to the sport made famous by my brilliant students. Evolve Gym provides the perfect location for a well run week of training and fun with people from all over the world united by a love a jiu jitsu and a desire for self improvement in their sports performance at whatever level they bring and aspire to. Hope to see you there!

Getting ready: Craig Jones has been training hard in the blue basement getting ready for his showdown against the formidable Rousimar Palhares at @kasaigrappling in two weeks in NYC at the Hammerstein Ballroom. That’s a very glamorous venue for the outstanding athletes that Kasai has brought together - until then it’s the much less glamorous blue basement 😜😜 Mr Jones has shown admirable drive in training and is making rapid progress. There is a sense in which his experience now is also your experience as you battle towards your own aspirations - just on a lesser scale for now. The idea is the same - CHOOSE A DATE AS A DEADLINE FOR A PERFORMANCE- WHETHER IT IS PUBLIC COMPETITION OR PRIVATE GYM PERFORMANCE IS NOT IMPORTANT - THE REAL COMPETITION IS WITHIN YOU - CREATE A PLAN TO IMPROVE YOUR PERFORMANCE BY THAT DATE AND EXHIBIT THE DISCIPLINE AND WISDOM TO GET IT DONE. It’s a wonderful opportunity for the juniors to train with a such an outstanding grappler and a good daily test for Mr Jones every day in a very leg lock heavy room to test the skills he will need to build and exhibit against such a tough and talented opponent. This is the notion of mutual benefit in action. Remember always that best kind of benefit is MUTUAL BENEFIT. Only then can the relationships needed to build skills and strength over time be sustained long enough to make significant progress in any enterprise in which you take part.

Finishing mechanics: A distinctive feature of my coaching style is an unusually heavy emphasis on FINISHING MECHANICS for all the major submission holds my athletes use. So often I see talented athletes do a fine job of entering into a submission and controlling their opponent, but then exhibit weak finishing mechanics at the crucial moment when submission victory was within their grasp. You must have a very clear understanding of the mechanical details that make a given submission work against determined resistance. Perhaps more than any other aspect of jiu jitsu - the submissions game is the one where the smallest errors of placement of lever and fulcrum and application of directions of force will have the most detrimental effects. Study your favorite submissions with an eye for detail that surpasses all other aspects of the game and you will soon find that opponents who used to easily slip away from you are now trapped and helpless when you get to your finishing positions. MAKE YOUR PRIMARY FOCUS TIGHTNESS, RESTRICTION OF MOVEMENT AND PRECISION IN PLACEMENT OF FULCRUM AND LEVER RATHER THAN APPLICATION OF POWER. Observe the impressive tightness of the rear strangle used by Garry Tonon to win his second MMA fight - it looks as though a tourniquet has been wrapped around his opponent’s neck, such is the precise placement of hands, Head and elbows, along with the rotational direction of force that we favor. Take pride in your finishing mechanics - once you master them you will have a set of weapons that opponents will fear and upon which you can attach great faith.

New England summer: I spent the weekend with Bernardo Faria and the team at BJJ Fanatics filming the next installment of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series - THE FRONT HEADLOCK/GUILLOTINE. Two days of filming in a beautiful New England/Boston setting - a ton a footage featuring the squad’s approach to the front headlock/guillotine game. I always insist that my students have strong attacks out of front headlock - all of them excel at it. In the gym it is one of our most successful systems when our students spar each other and has been featured in some of the squad’s biggest successes. Can’t wait to see how this one comes out - I feel this one will have very wide applicability for many students as guillotine attacks and other strangles from the front are among the most popular and successful in the sport. Our step by step approach to the position will make it easy for you to use them in a more systematic fashion. Now it’s back to the train station and five hours back to NYC - a wonderful ride through New England in summer - for a full day of teaching tomorrow in the basement of hope and despair- wishing you all the best from Boston!

Mentors: I am a huge believer in the idea of taking on grappling mentors - outstanding figures in the sport who you believe have some characteristics that strongly appeal to you or which you believe could greatly improve your performance and direction if you were to implement them. A truly great grappler who dazzled the sport when he entered ADCC and blitzed his weight division on several occasions was the inestimable Jean Jacques Machado. It was not just that he won that was so impressive- it was the WAY he won. There was not a moment wasted on the mat - he embodied what I take as the ideal of jiu jitsu - PURPOSEFUL MOVEMENT DIRECTED TOWARDS CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUSTAINED ATTACKS CULMINATING IN SUBMISSION. Nobody demonstrated this ideal better than Mr Machado. If you wanted to show a curious friend what great grappling looks like and were looking for exciting and technically flawless matches you could not do better than those world championship winning performances. From the start of the match until the inevitable submission finish it was a hustling bustling flurry of well directed attacks in combinations that flowed evenly between position and submission and created tactical pressure rather than physical pressure - watching this pressure crack his opponents was one of the most instructive lessons of my own development. Trying to recreate that sense of efficient and unrelenting attack has been a big part of my work - and it should be yours too. What a pleasure to see the great man visit the blue basement and show his knowledge to new generations of students alongside my Sensei Renzo Gracie - they grew up together in jiu jitsu - now they share it and improve it on opposite sides of America I will always be grateful to the mentors who provided insight, inspiration and example to me - through study and training their work can become yours - find them, study them and cherish them.

I am very pleased to announce a mega seminar featuring Gordon Ryan and myself teaching four hours of leg attack system and back attack system hosted by ace seminar organizer Mike Stewart Jr August 18th Gracie Jiu-jitsu Maryland . 9570 berger rd columbia MD 21046 . Register at www.realjiujitsu.com. They are putting a limit of two hundred people on the event and have around twenty spots still available. I am very much looking forward to showing details of our work in a new venue. Looking forward to meeting up with our jiu jitsu friends and doing our best to improve your performance on the mats!

Knowing what to expect: This is a photo of Garry Tonon roughly three hours prior to his second MMA fight practicing his outside hook (kosoto gake) takedown against the fence. Most fight promotions allow the athletes access to the cage prior to the event so they can warm up and get a general feel for the arena prior to their bout. Later that night, Mr Tonon would use that exact same takedown to good effect on multiple occasions. Remember this - TO A DEGREE, COMBAT SPORTS ARE CHAOTIC AND WE DON’T REALLY KNOW WHAT WILL HAPPEN - BUT WITHIN THAT CHAOS THERE ARE MANY THINGS THAT ARE VERY LIKELY TO HAPPEN - WE NEED TO FOCUS A LARGE PERCENTAGE OF OUR TRAINING TIME UPON THOSE. However confusing the game may seem at times, there are many things about it that are known and predictable. Patterns of behavior that are often repeated. TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS FOREKNOWLEDGE AND USE IT TO HELP YOUR DEVELOPMENT AND EFFECTIVENESS. There are certain moves, scenarios and movement patterns that occur in almost every match - KNOW THEM WELL AND TRAIN THEM AND THEIR COUNTERS MORE THAN OTHER TECHNIQUES. once you think this way some of the mystery goes out of the sport and you will soon see performance increases.

Back in the blue basement: Great to see outstanding Australian grappling sensation Craig Jones @craigjonesbjj back training with the squad in preparation for his upcoming super fight in the upcoming @kasaigrappling show in NYC against leg locking powerhouse Rousimar Palhares. Senior squad member Garry Tonon had an epic match against the Brazilian juggernaut that showcased the leg lock game probably better than any other match. Mr Tonon did it weighing only 168 pounds that night in England. What better place for Mr Jones to prepare for the same challenge than the basement of hope and despair at RGA? This should be a fascinating match up. Mr Jones has a much bigger and longer body than Mr Tonon so there will be both differences and similarities in the preparation- should be extremely interesting. Today he mixed it up with the squad juniors in some great training. Here, he and Oliver Taza get into a great sparring session and exchange attacks. Next few months has a slew of tournaments with various rule sets to make for very interesting training sessions

Techniques differ - Principles don’t: At the @onechampionship event this past weekend it was my pleasure to work the warm up locker room next to an athlete I often make my students watch as an example and role model for their striking development - the great Giorgio Petrosyan. Mr Petrosyan was at the event to corner his brother. It was fascinating watching them workout and prepare and to note the similarities in the combat principles he embodies to those found in jiu jitsu. Jiu jitsu’s fighting methodology is based always upon the core concept of attaining positions that allow you to strike whilst restricting your opponent’s ability to do the same back to you. In jiu jitsu this is done via takedown to dominant positions. Mr Petrosyan is a master of doing the same - but given the nature of kickboxing- he does it entirely in standing striking exchanges. He excels in the art of striking with effect, whilst denying his opponent’s the ability to do the same - he uses an dizzying array of subtle footwork patterns, distance control, angle, level, clinching and other means. The result is he hits with tremendous power and effect while offering very few opportunities for an opponent to do the same back to him. He dazzled the room as he went to work and showed the depth of his knowledge in his art. It was a real treat to see the same principles we espouse being applied in a totally different context and with such skill.

From one mat to another: Teaching yesterday in the Philippines- then twenty seven hour flight home - now teaching back on the mats of the blue basement in NYC 😜 From mat to mat the game is the same - keep learning and keep improving- no matter how small the progress, have faith that it will accrue over time to become something substantial. No matter where you are or who shares the mat with you; there is something you can learn and practice so that the next time you step on the mat, wherever it might be, you are better than the previous time. Looking forward to upcoming projects with the squad and all my students at RGA starting tomorrow! 😊😊

Teaching time: What better way to cap off a wonderful weekend watching my student and teacher decisively win their respective MMA fights in the best tradition of jiu jitsu, than to partake in the pleasure of teaching local jiu jitsu students our systems based approach to the sport. I was very impressed to see the high interest level in our leg lock game and the enthusiasm and dedication of local students. It’s always a wonderful experience coming out to Asia and being in the home of the great martial arts traditions that gave so much to the West - it’s an honor to give a little back. The Philippines has a unique distinguished history of martial arts development and the great show put on by @onechampionship gave local fighters and fans an opportunity to show that. Heading to the airport now for the long twenty five hour journey home. Tired but happy. Thank you to our Filipino hosts, thanks to all the local students who came out in force to learn our game and thank you to you my loyal readers for your interest and support for what we do. Best wishes from the Philippines and see you soon to my students back in the basement in NYC 😊😊

What a night! Sensei Renzo had an amazing comeback tonight! He finished Yuki Kondo here in Manila tonight in the second round with a beautifully applied strangle from the back. He controlled the action from standing to ground and showed his immense knowledge by switching grips to break through against strong resistance. We are all so proud to see him prevail so convincingly against such a tough opponent. Also great to to see two generations of Renzo Gracie Academy athletes showcase their winning ways 😊😊 I am always very proud to be a student of this great man - but tonight was something special to behold. Thanks so much for all your support. Can’t wait to see all our dedicated students back at RGA in NYC and tell the full story of sensei’s amazing night! See you all soon! 😊😊🤗🤗

Victory in Manila! Garry Tonon won his second MMA fight here in the Philippines tonight. He took on a very tough and big Rahul Raju and won via rear strangle in the third round. It was an interesting bout, Mr Raju had a big reach advantage and staked his chances on a powerful counter rear hand. Mr Tonon attacked the legs hard in submission exchanges looking to cause enough damage to prevent him sitting on his heavy punches. As the damage to the legs accrued the takedowns came easier and then Mr Tonon switched to back attack system to get the break through. This ends only the seventh month of his MMA training - I am happy he got more time in the cage in this fight and got to feel some of the adversity of a longer fight - all important steps in an athlete’s development. Congratulations to Mr Tonon on a very nice win and deeper progress into the game. Thanks so much to all the sparring partners who helped the preparation - and thanks to all of you for taking an interest in our approach to the game and your support of what we do - hope you all enjoyed the show! 😊 Wishing you all the best from the Philippines!

Garry Tonon gets in his last workout prior to @onechampionship in two days here in Manila. Tomorrow he will focus on the small weight cut. He is very small for 170 pound division - in the United States he would fight at 145, but the rules of One Championship forbid big dehydrating weight cuts. Now it’s back to hotel for light meal and discussion. Wishing you all the best from Manila!

Press conference: The rise of OneCampionship show: You can always tell a lot about the interest level for a given show by prior media attention. The media presence is a strong indicator of initial public attention and then they amplify that through their channels to compound it. In the main press conference yesterday, @onechampionship CEO, Chatri Sityodtong presided over a veritable horde of media correspondents here in Manila. There is a sense of real growth in Asian MMA. Mr Sityodtong expounded his long term vision for growth of the sport in Asia and beyond. His main goal is to reconcile the modern sport of MMA with traditional martial arts values to create greater social acceptance and support in a way that can create massive growth over time and make MMA a true mainstream sport. The vision for the athletes is one of killers in the cage, but gentleman outside; and where the athletes are the draw both as fighters and as people. It is very interesting to observe the differences from American MMA culture where a much more confrontational attitude outside the cage is seen as essential to selling a show. Here in the Philippines this approach seems to be working very well, as a sold out show projected to a huge television audience across Asia and covered by a media swarm bigger than I ever saw in North America takes shape. I have always believed that to get to the top you have to stand out and represent something different from the others. Mimicry can get you only so high - at some point you have to do things your own way if you want to reach your full potential. OneChampionship looks to be doing exactly that. Excited to see them setting up the big show!!

I am very excited to announce the release of my new instructional video BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM today from BJJFanatics - the second video in the ENTER THE SYSTEM series. There is a link in my instagram bio that you can follow if you wish to order it. Most of you know that I greatly favor the back as the ultimate attacking/safety position in grappling and fighting. Whenever my students take on bigger and stronger opponents I always counsel them to make their primary focus attacks upon the back and the legs - everything else is secondary. I present here the complete system. As always, I teach the “why” of everything so as to give a clear conceptual understanding in addition to the “how” via explicit techniques. The video is around nine and half hours long. It covers all the main aspects of working from the back with a particular emphasis on finishing skills. My intention is to give you all a complete systems based training resource you can keep coming back to for years rather a “flavor of the month” collection of moves that will amuse you for a while and then be forgotten. As always, this work is dedicated to all my teachers and mentors along with my outstanding students who have always done an incredible job of displaying the techniques and concepts in this video. Without their hard work, dedication and individual brilliance I would just be a fool tinkering away in my sensei’s basement. I was always very proud that in the numerous EBI competitions that my students competed in, they had by a landslide the highest rate of wins and submissions in the tricky overtime rules - on every occasion they chose the back - now you will see why.

First workout in Manila: Garry Tonon goes through his drills in preparation for his bout Friday night. It’s always a good thing getting that first workout behind you after a long flight, different climate and unfamiliar environment. There are two mild typhoons close by, so there is constant heavy rain making a wet and humid atmosphere that makes warm ups easy. Thanks to local BJJ gym metacore for hospitality and venue. It’s a great place to train while here In Manila. Now it’s back to the hotel to recharge and get ready for tomorrow 😊😊 Excited to see the big show @onechampionship arriving in force tomorrow- there is always a special feeling of anticipation and purpose when all the athletes and coaches and officials fly in. Wishing you all the best from the Philippines!

Bound for the Pacific: At JFK airport bound for Manila, Philippines via Korea. Mr Tonon has trained hard as always. Thanks so much to all our team mates, sparring partners and mentors. Looking forward to getting back to the Asian martial arts scene and the team at @onechampionship as they continue to showcase MMA throughout Asia and growing in the West as well 😊 looking forward to doing what I can to help the BJJ scene in Manila while in town and catching up with comrades Tom DeBlass and Sensei Renzo’s team. Wishing you all the best! Thanks so much for your interest in what we do and how we do it! Back system video will be released next week - I won’t be here for that, but hope you all enjoy it anyway! 🤗🤗

Sparring with a purpose: The vast majority of jiu jitsu athletes enter every sparring session with a “let’s see what happens” attitude. Let me tell you something - whenever you enter sparring with a “let’s see what happens” attitude, YOU WILL SIMPLY END UP DOING THE SAME THINGS YOU DID IN ALL YOUR PREVIOUS SPARRING SESSIONS. Left to their own devices, ATHLETES WILL ALWAYS GO BACK TO THEIR HABITS. The idea of progressive training is to create NEW habits, not simply repeat old ones. Change within yourself has to be FORCED, it won’t happen by itself. The best way to make this happen is to have a clear goal(s) when you spar. Usually the goals are very modest - a new grip, a new set up for a favorite move, perhaps a new move you think has potential. Only by bringing in new material and improving old material will you make progress. This is best done by having a notion of what you want to accomplish before you slap hands and commence sparring. Of course there are days where you just want to spar with an open and relaxed mind and have fun seeing what happens - that’s fine and healthy. However, make sure a healthy percentage of your sparring sessions involve clear prior goals to prevent them degenerating into “more of the same” sessions where you walk out the same the same as you walked in the door.

Study: Every Jiu Jitsu athlete studies moves. Remember this - ANY GIVEN MOVE HAS FOUR CRITICAL STAGES
First- set ups and precursors
Second - entry
Third - execution
Fourth (if the move should fail (and realistically the majority of your attempts will fail on someone your own size and skill level)) - exit/entrance to subsequent move Only when you study moves in this four step pattern will you realize their depth and use that to succeed with them.

The neck: An essential feature of jiu jitsu is the idea of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE UPON A VULNERABLE TARGET THAT, IF SUCCESSFULLY ATTACKED, WOULD END THE FIGHT. There is no part of the human body that is more vulnerable to the attacks of grappling than the NECK. The neck is relatively small in circumference- around fifteen to twenty inches for most male athletes - yet within it are packed together some of the most vital components of the hum body. The body does a good job of protecting key components like heart and lungs behind the bony rib cage. The crucial spinal cord is well protected by the spine. The brain by the thickness of the skull. The neck on the other hand, houses the critical carotid arteries, vertebral arteries, jugular veins, trachea and the spine itself, along with a host of other very important components- all packed in close to each other with NO PROTECTION and close to the surface. As such, the neck is the single best target for attack when grappling (when strikes are involved you can argue that the jaw and other targets becomes more important). All jiu jitsu students must make a serious study of neck anatomy and the means of attacking the vulnerability of this greatest of all targets. In grappling, The human body is CONTROLLED at the head, but it is best FINISHED at the neck. NO OTHER PART OF THE BODY OFFERS SUCH A DENSELY PACKED MASS OF CRITICAL COMPONENTS HOUSED IN SUCH A SMALL SPACE AND SO UNPROTECTED BY ANY OTHER ELEMENTS OF OUR PHYSIOLOGY. I teach my students to fight like vampires - the neck is always the first target. Once opponents fear your neck attacks their defensive reactions will often make other favored targets such as legs, much easier to snatch.

Here is a short clip from my upcoming video instructional BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM. As you know from the incredible work of my hard working students, I put a very heavy emphasis of back mastery in my training programs. In particular, my students have shown remarkable finishing prowess from the back. This is the result of a specialized system of subtle arm traps that make breakthroughs with the single most important submission hold in the sport - the rear naked strangle - much easier to achieve. So many students come to me expressing frustration with the common problem of being able to get to the back quite readily, but then failing to finish successfully from there. I teach the complete system (I believe this is a nine hour video) on both a conceptual level (to give students a clear understanding of the WHY of their actions) and a technical level (to give students a clear understanding of the HOW of their actions). I actually had to film this video twice as the first one had faulty audio, but now it has superb audio and much improved production 😊😊 It was fun going up to Boston to film with Bernardo Faria and his team at BJJ Fanatics. I hope you have as much fun watching as we had making it, and more importantly, the happiness of good results on the mat. As always, thanks so much to my sensei, Renzo Gracie and my students, who made the grappling world take notice of the back system and whose innovative brilliance keeps it growing and improving, and to all of you, my students outside the basement for taking interest in our work. Video should be released early next week 😊😊

Getting ready: Garry Tonon goes through another sparring session in preparation for his upcoming bout in One FC @onechampionship in Manila Philippines in two weeks. He will take on Rahul Raju. On the same card, my sensei, Renzo Gracie will take on the great Yuki Kondo in a battle of masters. Working the interface between grappling and MMA has always been one of my greatest interests so its a pleasure to watch over the preparation of Mr Tonon. He is only seven months into his MMA training so every day something new is learned. It’s rather similar to our first days in jiu jitsu, where every class you see and try things you have never done before and everything is completely new. That spirit makes for exciting training sessions and a great sense of development and growth. It can be frustrating at times - new skills never come easily, but so long as a person has a sense of forward progress towards a desired goal , I believe they can endure any frustration and disappointment and keep in the game. Just one more week of training in NYC and then it’s off to the Philippines! Another marathon plane fight - any person raised in Australia or New Zealand is used to that! It will be nice to be back in the Southern Hemisphere again! Keep that spirit of your first six months of training alive within yourself - keep those feelings of amazement, growth, frustration/desire and your game will never grow stale and will grow alongside you.

Victory in London! The squad has a great night in London at the O2 Arena @polaris_professional grappling Championships. Nicky Ryan made superb use of his triangle (sankaku) and armbar skills to take a fine submission win over UFC veteran Phil Harris and advance to the next stage of the Polaris 145 pound championship. Oliver Taza defeated talented Australian grappler Lachlan Giles via decision after dominating most of the action through a great match - he now moves to the final for the welter weight title. Both Mr Ryan and Mr Taza will have bouts in a future Polaris event to try to win those titles. Outstanding work from these two youngsters- great to see their hard work in the gym paying off on the stage 😊😊 I have been telling people for the longest time about the skills of the Ryan brothers in triangle attacks - good to see them going public with it! Oliver Taza has some of the best gym performances I see every week - great to see him taking those on stage more and more. Both athletes work in the best spirit of jiu jitsu - constant attacks looking for submissions at all times. Well done!

The back - Reconciliation of two fundamental approaches: There is no question that the single most successful attack from the back in jiu jitsu is the rear naked strangle (mata leao/hadaka jime). The essential nature of this attack is one of A SINGLE HIGH PERCENTAGE MOVE ATTACKING A SMALL AREA IN AN ENTIRELY PREDICTABLE MANNER. Such is the positional control afforded by this method of attack, that even though it is known to all, it is still very difficult to stop. When it DOES fail, we need to shift our method entirely to DIVERSIFIED ATTACKS OVER A WIDE AREA - the very opposite of the initial approach. Learning to play these extremes of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE with rear naked strangle in one hand and DIVERSITY OF ATTACKS AND LOCATION OF ATTACKS on the other, is the heart of a successful back attack program. We have to recognize the simple fact that one submission deserves the majority of our attention, but that we need back up attacks in different areas to get a breakthrough when the big gun fails. Learning how to reconcile these two different approaches to the back is crucial for your success. Here, young athletes Mikey Wilson and Liam Zeh show how it is done with excellent switches between rear naked strangles and rear triangles (ushiro sankaku) both essential elements of our back attack system. Everything begins with the rear naked strangle, but where things finish is often determined by the directions of resistance.

Young guns in London: This weekend in England, Nicky Ryan will compete in Polaris Grappling @polaris_professional feather weight championship. Four outstanding athletes, Mr Ryan, Masakazu Imanari, Ashley Williams and Phil Harris will match up to determine the 145 pound title. Mr Ryan is matched against UFC athlete Phil Harris, who has also competed well in previous Polaris grappling shows. The same night, squad junior Oliver Taza will take on the outstanding Australian grappler Lachlan Giles, who has put on excellent performances in EBI and ADCC and is a stablemate of Fellow Australian dynamo, Craig Jones. Gregor Gracie of RGA takes on UFC and ADCC standout Gilbert Burns - it will be a great show in London! Everyone has trained hard and are now ready for action!

Squad hangs out with Sensei after class: Training is always tough - it’s always great to have someone light up the room after a tough session. No one does it better than my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie! Great to see Georges St-Pierre get the latest grappling material under his belt with the squad. Garry Tonon is working hard in preparation for his next MMA bout - who better to get advice and tips from than Georges St-Pierre? It’s the exchange of expertise that helps make this place so special. Another tough but fun day in the blue basement!

Working from neutrality to advantage: The basic insight behind all martial arts is that of gaining some form of prior advantage before committing to an attack. In truth however, our opponents strongly and craftily resist any attempt on our part to gain any form of advantage and so we spend the majority of our time on the mat in neutral positions. It is important to understand that EVEN WITHIN POSITIONS THAT ARE CLASSIFIED AS NEUTRAL (no points scored) THERE CAN STILL BE MINOR ADVANTAGES GAINED THAT CAN ACCUMULATE TO A DEGREE WHERE A BREAKTHROUGH CAN BE ATTAINED AND POINTS SCORED OR A SUBMISSION APPLIED. Often it may be something small, an advantageous grip, foot position, head placement - anything that affords you a greater degree of control over him than he has over you, no matter how small. Understand this - ANY GIVEN NEUTRAL POSITION IS IN PRACTICE, ONLY AS NEUTRAL AS THE RELATIVE SKILL LEVEL OF THE TWO ATHLETES. Learn to go beyond seeing POSITIONS as dominant or advantageous and start to look for ACTIONS AND PLACEMENTS that are advantageous. These are less obvious, less well defined, but against skilled opponents, they will be the resource you call upon more than any other. Here, Georges St-Pierre and Garry Tonon work from neutral position for leg control. Small nuances in grip, limb positioning, placement of wedges and directionality of force will determine winner and loser in these situations.

What do you look for? Though i write in copious amounts about my work as a coach, The basis of any coaching program can be put in a single word - PROGRESSION. Everything I do is simply an attempt to take a group of athletes from one level to higher level, no matter how small that uplift may be be - every single day - and then let time work it’s magic as days become weeks and months and years. Those small daily progressions will make big changes. Just as seemingly small interest rates compounded over time can make you wealthy, so too, can daily changes where each new skill compounds with existing skills until you go from unknown amateur to someone whom people will pay to watch. What is required more than anything is A CLEAR SENSE OF WHAT IS DEFICIENT OR PROBLEMATIC TODAY AND A CLEAR PLAN TO FIX THAT FOR TOMORROW. My job is to see where the problems are now and address them tomorrow and then check short term progress in those areas. All this is done on a daily basis - but this has to be reconciled with long term goals and a vision of what the athlete wishes to achieve in the long run. This daily log of problems and deficiencies is the basis of my observations. Then instruction and drilling of potential solutions followed by more observations, this time looking for results compared with previous days. ABOVE ALL THERE MUST BE A SENSE OF CONTINUITY FROM DAY TO DAY SO THAT PROGRESS CAN BE MADE OVER TIME. If the observations of today are not linked to yesterday and tomorrow they are without value. Don’t observe for entertainment or excitement - observe for PROGRESS - only when observations are linked to past and future can you do this.

When Chuck Norris does leg locks he doesn’t bother with ashi garami - he just tells your leg to break itself...and it does...Great to see Georges St-Pierre meet the man who has done so much for the growth and popularity of martial arts around the world and who played a key role in the early development of BJJ in North America. He was a kind and gracious host to my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie along with many other members of Gracie and Machado families back when no one in the United States even knew what BJJ was. I remember him coming to do a class with Mr Gracie in NYC and being impressed by his quiet and thoughtful demeanor and his incredible work ethic in In continuing to learn new aspects of martial arts despite already being an established legend - an amazing example to us all. Though he is mostly remembered for his martial arts movies, he was a Karate tournament champion in the early days the martial arts explosion in the late sixties and early seventies and had the adaptability to stay at the forefront of martial arts development through the nineties and beyond. Great to see him meet the face of the modern multi-discipline approach to MMA. 😊😊

The back - coaching a mindset: Most of my coaching work is the development of physical skills. These will always form the backbone of any training program since without them, all the other aspects of the game - tactics, strategy, game plans etc etc cannot be enacted. Nonetheless, you must recognize this fundamental truth - EVERY DELIBERATE PHYSICAL MOVE ON THE MAT MUST BE PRECEDED BY THE MENTAL ACT OF RECOGNIZING THE OPPORTUNITY TO EMPLOY THAT MOVE, WHETHER IT BE CONSCIOUS OR UNCONSCIOUS. If you never identify the opportunity, you will never attempt the move. It is crucial therefore, THAT YOU TRAIN YOURSELF TO SEE AND IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITY, for only then will the physical action follow. The more opportunities you see, the more that move will fire for you. SO JUST AS IMPORTANT AS THE VARIOUS TECHNIQUES FOR TAKING THE BACK IS THE SKILL OF RECOGNIZING THE CONDITIONS THAT MAKE TAKING THE BACK A POSSIBILITY. An athlete who can see opportunities and who has the physical skill to make it happen is a dangerous opponent indeed. Conversely, an athlete who has well developed physical skills but who is blind to opportunity to actually employ is harmless to his opponent. Since I favor the back above all positions, unsurprisingly I constantly emphasize to my students the need to see opportunities to get there so that they see opportunities where others don’t. This heightened state of awareness for the back is a big part of your success rate in actually getting there in a match

Nothing beats the back: When it comes to control and submit a tough and dangerous opponent- nothing will beat getting behind him and strangling him. The back is the single safest place to be in a one on one fight without weapons - whether it be grappling, MMA or a real fight. Nowhere else is there such a massive imbalance between your ability to attack them and their ability to attack you. Of course other positions have their own great value, especially when striking is permitted, but the back will always be my favorite due to the imbalance in attacking potential between the two athletes and the incredible power and success rate of the main weapon used from the back - the rear naked strangle (mata Leao/hadaka jime). No other weapon in the jiu jitsu submission arsenal offers such variation in severity of application as the back/strangle combination. It can go from a mild hold-down/immobilization to a safe means of rendering an uncontrollable opponent safely unconscious; to a truly brutal elbows-to-the-back- of-the- head beatdown position to a lethal strangle in a life or death struggle. No other submission offers this mix of versatility allied with safety and high percentage success rate. As such, the back and the mata leao strangle are the most symbolic representation of jiu jitsu. If I could only pick one submission hold for the rest of my life - unquestionably I would choose this one and I believe the overwhelming majority of other jiu jitsu players of all levels and all sizes and skill levels would do the same. Understanding the many nuances of the back - both the positional element and the submission element is a huge part of my coaching program. Nothing shows me more clearly the speed of a student’s progress than A PROPENSITY TO RUTHLESSLY HUNT FOR THE BACK AT ALL TIMES IN A MATCH, THE PHYSICAL SKILLS TO GET THERE AND STAY THERE, ALONG WITH THE KNOWLEDGE AND INTENSITY TO BREAK THROUGH DEFENSES AND FINISH IN THE MOST DECISIVE AND CONTROLLING WAY POSSIBLE FROM THERE. Here, Gordon Ryan, who has truly devastating control to submission sequences from the back, locks in a characteristically tight stranglehold from behind.

Happy Fourth of July from the Blue Basement! Many great things start from a revolution - down in the basement we constantly work to revolutionize ourselves and aspects of the game - but today we also celebrate the most important political revolution that gave rise to the great nation inside whose framework, solidity and freedom we can work to improve ourselves in whatever field we choose. Hope you all have a wonderful 4th of July! 🇺🇸🇺🇸🤗🤗🇺🇸🇺🇸

The dualities of jiu jitsu - part two - top and bottom position: Jiu jitsu is unusual among the main grappling style insofar as it is neutral between top and bottom position. There is no penalty for simply coming out at the start of match and sitting down. The core assumption of the sport is that TOP AND BOTTOM ARE OF EQUAL VALUE PROVIDED THE BOTTOM ATHLETE CAN MAIN CONTACT WITH HIS OPPONENT WITH HIS LEGS. Only when the top athlete clears the legs is it understood that he has advantage with his top position. As such, the sport is played almost entirely with one athlete working from top position trying to clear the legs (guard) and a bottom athlete trying to maintain control with his legs and attack from underneath with sweep/reversals and submissions. Most athletes have a preference for one over the other - BUT NOBODY CAN ONLY BE SKILLED AT ONE AND RISE HIGH IN THE SPORT. As early as possible in your development you must make a commitment to excellence in both top and bottom positions. If you feel your development is uneven in this regard and your skill in one is noticeably higher than the other - YOU MUST ADDRESS THIS, for continuing on without resolving this issue will prove a real problem in the future. Make your first goal the ability to HOLD AND MAINTAIN your guard against passing pressure from bottom and MAINTAIN BALANCE, POSTURE AND TOP POSITION against sweeping and submission pressure from underneath. All the other moves - sweeps, passes, submissions etc have to be built upon the bedrock of GUARD MAINTENANCE on bottom and BALANCE/POSTURAL MAINTENANCE on top. Only when you can retain your guard for long periods of time against pressure will you be able to employ the various moves from guard - you won’t sweep or submit anyone from guard if your opponent blows past your legs in seconds - nor will you pass anyone’s guard if you are immediately knocked out of balance and posture broken. Remember always that jiu jitsu requires excellence in both top and bottom - don’t fight against this basic truth - train and develop in accordance with it.

The dualities of jiu jitsu: Much of the essential nature of jiu jitsu is revealed by its many notable dualities. One of the most fundamental and important is that between offense and defense. It is critical that you become equally adept at both as inadequacies in one will make you incapable of revealing your strengths in the other. If i know my defense is weak I will always be unwilling to take the risks required for strong offense for fear of ending in a vulnerable position that I cannot defend. If my offense is weak I will hide behind my defense and never exhibit the ability to carry the fight to my opponent and take victory. It is your duty then, to approach the learning of every move from BOTH the viewpoint of offense and defense - THE MORE YOU LEARN ABOUT ONE, THE MORE YOU WILL UNDERSTAND ABOUT THE OTHER. Every move in jiu jitsu has two faces - offense and defense - if you see only one you are growing at only half your potential.

Elevating: There is an essential prerequisite if I wish to enter into ashi garami from bottom position - MY OPPONENT’S KNEES MUST BE OFF THE MAT. Due to the fact that many athletes pass guard in standing positions, this creates many opportunities to leg entries from bottom. In cases where my opponent keeps two knees on the floor IT IS UP TO ME TO GET HIS KNEES OFF THE MAT. The single best method of doing so is some form of ELEVATION. This is a truly essential skill that must be thoroughly mastered if you wish to be considered proficient in the leg lock game. Daily drilling getting a partner up into the air will quickly get you proactively creating opportunities to enter the legs from underneath so that every day you have numerous opportunities to attack and develop your skills. Get your opponent up high and watch your leg locking skills go higher still!

Body Tension: Your ability to judge when to relax your body and when to lock it tight in maximal tension is a critical factor in your development in the sport. Tension in the body is absolutely necessary WHENEVER YOU ARE TRYING TO INHIBIT THE MOVEMENT OF YOUR OPPONENT. In most other cases it is undesirable, as it costs you greatly in endurance and efficiency of movement. The clearest examples of a time when you want to shut down your opponent’s movement is during the application of a submission hold - so unsurprisingly, this is a time when there ought to be considerable tension locking your body into the hold until the application is complete. This explains why failed submissions, particularly in long combinations, are among the most tiring aspects of a match. Learning to keep your body relaxed when you want to generate movement, and then switch to maximal tension when you want to lock the opponent down and complete a given move is a big part of your shift from beginner to expert. Jiu jitsu is a typically played out as long cycles of relatively relaxed periods interspersed with short bursts of maximum tension as critical moves are attempted. Just make sure those periods of great tension are kept short and spaced apart or you will quickly exhaust yourself. The most dangerous part of maximal tension is the natural habit most people have of HOLDING THEIR BREATH UNDER TENSION - be very careful - once you go into oxygen debt it is very hard to get out of debt under the stress of a tough match. Monitor your breathing careful and keep breathing even when your body is fully locked in a deep submission hold. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows an excellent degree of body tension as he locks in a tight inside heel hook in an inside sankaku variation of cross ashi garami. Notice that although his BODY is exhibiting strong tension, his FACE is not - this is usually a good sign that breathing is uninterrupted and that the tension is being applied in the correct places.

The iron law of competence and context: One of the most commonly asked questions I receive runs like this, “I love what the squad does in grappling competitions with leg locks, but would those leg locks work in MMA?” There seems to be an odd conception among many people that leg locks are somehow DIFFERENT from all other grappling techniques insofar as they are workable in grappling, but unworkable in fighting. I never hear people say for example, That arm-bars work in grappling but don’t work in MMA, or Darce strangles, or half guard passes etc etc. Here is a point so important it ought to be written in large bold letters on the wall of every jiu jitsu academy in the world - THE COMBAT EFFECTIVENESS OF ALL THE MAIN MOVES OF JIU JITSU, INCLUDING LEG LOCKS, IS NEVER DETERMINED BY THE MOVES THEMSELVES- THEY ALL WORK WELL - BUT RATHER BY THE COMPETENCE AND CONTEXT IN WHICH THEY ARE EXECUTED. The truth is, ANY jiu jitsu move can result in catastrophic failure if applied incompetently or at the wrong time or on the wrong person. This is just as true of arm bars and strangles as it is of leg locks. Worry less about your technique selection and worry more about your technique execution - do you perform it well? Do you select it at the appropriate time and against an appropriate opponent? Do you make the necessary adjustments to lessen the danger of striking technique being used as you apply it? Do you have a realistic follow up if it should begin to fail? These are the more important questions. Here, Outstanding MMA fight Joao Zeferino, who has trained regularly with the squad for a long time, shows great execution of heel hooks in MMA at WSOF lightweight Grand Prix in 2015, submitting to two opponents in one night, including MMA legend, Jorge “Macaco” Patino with fine technique well adapted for the different pressures of the cage

The higher you go....The higher you go in the sport of jiu jitsu, the less you will concern yourself with the standard techniques of the sport. Your first challenge when you begin jiu jitsu is to develop strong skills in the basic operations of the game - to develop skill in the basic MOVES. So for example, you work hard to develop a good arm bar, a tight triangle, a reliable elbow escape etc etc. By the time you get to a good level you will come to realize that in the majority of cases, THERE IS NEAR UNIFORMITY IN THE ABILITY OF MOST ATHLETES TO PERFORM THE BASIC MOVES OF THE SPORT. If you watch the current world champion perform a basic move, say for example, an arm bar from closed guard, there is little to distinguish it from a local black belt. At the higher levels, IT IS MUCH MORE ABOUT YOUR ABILITY TO OUTPERFORM OTHERS AT THE SET UPS AND PRECURSORS TO THE TECHNIQUES RATHER THAN THE TECHNIQUES THEMSELVES. Among competent black belts, EVERYONE has a strong arm bar, a strong kimura etc. What makes one stand out from the others is mostly about the small and subtle skills and tactics that enables him or her TO GET INTO A SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN ACTUALLY APPLY THAT MOVE. Due to the fact that the vast majority of your opponent’s defense to any given move comes from the integrity of his stance, the single most important skill at the higher levels becomes THE ABILITY TO SUBVERT, NEGATE AND DEGRADE YOUR OPPONENT’S STANCE - only then will you be able to actually apply the basic moves of the sport. Beginners must focus on moves, but as you gain in expertise, YOU MUST SHIFT YOUR FOCUS TO BREAKING YOUR OPPONENT’S STANCE AND STRUCTURE - only then will the opportunity to apply those moves arise. My teaching reflects this fact - moves are taught in great detail, but always embedded in a coherent system of preliminaries that make them work in competition.

Learning from a distance: You guys know I am a firm believer in the possibility of a mentor having a massive influence on the direction of your life even in a short meeting - Dean Lister played this role in my leg lock development - for me, he provided the spark from which the current leg lock blaze burns. I am also a tremendous believer in the power of self starting, independently minded individuals to see information from a distance and USING THAT AS A STARTING POINT, GO ON TO MAKE INCREDIBLE PROGRESS ON THEIR OWN OVER TIME. That is why I am so enthusiastic about teaching seminars and making instructional videos - I truly believe in their ability to make a difference in your grappling life. Here is an amazing example all the way from Australia. A few years ago I went to visit family and taught some impromptu leg lock seminars in Sydney and Melbourne - turn out and enthusiasm was fantastic. A young man named Jeremy @jeremypaulskinner came to one of them and impressed me with his movement and thirst for knowledge. Since then he went on to greatly develop his game, based on seminar notes, watching the senior squad members in action and most importantly, his own hard work. Now he teaches alongside Craig Jones at @absolutemmamelb Here he is the recent boa super 8 tournament in Australia demonstrating a perfect rendition of a classic squad maneuver into cross ashi garami utilizing double trouble to completely control his opponent into a fine finish! What a fine example of long distance learning married to hard work and initiative to get super results! Great to see this and I hope it drives you to be confident that an initial help can be the impetus to create something great within yourself and get you to your goals and dreams. Well done, Jeremy! 🤗

Stay compact: Probably one of the biggest problems beginners in jiu jitsu face is that of extending their bodies at times that make them very vulnerable to attack. Most of the fundamental postures of jiu jitsu, particularly the defensive ones, involve CONTRACTION of the body - spine rounded, elbows and knees tucked in tight. Learning to trust in this contraction as the best means of slipping your limbs INSIDE your opponent’s limbs as the most high percentage route to escape and evasion is a big step for the beginner in jiu jitsu. As you progress the problem will change from that of GETTING TO a safe contracted posture to that of MAINTAINING this strong posture throughout the course of a long tough match against a skilled opponent who is doing everything he can to subvert that posture - either way, learning and fighting to keep your limbs in tight at the appropriate time will be a constant theme of your training. Just as a good boxer constantly keeps his chin tucked, shoulders high and rounded to protect his jaw and elbows in tight to protect his torso when in danger; so a good jiu jitsu player puts his or her primary effort into sound defensive structure before anything else. Here, young Nicky Ryan presents me with a wall of knees and elbows that prevents me exploiting the angle I have gained. His well rounded spine will give him the mobility he needs to quickly recover his legs and square up to me so that he can immediately shift from a defensive cycle to an offensive one. Posture before all - and in defense - when in doubt - contract and pull everything in tight. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Changing the leg lock game: Probably the single biggest influence on the leg lock game that myself and my students had was to promote the idea that the leg lock TECHNIQUES employed by an athlete were not as important as the overall SYSTEM of tactics, supporting techniques and mechanical details that actually make the basic techniques work repeatedly against skilled opponents; so that the standard leg lock techniques are seen as being only as good as the support system in which they are embedded. They say it takes a village to raise a child - well, similarly, it takes a system to land a heel hook. If that was the biggest influence - there is another that could well be a strong second place. When i first began a serious study of leg locks almost twenty years ago, the overwhelming majority of leg attacks were done from top position as a means of attacking someone who was playing from guard position. Thus leg locking was seen as contrary to spirit of jiu jitsu, which always strongly emphasized passing guard first and submissions second. The few people using leg locks at high level scored all their greatest successes from top position or standing position. What I did was to push the leg locking game from bottom position. Many popular and proven guard positions such as butterfly guard, X guard, half butterfly guard etc are based on inside position that can easily be adapted to ashi garami based leg locks. Using these inside control based guards as a starting point, I added the notion of kuzushi (off balancing) from guard position, rather than the standard idea of sweeping from guard. This forced opponents to base out wide with arms and legs and made entries into leg locks from bottom position very easy. You can clearly see that among all my students, the vast majority of their leg lock entries are from bottom position. This nullified the old criticism that leg locking was a bad idea because it would result in loss of top position if it failed. It also meant that people stopped seeing leg locking as a weapon to be used AGAINST guard position (anti jiu jitsu) and started seeing it as I do, as a weapon used FROM guard position that only makes jiu jitsu stronger.

How much can I really learn from a video? Quite often I am asked whether someone can learn technique from video instruction. An interesting insight into answering this question comes from my demonstration partner (Uke) in the new version of my leg lock instructional video. Placido Carl Santos was a great partner to film the series in Boston, where he trains with my black belt student, Travis Stevens. This weekend he entered a local grappling tournament and won via...leg lock! A very nicely applied heel hook sequence that he learned by having it demonstrated on him by me during filming! It is a good example of how I believe video instruction can greatly help a student and provide new directions in their mat work. Now, let’s be clear - watching a video and then doing nothing will do little to help you improve performance. What is need is TO GAIN INSIGHT, TECHNIQUES, AND TACTICS THAT IN CONJUNCTION WITH YOUR OWN PRACTICE CAN HAVE A DRAMATIC IMPACT ON YOUR SKILL LEVEL OVER TIME. Think of it as an extra teacher or mentor. Just as even the finest teacher/mentor will be unable to help you if you do not put time and effort into your training, neither will a video instructional. However, if you take that video as a teaching resource and work hard on the material i am extremely confident you will get great results. I base this confidence on my experience as an instructor. I was very fortunate to begin my training in the 1990’s with one of the best senseis in the world, surrounded by world champions, so I never needed outside help, but I knew MANY people who lived in other parts of the country with no teachers. They learned almost entirely from video instructionals and many had excellent results. Nowadays I often see visiting students come by RGA and exhibit skills they tell me they learned from online courses and demonstrate very good skills obviously learned from the various champions whose video courses they follow. Wonderful to see Placido show how he learned from being there at the filming of the video and wishing the best to the all long distance video students who follow their favorite jiu jitsu teachers spreading their message to a wider audience!

Handicapping yourself to make yourself better: One of the most valuable methods of improving your skills is to handicap yourself in same way that forces you to adjust in some way that encourages skill development in other critical areas. I usually find that most beginning students are HAND and ARM dominant in almost every aspect of the game. This is a natural consequence of the fact that most tasks we perform in everyday life are predominantly performed with hands and arms. However this usual hand/arm bias is not acceptable in jiu jitsu. Trying to perform the moves of jiu jitsu with hands and arms quickly leads to fatigue and failure. THE SOURCE OF ALL POWER AND ENDURANCE IN THE HUMAN BODY IS IN THE LEGS AND HIPS. Only when you become leg and hip dominant in the performance of jiu jitsu moves will you excel. In the case of heel hooking, a simple test for me as a teacher as to whether or not a student is performing the move predominantly with legs and hips is to make him or her perform the heel hook with ONE HAND. This immediately forces the student to properly apply legs and hips in the move - they cannot compensate for failures in hip and leg work with their hand strength. When you can easily submit an opponent with a single handed heel hook, breaking an opponent with two hands is easy work. There are MANY ways to use this simple training principle in jiu jitsu. Use it often. It will teach you a LOT about how the other parts of your body are involved in any given move. When you remove the handicap and come after your opponent with full force they will feel the jump in performance you have made.

Re-release of LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM: Today BJJ Fanatics puts out the new and greatly improved version of my leg lock instructional video showing the complete approach to leg locking as it was taught to my students and used so brilliantly for so long by all of them. The first edition had some problems with audio quality so I completely re shot them and added almost two hours of new bonus content along with faster delivery of information. My intention is to change the nature of video instruction in this ENTER THE SYSTEM series. Instead of showing a few random moves I want to put out longer videos that package a complete set of moves IMBEDDED IN A CONCEPTUAL AND TACTICAL FRAMEWORK THAT ALLOWS YOU TO ACTUALLY GET THEM WORKING IN LIVE SITUATIONS IN A SHORT TIME. Because the videos are longer they can can function as a learning resource for years to come rather than be a “flavor of the month” superficial input. In addition you actually get FAR more minutes of instruction per dollar spent than a conventional video - twelve hours for two hundred dollars vs two hours for eighty dollars. The production quality is outstanding this time. It is free for anyone who bought it already and anyone buying now will also get the original as well for free. Hope you all enjoy the new look video and I look forward to seeing the skill level of leg locking massively increase around the world over the next few years!!! 😊😊😊 There is a link above in my instagram bio if it is something you are interested in.

Knowing what you want to do: Imagine a Genie came to you and said he would give you both a tremendous blessing and a tremendous curse. You ask him what the blessing is and he says, “ I will give you all the skills to accomplish whatever you want in life!” You are overjoyed at this wonderful news and the powers it will give. Then you ask, “So what’s the curse?” He replies, “ You will have no ability to decide what you want to do.” Will you ever accomplish anything with those new incredible skills of yours? No - not a thing. SKILLS CAN ONLY BE IMPLEMENTED WHEN YOU HAVE A NOTION OF WHAT YOU WANT TO DO. That is, A SENSE OF DIRECTION IS A NECESSARY PRECURSOR TO SKILL IMPLEMENTATION. So often I see people teach and learn jiu jitsu as though it were only a set of skills. THOSE SKILLS ARE ONLY AS USEFUL AS YOUR ABILITY TO CLEARLY IDENTIFY WHAT YOU WANT TO ACCOMPLISH. It is worthless to teach skills without giving an athlete a general sense of direction so that he or she can actually put them into operation. That is why I always imbed skills in general tactical plans. The best way to do this is in short and simple sequences that give order and direction to the skills. So for example, in ashi garami based heel hooking skills, there are four basic tasks arranged in a sequence that are necessary for the successful completion of the move. First, you have gain entry and connection to the opponent’s legs and hips. Second, you have to expose the heel. Third, you have to negate the various lines of resistance, usually by undermining the defensive potential of the secondary leg. Then last, break the opponent. When the athlete is absolutely clear conceptually as to what needs to be done - he or she will naturally exhibit the skills they have trained to get it done. CONFUSION AT THE LEVEL OF DIRECTION WILL ALWAYS PARALYZE THE STUDENT AT THE LEVEL OF EXECUTION. Here, Gordon Ryan has clearly formed a solid connection, exposed the heel of Keenan Cornelius, compromised resistance by interfering with secondary leg - all that remains is to go for the finish. Crystal clear sense of direction creates quick and positive action- one without the other is worthless.

No one does it alone: One of the best things you can ever do to advance your level in jiu jitsu is create strong partnerships with other people of similar dispositions and goals to use as feedback for ideas and skills that you work on to improve yourselves. The most productive relationships in life are almost always based on the concept of MUTUAL BENEFIT. Nobody likes a parasite - try always to give as much as you receive and these friendships will last years and create more advances in you than you could ever have done alone. Partners on the mat can be so much more than drilling and sparring partners - try to form bonds where they become RESEARCH PARTNERS as well - I promise you it will benefit you greatly. I was always greatly blessed in this regard. I had truly outstanding senseis and mentors. My senior class mates where outstanding and after twenty five years I still know and see and learn from almost all of them. So to with my students past and present. They are an incredible means of testing ideas and the feedback I get from their adventures on the mat and the stage is a huge part of my own advancement in knowledge over the years. Don’t do it alone - THE GREATEST RESOURCE YOU HAVE IS YOUR OWN INQUIRING MIND - AND THE SECOND GREATEST IS THE PEOPLE AROUND YOU WHO ENABLE YOU TO MAXIMIZE ITS USE. Here I am scheming some dastardly improvements to my front headlock game with trusted partner in crime Shawn Williams - himself a great innovator and one of my favorite people to run ideas by and test theories and concepts. Sharing the journey not only makes it more fun - it takes you further than you could have gone alone.

Ryan Gracie and the navigation principle: I have had the benefit of one great sensei, Renzo Gracie, and many fine mentors in my years of development in jiu jitsu. A very important mentor was Ryan Gracie. It was from him that I saw the great value of what I call (for want of a better term) the “navigation principle.” Mr Gracie was one of the most explosive, dynamic and intuitive grapplers I ever trained with. He had an uncanny sense of first creating a scramble and then in what appeared to be a chaotic situation where neither person had control of the other, somehow navigate himself directly into a submission hold. This made him very dangerous at all times in a match and lead to a very high submission rate per minute of sparring. I was very impressed by this and worked hard to implement it into my game and that of my students. Let’s define a scramble as ANY SITUATION WHERE THE TWO ATHLETES HAVE CLOSE CONTACT WITH OTHER IN DYNAMIC MOVEMENT, BUT NEITHER HAS A GREATER ABILITY TO CONTROL THE OTHERS MOVEMENT. Most people just follow their instincts in these situations and hope something good emerges in the course of the movement. Better athletes may work with a general insight that confers some form of advantage in a scramble, such as keeping higher position throughout the scramble. In the sport of jiu jitsu, the best outcome in any situation is submission - so it is very valuable indeed to train your mind to SEE SUBMISSION ENTRIES IN THE CHAOS OF A SCRAMBLE SO THAT YOU EMERGE AT THE END IN A WINNING POSITION. This is no easy task. We are not born with this as an instinct. It has to be developed. The way to develop it is to choose one submission. Understand what the PRECURSORS to that submission are and then start training yourself to see those precursors in the midst of dynamic scrambles and move into that submission. When you are confident with one, add another, until you have an arsenal. Your aim is to be able to automatically navigate in a fast moving scramble straight to a preferred submission. Once mastered, this will prove a truly valuable skill to you. It will make you a very dangerous opponent on the mat and give you a sense of direction in chaos.

Frank Rosenthal wins Onnit Invitational in Texas: Outstanding junior, Frank Rosenthal won the prestigious Onnit Invitational grappling event last night - two matches by heel hook and one by strangle- to take gold and shekels in fine form. Mr Rosenthal has been on a leg locking mission of late, doing an incredible job of embodying the core themes of my system to secure numerous impressive victories. The Onnit Invitational was always one of the big hurdles used by the squad to prepare developing athletes for big endeavors. It seems like yesterday that a young Gordon Ryan was preparing himself for this challenge - it’s great to see Mr Rosenthal taking those same big steps on his journey towards his goals and dreams. This theme of planned development and progress is critical for all of you. Everything works better with a coherent and rational plan. Of course there will be impediments and derailments along the way, that’s to be expected; but adapt to each one and keep pressing forward and you shall get there with results like this.

Seven fundamental axioms of my leg lock system: Nowadays most people are willing to admit that the new approach to leg locking that I teach and which was so brilliantly exhibited by my students, is a highly effective addition to the jiu jitsu arsenal that I am confident will make jiu jitsu even more effective as a martial art that prides itself upon its ability to defeat opponents by submission. It can be very instructive to ask - what did we do differently? Why did it suddenly happen that a group of people were able to do so well with techniques that were considered low percentage for generations? My approach is built around some core insights that motivate and give substance to the system overall.
1 My approach to leg locking is HOLISTIC. The effectiveness of a leg lock will be proportional to the system of set ups and follow ups and a vast array of tactics and techniques in between. Teaching leg locks as MOVES was largely ineffective for generations. Teaching them as a SYSTEM around a move was extremely effective.
2 I strongly distinguish between the means of CONTROL (ashi garami) and SUBMISSION (the actual lock employed eg heel hook)
3 Doing so encourages the use of MULTIPLE ASHI GARAMI PER LOCK so that the different respective tasks of each heel hook can be covered by a different ashi garami well suited to that task.
4 The direction of force of the ashi garami must DIRECTLY OPPOSE the direction of force of the lock so as to immobilize the opponent and create ideal breaking conditions
5 The break must involve opposing forces BOTH UPON THE KNEE THROUGH THE ASHI GARAMI (against the direction of the lock) AND THE FOOT (through the grip you employ to create a simultaneous push/pull)
6 I also seek to control BOTH LEGS whenever possible. By distinguishing between a PRIMARY leg to be attacked and a SECONDARY leg to be controlled, athletes can immobilize opponents and attack at their own pace.
7 I strongly emphasized BOTTOM POSITION ENTRIES (usually from butterfly, X and half guard) over traditional top position entries so that POSITIONAL LOSS was never an issue for my students. All they had to do was establish grips and inside position on bottom and attack

Angle: A theme that runs throughout all the combat sports is that of ADVANTAGEOUS ANGLE. The human body is constructed in such a way that it deals well with threats from directly in front, but poorly with threats from behind. Any angle to one side that gets us closer to inherently advantageous rear positions is generally a good thing. Defensive positions that seem impervious from the front often prove quite easy to attack from an angle. This is particularly true of leg lock attacks from bottom position. Typically we begin encounters facing square to our opponent. After an initial engagement to secure grips and kuzushi (off balancing), LOOK IMMEDIATELY TO SECURE AN ANGLE TO FACILITATE ENTERING THE LEGS AND THEN EMERGE WITH THE LEG UNDER YOUR CONTROL (via ashi garami) AND AT AN ANGLE WHERE YOU CAN EXPLOIT THAT CONTROL WITH A STRONG ATTACK. Here, you can see that I have elevated my opponent and forced him to carry his own weight on his hands. This frees me up to turn to an angle that makes entry easier and creates a dilemma between straight and cross ashi garami attacks (he can only avoid one by giving me the other). In addition this greatly reduces the need for flexibility and athleticism on my part to lock a tight ashi garami (that’s a good thing for a fifty one year old with a hip replacement and soon to be knee replacement 😉😜). Make ANGLE a serious part of your study of submissions. Identify which holds require it and make a study of how you can attain it under the conditions you can expect when hunting for it - you will soon find situations that used to frustrate you bring success.

What is your best skill? Yesterday we looked at the problem of lagging skills in our game. Today we shall look at our strong points. What is your best skill on the mat? Is it a positional move? (Eg a guard pass or sweep) or a submission move (eg Americana lock). How did it become your best skill? Was it a natural result of your body type? Your personality? Perhaps some technical insights from a coach, a mentor or self experimentation? We are all proud of our best skills - they give us confidence and direction on the mat - when we go against a tough opponent we naturally gravitate towards our best moves and when things get tough we work in the hope that we can bring our best and biggest guns to bear. Now ask yourself three sets of questions. However happy you might be with your favorite skills - first, DO YOU REALLY MAXIMIZE YOUR POTENTIAL SUCCESS WITH THAT MOVE? OR COULD YOU DO MORE WITH IT?Second, DO YOU USE THAT SKILL/MOVE AS A LEAD IN TO OTHER MOVES AND SKILLS TO BROADEN YOUR REPERTOIRE? Third, WHAT DID YOUR EXPERIENCE LEARNING AND DEVELOPING THIS FAVORITE MOVE OF YOURS TEACH YOU ABOUT LEARNING IN JIU JITSU? COULD YOU USE THIS KNOWLEDGE TO HELP YOU LEARN OTHER MOVES AND FURTHER YOUR PROGRESS FAR BEYOND YOUR CURRENT STATE? It’s natural (and healthy) to feel a sense of pride and contentment about your best moves. SAVE YOUR CONTENTMENT FOR YOUR DEATH BED. KEEP WORKING HARD TO MAKE FORWARD PROGRESS AND LEARN TO USE PAST LEARNING SUCCESS NOT AS A PLACE TO REST AND BE HAPPY, BUT AS A SPRINGBOARD TO FURTHER PROGRESS AND DEVELOPMENT THAT WILL ELEVATE YOU FAR ABOVE THE LEVEL THAT CURRENTLY MAKES YOU HAPPY.

What is your worst skill? Every jiu jitsu player,
you, me, everybody, has a worst skill - some part of the game that lags far behind their other skills. We all carry it around as a burden and hope it does not show up in sparring or competition. A great project for all jiu jitsu students is to identify the worst element of your game. It can be a MOVE, say for example, kata gatame (arm triangle); or a POSITION, say, left side bottom half guard. Whatever it is, identify it. Then study it. Ask your instructor about it, study great athletes who have a reputation for excellence in that area. Then set a very manageable goal. For three weeks, START EVERY SPARRING SESSION IN THAT POSITION OR MOVE AND SPEND AS MUCH TIME AS POSSIBLE WORKING IN THAT SPECIFIC AREA. Initially you will feel awful. Don’t get dispirited. Understand this - IN ALL LEARNING ACTIVITIES THE GREATEST JUMPS IN SKILL LEVEL OCCUR EARLY IN TRAINING AND THEN DECREASE OVER TIME. I promise you that after a rough start you will make astounding progress in that area in a relatively short time. Will you be a world beater? No, but you will be considerably better and put yourself in a position to improve over time. Most importantly, YOU WILL NO LONGER SEE THAT SPECIFIC AREA AS A WEAKNESS,
BUT RATHER AS A GROWTH AREA WITH POTENTIAL FOR THE FUTURE. Once you see it in that light, then you can move forward with that move/position as part of your overall progress, rather than make progress in some areas and just leave that one behind and hope it never gets exposed.

The shared spiral: All joint locks are divided into linear locks and twisting locks. Arm bar (juji gatami) and knee bar would be good examples of linear locks, where the joint is hyperextended in a straight line. Twisting locks rotate the joint in directions it cannot follow - figure four toe holds and Kimura would be good examples. The HEEL HOOK is a classic example of a twisting lock. Many people experience failure with the heel hook due to THE PROBLEM OF THE SHARED SPIRAL. There are two aspects to this problem. The first is that many athletes make the mistake of applying the direction of force of both the ashi garami they use to control the leg they are attacking AND the heel hook IN THE SAME DIRECTION, thus they are only able to apply a turning force in one direction upon the joint, rather than applying them in OPPOSITE directions so that they can apply a true tearing force. The second aspect is that your opponent will want to turn in the same direction as your heel hook’s rotational force to relieve pressure - so that you spiral together. It is crucial that you create a spiral force on the leg, BUT THAT YOU PREVENT OR LIMIT YOUR OPPONENT’S ABILITY TO DO THE SAME. This is done by the sophisticated use of ashi garami controls, switching from one ashi garami to another, or using some form of ashi garami that enables you to interfere with your opponent’s ability to turn with you. Your goal is to slow and control your opponent’s spiral and ultimately STOP it - even momentarily- so that a breaking force can be applied long enough to get the job done. Here, Katya Leontyeva gets to an ashi garami variation and then works to slow down her opponent’s strong turning defense until she can finally stop it long enough to apply a powerful force in the opposite direction of her ashi garami to get an impressive win.

Juniors cover all options on route to victory: Outstanding junior squad members, Frank Rosenthal, Katya Leontyeva and Danny Hernandez had great wins in Global Grappling League super fights yesterday in Phoenix NY. All three won by submission- an arm bar, a leg lock and and a strangle - covering all three of the major possibilities of submission- arm, leg and strangle. Always the idea is to threaten the whole body with submission- it’s much harder to defend a wide expanse of territory than a narrow one. It’s great to see the juniors doing exactly that in competition. This is an important lesson for all of you - of course it’s desirable to have favorite moves with which you can smash through determined opposition even when they expect it coming, but it’s equally desirable to be versatile enough with your attacks that an opponent never really knows where the next one is coming from and thus has to scatter his or her defenses and fall prey to feigned attacks on one area only to be caught in another. LEARNING TO PLAY BETWEEN FOCUSED CONCENTRATION OF FORCE AND WIDE RANGING VERSATILITY IS A KEY PART OF YOUR DEVELOPMENT AS A STUDENT OF SUBMISSIONS. Work hard on this crucial theme and soon you will see similar results as these outstanding students!

The Renzo Gracie Academy lost one of its most beloved members today. Mr Anthony Bourdain was an enthusiastic student of the art and loved by all for his kind and quiet demeanor that made it a joy and privilege to share the mats with him. He was a gentle soul and traveler who traversed borders and generations bringing the gift of conversation and story telling - gift wrapped in cuisine - but whose real effect was to make listeners from every strata of society, from the greatest to the least, reflect upon themselves in ways that when the talk ended, you knew yourself a little better and felt a little wiser. In a harsh, competitive and divided world he was a spokesman for the power of simple joys to bring people together, initially at the table, but ultimately at the mind. Food was just the medium - not the message - the deeper lesson was always harmony based around the insight that the pleasures of the dinner table are the same for one and all, and thus that division can be broken down by the simple joys of life that can make us see what is the same in all of us instead of what is different.
Peace to the departed and strength to those who remain

Mechanical tightness vs muscular tightness: One of the most basic demands of good jiu jitsu technique - particularly submission holds - is the demand for TIGHTNESS. Your body must be tightly woven into your opponent’s body to prevent slippage and escape. Unfortunately most beginners misunderstand this need for tightness as MUSCULAR tightness and quickly exhaust themselves locking in to their opponents and squeezing for all they are worth until inevitably they fade and fail. The key to tightness is not to squeeze your opponent, but to FIT THE SHAPE AND GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THAT OF YOUR OPPONENT and then exert your tension into YOUR OWN BODY in order to hold that geometric shape around your opponent, rather than try to squeeze him into the shape you want with your strength. The only way to make your body conform to the shape of your opponent is to RELAX until you have the desired positioning and THEN lock YOURSELF tight - not him. Thus you must learn to put yourself through CYCLES OF RELAXATION AND TENSION until you get what you want. Try to break the natural, but harmful, beginners habit of maximum tension from start to finish that is both exhausting and unlikely to work. Begin your experiments with these cycles of relaxation and tension in drilling moves and then try to extend them into live sparring where their application is more difficult. Learning to manage these cycles of tension and relaxation is a huge step in the jiu jitsu journey

Auxiliary systems: Most of you know that I am a big proponent of a linked subsystems approach to jiu jitsu. Classical BJJ is a system based approach to combat. I build upon this through the use of subsystems - systems built around specific areas of the game that create tremendous expertise in that domain that can enable an athlete (often with less overall experience than his opponent) to trap his or her opponent within that system where they have a significant knowledge, skill and experience advantage due to specialization and can win from there. As these subsystems grew in complexity I divided them up further in various ways that aided students in learning and applying them. One of the more interesting types of division was that between MAIN systems and AUXILIARY systems. In the case of our BACK SYSTEM, the main system is built around a set of arm traps that allow an attacker to pin his opponent’s defensive arms to facilitate the use of the most high percentage back finish - the rear naked strangle (mata leão/hadaka-jime). There is no question this is our main method of attacking the back and the one that has garnered the most success in competition. However, in cases where we cannot get the breakthrough by this main route, there are four AUXILIARY systems that go in a totally different direction. Instead of facilitating the breakthrough of one submission in one area (rear strangle around neck) they employ a diverse array of submissions OVER THE WHOLE BODY. This play between the narrow focus of the main system and the diverse applications of the four auxiliary systems is a big part of what gives our overall back system its character. Here, Garry Tonon shows his skills with one of those four auxiliary systems- the rear triangle (ushiro sankaku) as he locks in an impressive looking strangle in training.

Two is always better than one: A founding principle of my approach to leg locking is that of double trouble - given that most of your opponent’s resistance to a lock on one leg comes from the OTHER leg; if we can somehow restrain the second leg, this will make resistance far more difficult for him. There are many ways to restrain that second leg. Which method you choose is mostly determined by the version of ashi garami you find yourself in (though there are other factors also). Here, Gordon Ryan works on a version from reverse ashi garami, binding up both his opponent’s legs as he works between a knee bar and toe hold. Constantly looking to manifest this important principle will pay big dividends in the leg locking game. Having a clear understanding of the underlying PRINCIPLES behind the main movements of jiu jitsu will enable you to improvise during a match and innovate in the training room - two things that will greatly increase your prowess

There’s no heel hook without a heel: A critical part of success in jiu jitsu is that of SEQUENCE. Most of the moves have essential preconditions without which the move simply will not work. As such, YOU MUST ALWAYS HAVE A CLEAR SENSE OF WHAT THOSE PREREQUISITES ARE AND HOW TO ATTAIN THEM. In the case of one of my favorite moves, the heel hook, HEEL EXPOSURE is one of the critical prerequisites. If I cannot expose my opponent’s heel, any other leg locking skills I might have are worthless. As you deal with better opponents, they will also understand what the prerequisites to your favorite moves are; and they will fight hard to prevent you getting them. At this level, you will have to fight not only to perform the move you want, BUT EVERY PREREQUISITE STEP THAT MAKES THE MOVE POSSIBLE. Your journey to prepare yourself to win these battles will create depth in your jiu jitsu game. It will mark your rise from beginner to expert. No matter what your favorite moves are - research the preconditions that underlie them and make a serious study of those as well as the move itself. You will be rewarded with a move that you can impose upon even expert defense. Here, Garry Tonon opts to hook his opponent’s exposed heel even before he fully controls his opponent’s leg in an ashi garami - usually I prefer a tight controlling ashi garami first and work to expose the heel second, but reversing the order of operations can also be very effective in some cases, but in either case, KNOW WHAT YOU NEED IN ORDER TO GET WHAT YOU WANT.

Pace: A critical factor in competition success that gets surprisingly little attention is PACE. There are two main types of pace that are of importance. The first is the pace that i impose upon MYSELF. This concerns my efficiency with regards my energy expenditure. Often i see athletes working themselves very hard when there is no need. Consequently they fatigue rapidly and after a strong start, fade in effectiveness. The second concerns the pace i impose upon my OPPONENT. For any given match there will be a pace set by the two athletes that is usually a compromise between the desired pace of each of them. Every athlete has a pace they feel comfortable with as they perform their techniques. If I can force them to work at a slower or higher pace than their comfort zone, this will often lower their performance and fatigue them. Learning to use pace as a weapon is often neglected in the gym where the sparring is usually (and understandably) a level below competition. Thus the great value of competition experience as the primary means of learning this skill (though it certainly can be learned in the gym also). Here, Nicky Ryan works to impose his desired pace in a tough match against the talented Geo Martinez. His victory was largely a result of an advanced use of pace control - VARIATIONS IN PACE THAT CONFUSE AN OPPONENT AND ALLOW A SUDDEN INCREASE IN PACE AFTER A LULL TO HELP GET A BREAKTHROUGH. Learning to set your techniques in the context of pace signifies a well developed game - work on it like all your other skills - it will soon reward you.

Nicky Ryan seminar in Los Angeles this Sunday: Nicky Ryan will show our fans in LA the intricacies of our approach to the game this Sunday at one of our favorite LA gyms @dynamixmma on 6/3 at 3:30pm. Not only will he show the essential squad approach to the game, but his personal approach to it. All my students are innovators and researchers. All have their own specialty moves that they developed independently and which figure prominently in their game. This independence is the most exciting thing for a coach to witness and to see it in such a young man is truly remarkable. If you are within distance of Santa Monica on Sunday - Check our this amazing young athlete and teacher and see for yourself the knowledge and skill that I am lucky enough to witness daily. As always - a big hello to our West Coast followers 😊😊

Coaching memories: Georges St-Pierre vs Josh Koscheck 2 - One good move begets another: A theme that I often push upon my students is that of DEVELOPING AT LEAST ONE STRONG MOVE THAT PEOPLE KNOW AND FEAR YOU FOR. In truth - IT DOES NOT EVEN MATTER IF YOU ACTUALLY SCORE WITH THAT PARTICULAR MOVE - YOUR OPPONENTS DEFENSIVE OVER REACTIONS TO THE MERE THREAT OF IT WILL OPEN MANY OTHER ATTACKING OPPORTUNITIES THAT YOU CAN EASILY EXPLOIT. A very fine example of This occurred when Georges St-Pierre took on the very tough wrestler Josh Kosheck for the second time. The first match was hard fought, but Mr St-Pierre dominated with his takedowns - shocking given that Mr Koscheck was a two time NCAA champion and three time finalist. When we did the Ultimate Fighter show, Mr Koscheck made it clear that he would not be taken down this next time. When the second time came, Mr St-Pierre took him down in the opening seconds with one of the fastest double leg entries I ever saw. Mr Koscheck did a good job of recovering back up to his feet - but the damage was done - he now had to focus all his defensive skills into stopping that dangerous double. Mr St-Pierre immediately took notice of this - and went to phase two. He was always a lead hand dominant striker - strong jab and left hook - much less so a rear hand striker, that was never his strength. He began to mirror his level change to a fast and powerful rising jab to that of his double leg. From Mr Koscheck’s perspective it was nearly impossible to tell whether any given level change signaled either a double leg or a rising jab. Immediately the jab starting scoring. One was so powerful it broke Mr Koscheck’s orbital bone and caused a gruesome eye injury that essentially sealed the outcome in the first round. To his credit, Mr Koscheck showed the heart of a lion and stayed the course, getting back up every time he was taken down, but the lesson is clear - THE THREAT OF ONE BIG WEAPON WILL ALWAYS FACILITATE THE USE OF ANOTHER. Take this lesson from this great man and make it yours - PUT TIME AND ENERGY INTO DEVELOPING A POWERFUL ATTACK THAT INVOKES STRONG DEFENSIVE REACTIONS IN YOUR OPPONENTS AND BUILD AN ARSENAL AROUND IT

Taking notes: I am a big believer in the notion that to a large degree, jiu jitsu is a knowledge game. Of course knowledge is not the whole story. Until KNOWLEDGE is translated into SKILL it is of little practical value to the athlete (though it can still be of great value to the coach). Like any knowledge based enterprise, there is a lot of memorizing and, unfortunately, a lot of forgetting! 😖😂😉 As such I believe it is of great value to many people (not all people - some learn in very different ways) to keep notes on their progress. At the end of every day I make sure I write down in some form the main things I learned that day. I don’t suggest writing vast amounts (you wouldn’t guess that given my lengthy instagram posts would you!? 😂😂) - just the NEW elements that you believe have potential for the future. I believe that JUST THE SHEER ACT OF WRITING AIDS RETENTION. In addition to helping retention, IT HELPS ORDER YOUR THOUGHTS INTO MORE COHERENT STRUCTURES THAT WILL HELP YOU WORK THEM INTO YOUR DEVELOPMENT. Thus even if you never peruse those notes again - they will have helped you. I remember once coming across an old journal of mine from 2002 and seeing an entry on an “interesting concept that may be of considerable value for further research and wider applications” - it was the notion of double trouble applied to ashi garami based leg locks - how ironic that this would go on years later to be of such value to my students. Let the time, orderliness and discipline of note taking work for you - just as you did in school - it can help you take the lessons of today into your improvements of tomorrow.

Isolating limbs: In an MMA or fighting context, what makes the dominant pins of jiu jitsu such as the mounted position dangerous IS YOUR ABILITY TO DO DAMAGE WITH STRIKES. All this changes in a grappling match however, where strikes are not allowed. The single most important ability you can develop to make yourself dangerous from a dominant position in a grappling context, is THE ABILITY TO ISOLATE AND CONTROL A LIMB. An isolated limb can be controlled and broken (or in the case of the neck - strangled (the neck is the fifth limb in grappling)). I always encourage my athletes to go the extra distance when they get to a dominant position - DON’T BE SATISFIED WITH THE PIN ITSELF - GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND FIGHT TO ISOLATE A LIMB. The day you start doing that you will begin SUBMITTING people from dominant positions rather than merely HOLDING them. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of pinning down Ralek Gracie’s right arm from a variation of the mounted position, thus isolating one arm from the other allowing complete isolation and control of the head and left arm in ways that lead directly to a variety of submission holds.
Respectful Memorial Day to all 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

When the day is done: The re-filming of the instructional video BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM is done - two long days of filming covering all the main features that my brilliant students have had so much success with over the years. Now it’s back on the train to NYC and get ready for teaching tomorrow. There is a sense in which our day is never really done - it’s just preparation for tomorrow. The important thing is always to keep a sense of progression, so that the lessons of today make us wake up tomorrow a person better skilled to deal with whatever challenges the new day should bring.

Great day of filming back attack system in Boston: I returned to Boston today to reshoot the BACK ATTACKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM video instructional (another part of the ENTER THE SYSTEM series detailing the systems based approach to jiu jitsu that I teach to my students). The original filming suffered from the same audio issues as the original leg lock video so there was only one thing to do - start over again and do it right. Filming at Bernardo Faria’s academy in Boston all day today - just finished day one at 10pm and begin day two tomorrow at 8am. Can’t wait to show our approach to finishing from the back and change the game! Wishing you all the best from Boston and a happy Memorial weekend to all of you!

Georges St-Pierre on Joe Rogan experience: For those of you who have not heard, my student Georges St-Pierre @georgesstpierre
appeared on the world’s biggest podcast - The Joe Rogan experience @joerogan yesterday. Mr St-Pierre is usually very guarded during interviews, but Mr Rogan did an amazing job through his informal chat based method of getting this amazing athlete and human being to open up and tell his story in his own words to a greater degree than anyone has ever done in the past. All these years I have known what an incredible person, martial arts athlete and innovator Mr St-Pierre was - now you will see it too in this remarkable interview! Hats off to Mr Rogan for accomplishing what no one else could in showing the humor, interests and methods of this truly great MMA athlete. In less than six hours it already passed a million views. If you have time this weekend - check it out - it’s both a fascinating and funny expose of a great man; but also A STUDY OF THE MIND AMD MINDSET THAT MADE HIM GREAT, and thus of great value to all of you as you work towards your own goals and dreams - check it out!

Just got a sample clip of the new and improved LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM instructional video. This time they got it right with perfect sound quality and camera work and initial reviews have been significantly higher than any other in company history. In addition I added quite a lot of new material and presented at a faster pace to give the video a leaner and faster look with same overall length. Complete editing is estimated to be around two weeks. Anyone who bought will get it for free ( and keep access to the original Darth Vader/Bane voice version as well) and anyone buying now or in the future will also get both (though I suspect most will focus on the way more audio friendly second version 😉). I’m happy and proud to offer a video that has the best content now matched with excellent production value - link to buy is in the bio of my instagram if you are interested. Now I will do the same with Back Attack system (hopefully this weekend though I did have some relapse with my perennial body issues this week - hoping I’m good enough to go this weekend). Hope you all enjoy good sound quality and overall production/presentation improvements!

Closed wedges: The essential feature all of jiu jitsu is control that leads to submission - this is the foundation of my approach to the game. Any deviations from that mindset are abhorrent to me and my students. The most fundamental form of control is that over movement - AND THE MECHANICAL BASIS OF IMPEDING MOVEMENT IN JIU JITSU IS THE WEDGE. The human body can be positioned as a SET OF WEDGES around another body to restrict movement and make possible the control required for submissions. Our favorite form of wedges are double sided reinforced wedges. That is, wedges positioned on both sides of the limb or torso we are trying to control and where something locks the wedges in position. Usually BODYWEIGHT is the thing that locks wedges in place - That’s is how most conventional pins work - but ashi garami does not involve bodyweight since you are usually sitting on the floor when you apply it - so we need another method. That method is CLOSED WEDGES where ONE OF OUR LIMBS LOCKS OUR OTHER LIMB IN PLACE SO THAT THE WEDGES ARE REINFORCED BY YOUR OTHER ARM OR LEG AND NOT EASY FOR A RESISTING OPPONENT TO DISLODGE AND GET AROUND OR OVER. In the case of leg locking in particular we greatly favor locking our legs around an opponent’s leg either with crossed feet or triangled legs. Most of our favorite finishing positions have this feature. The highest ranked in our leg locking hierarchy are those variations within the cross ashi garami featuring triangled legs - we call these variations “inside sankaku” (inside triangle). Here, talented junior, Drew Hooper, takes a brilliant win last weekend at Rise Invitational 4 in Manhattan. Notice the extremely solid connection he has achieved with the use of this inside sankaku variation and how it immobilized even a tough, competitive opponent in a way that gives him very few defensive options. This is exactly the kind of leg and hip control you should be looking for as you make your progress in the leg game.

Victory for the Bronx Bombers: Those of you who have been following me for a while will know that every Monday night I travel up to the Bronx to teach at the academy of one of my first and best black belts, Doug Pelinkovic, who runs his own excellent academy @bxmartialarts Originally I started going there when Mr Pelinkovic was badly injured and saw the dedication of the students and stayed on after! Now fully recovered, Mr Pelinkovic does a very fine job of teaching his students our approach to the game. This last Friday night his extremely talented student, Stanley Rosa @stanleyrosa put on a superb display of submission directed jiu jitsu. Mr Rosa has built a tremendous game in a shockingly short time that is testimony to his hard work and learning capacity; and the teaching skill of Mr Pelinkovic. He has a distinctive movement style - like a leopard - that when combined with the mechanical tightness of our approach catches everyone’s eye. Enjoy this excellent display from over the weekend. Tonight I head up to see the Bronx team and hear the full story.

It’s a wrap folks!! Just finished a crazy weekend of filming the re-shoot of LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM in Boston. Two hectic days - eleven hours on Saturday and nine hours today to produce around 10 hours of video content. Filming went well - I added a lot of new content. We stay on many of the same techniques and topics as the first video, but with many additions. The general sense of the new video is a leaner, faster paced, more action oriented production. Of course you will also have full access to the original as well so you get both styles. Now I’m on the train back to NYC back before midnight and then it’s a long day tomorrow - 6am alarm and get home from work around 11pm - it’s a good thing I like what I do! 😜😜 It’s beautiful to take a train ride through New England at dusk in spring - always a reminder that there’s more to life than gyms and jiu jitsu. Next weekend I return to Boston and do it all again as I reshoot the entire Back Attack series (it had similar audio problems to the leg lock series). It’s tough, but not as tough as going to sleep knowing you didn’t give your best to get an important job done - so come next weekend - back on the train bound for Boston to get it right! Wishing you all the best from the tracks in New England 😊

Juniors take Manhattan: Outstanding squad juniors, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau had fine victories last night at Rise Invitational grappling 4. Mr Rosenthal won the multi grappler tournament - winning both his matches via heel hook and using one of his favorite cross ashi garami finishing sequences to devastating effect in the final against 10th Planet standout Rey Rey to win gold. In the nights headline superfight, Jason Rau took on the outstanding Mike Padilla and won via back strangle and showcase his impressive skills. So proud to these outstanding developing athletes using back and leg systems so well in competition and developing their resumes in spectacular fashion. Keep your eyes on these young men - their rate off progression is impressive!

Bound for Boston: Waiting at Penn Station in rush hour - always an experience wading through the Manhattan commuters as everyone flees work and spills out of the city for the weekend! My goal is a little different - I’m going TO work - about to completely re-do the entire leg lock instructional to overcome the audio problems and bring the production quality up to the standards of the content. Four hour train ride then two days of filming over ten hours of content/usually double that time of actual work, then four hours back to NYC Sunday night and then 6:30am start Monday finishing teaching around 10pm - should be quite a weekend! 😜😜 Looking forward to getting everything right this time!

Angle: The human body is set up to deal well with threats that are directly in front of it. It is very poorly adapted to deal with threats from BEHIND it. Thus in all forms of combat there is a constant battle to get to an advantageous position behind an opponent. We can’t always get fully behind a good opponent - they will always resist our attempts by constantly squaring up to us. That fine - you don’t have to get all the way behind to gain advantage - usually even GAINING AN ANGLE on an opponent - a PARTIAL movement towards the back - is enough to secure sufficient advantage to score in some fashion. ANGLE IS ONE OF THE BEST AND MOST READILY AVAILABLE FORMS OF ADVANTAGE IN ALL COMBAT SPORTS - YOU MUST DILIGENTLY TRAIN YOUR MIND AND BODY TO SEEK IT AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY AND TO SCORE FROM IT. One of the more obvious examples of angle advantage in jiu jitsu is standing guard passes, where an initial angle makes completing the task of passing the opponent’s guard much easier. Here, Nicky Ryan does a fine job of getting a good angle to set up a standing guard pass that puts his rival, Geo Martinez under strong pressure.

Experimenting: The single greatest means of creating innovation and positive change in your game is a sense of experimentation. THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF THE INNOVATIONS THAT I BOUGHT INTO THE GAME CAME FROM IMMERSING MYSELF IN A GIVEN POSITION/SCENARIO AND USING TRIAL AND ERROR TO FIGURE OUT OVER TIME ANSWERS TO THE VARIOUS PROBLEMS I HAD IN THAT POSITION. All that is required is a partner, time and thinking. The hard part will come afterwards- when you test your findings in live sparring. If an innovation shows potential- it will be subjected to further experimentation and testing until it either passes and is accepted or fails and is discarded. Most people use only two modes of training - drilling and sparring. Add a third - experimental problem solving - a hands on approach to solving the myriad puzzles of the sport that will make you a much more involved student of the sport and convert you from a passive learner to an active learner.

Big news on Leg lock instructional video - PART 2: I’ve always preached a commitment to excellence among my students- I wouldn’t be much of a coach if i didn’t follow my own advice. I would have done it this past weekend but I had a prior coaching commitment with Georges St-Pierre. I will also add new material not shown in first video and seek to improve my delivery of information to make a leaner and better viewing experience and help atone for the initial problem. Never having shot a video before I just assumed the production company would be the experts to trust with the technical matters while i did the coaching- I’m not sure what went wrong as even a simple phone camera takes better audio than some of the scenes on the instructional. I am greatly heartened by the many messages i have received from people who loved the content of the video and are seeing improvements in both their performance and understanding - now I hope to do even better by bringing production up to the same level 🤗🤗 Apologies to you all for the initial mishap and looking forward to setting it straight this weekend!

Big news for my leg lock instructional video - PART 1: Last week my leg lock instructional video was released and within hours became the biggest seller in BJJ Fanatics catalogue by a landslide. Unfortunately it has become apparent that certain aspects of the production quality - in particular the audio (but some other aspects too) were not up to acceptable standards. The general consensus is that the content is great but the sound production is at best adequate and at worst lame. While nothing is lost on the audio, it’s not fair to subject you all to my voice sounding like some leg locking mix of Darth Vader and Bane! It’s doubly unfortunate because the whole idea of the video was to be dialogue/concepts heavy rather than just another video with a collection of moves. If a viewer were watching for extended periods of time, say on a plane or train or just at home, it could definitely be distracting or annoying. I want people to ENJOY watching the video and repeat view/review often - not ENDURE watching the video because they really want to know the moves! BJJ Fanatics tried to get sound engineers to rectify the problem. The best they could do were slight improvements. I believe if there is a serious problem with something - attack the whole problem rather than put a band aid on it and pretend it’s not an issue. Accordingly I have decided to go up to Boston on the train this weekend and reshoot the entire video from start to finish and have BJJ Fanatics offer it free to all those of you who bought it (you will also be able to keep the original Bane voice version as well if you wish - Also anyone buying in the future will have access to both versions). In addition we will make some improvements based on my experience with the first shoot - two cameras this time instead of one and less zooming from main camera. Whenever my students make mistakes in competition I always tell them to work hard to improve and rectify the error. In this case a mistake was made - whose fault it was is unimportant- the bottom line is that my name is on the product and therefore the right thing for me to do is work hard to fix it.

Looking out over a crowded training hall - I am always struck by the thought that potential champions are everywhere - it’s just a matter of good coaching married to ambition and discipline that creates the actual champions. Most people have complex lives that take them in many different directions. Thus their ambitions in jiu jitsu are usually more modest, since they have other priorities and approach the sport as a recreation. That does not blind me to their potential however - I have recreational students who can give even champions a very hard time indeed on the mat. Never lose sight of the fact that we all have roughly the same potential to excel in the sport - the actual differences are mostly due to lifestyles choices and time committed to training. Have faith that even a recreational approach can produce a shockingly good student in time. Never think that because you are not a full time professional athlete that you cannot excel to a level that even the best will be impressed by.

Always training/always learning: So often I am asked how to increase progress in learning jiu jitsu. The real question they are asking is “how can i get good quickly?” While I definitely believe there are ways to learn more quickly than most, there is simply no getting around the fact that you will need to invest large amounts of time and effort if you wish to gain competence in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. The better question then, is not, “how do I get good quickly,” but rather, “how do I sustain progress over time.” The danger is that as time passes, progress can be destroyed in two main ways. First, by extended periods away from the mat. Second, by showing up and training without a clear sense of purpose for each session, just complacently showing up and thinking that’s enough. The first will cause you to lose skills you once had; the second will simply maintain whatever skills you do have and no more - guaranteeing a plateau in performance that can go on for months or even years. If you seek excellence - as time passes make a concerted commitment to the idea of MINIMIZING TIME OFF THE MAT AND MAXIMIZING THE VALUE OF YOUR TIME ON THE MAT. Do this by having at least one clear goal every time you go to train and a plan to work towards that goal - showing up is not enough to avoid stagnation. The single best example of this mindset in operation over long periods of time I ever saw was Georges St-Pierre. Despite winning the success that could have easily made anyone else kick back and relax, he trains constantly and learns constantly. This week he caught up with the squad and went though all the latest leg lock work. Now he is flying home to work with some European tournament Karate champions to work on distance and movement skills. This constant push for volume and progress in training is deeply impressive and an inspiration to us all.

Teaching seminars is one of my favorite ways of getting our message out to students outside our gym. I love the personal interaction and the novelty of it all for new students. Note that all my students, particularly Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and the Ryan brothers, Gordon and Nicky, can do just as good a job (in many ways better - as they do not have my physical limitations). We all love to teach when we travel. If this is something you are interested in at your school, contact us at our individual social media and make arrangements. We love to form a bond with the schools in which we teach - not just come in teach some moves and go home, but come back again often to check progress and see developments. For example, I often teach at Dynamixmma in Santa Monica, LA and work with Josh Fiore and Antoni Hardonk to keep them progressing forward in our approach to grappling and watch the progress of their students. If this kind of long term teaching relationship of our style is of interest to you and your school - contact us. We would love to share our knowledge and have you learn what we do and share it to your students. Our goal is create coaching bonds with schools that mean a student who wants to learn our approach to the game can join that school and be confident that he or she is learning the same technique and tactics that we employ in our own gym. Here, I run an enthusiastic group of students at dynamixmma LA through squad leg locking work - they did a great job of learning and improving their skills!

My teaching method - The dynamic problem/Systematic Solutions model: My proudest achievement as a coach is not the many prizes and accolades my students have won, but rather the fact that all of them are excellent teachers and innovators who can chart their own development once they reach a certain level. A large part of why they can do this is the general method of teaching i use and in which they all excel - the dynamic problem/systematic solutions method. Most of you know that I see the primary attribute that determines long term success or failure in jiu jitsu (and in almost everything else in life - thus making jiu jitsu a mirror to all our other activities and giving it a deeper meaning) is PROBLEM SOLVING. Jiu jitsu is more than anything, the act of solving problems under stress faster and more competently in a competitive race towards submission victory than your opponent. My teaching reflects this belief. I break jiu jitsu into skill areas/scenarios and look to see what is the central problem(s) in that area. Note immediately that all the problems of jiu jitsu are DYNAMIC problems. If I ask you what is 316 divided by 23 - this is a static problem - once the problem is stated, it does not change as you figure out the answer. In jiu jitsu, like any competitive game with a sentient resisting opponent, every attempt at a solution to the problems they present will be countered even as we are fighting for a solution. Thus the usual pattern is one of central problems rapidly being followed by subsequent problems as we offer solutions. This immediately gets us into a creative drive to research and find new solutions in an interlocking web that rapidly grows in complexity and size proportional to the skill level of our training environment and our imagination. THIS TEACHING METHOD IS WHAT GIVES RISE TO SYSTEM BUILDING AND PROGRESS. It is the basis of teaching methodology and it creates innovative self starting students who can think for themselves and ultimately go further than their teacher - the very purpose of teaching. Begin by seeing every situation in jiu jitsu AS A PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED - in time you will astounded by the structures you build in response.

Leg Lock Instructional Video - ON SALE NOW: Due to heavy demand BJJ Fanatics has decided to release my leg lock instructional series immediately (it was initially planned for tomorrow at 12pm) - it is fully available as of now in both Digital and DVD formats. It will feature a very comprehensive ten hour viewing deep into the system taught along the same theoretical/conceptual/practical lines I use with my students- the dynamic problem/systematic solutions model - very different from standard instructional format. It is designed to give you a training resource you can constantly refer back to for years of development and build an ability to ask questions, solve problems and become a creative problem solver, rather than simply copy some moves. (For those that prefer a shorter and simpler format, I can definitely do that in the future also) Hope you all enjoy it! I will post a link in my bio if you are interested in buying (please buy from link if possible). Thanks so much to all my teachers, mentors, students and followers who built this interest in new approaches to jiu jitsu! Back system series will be next!

Carrying weight: One of the single most important directives whenever working from bottom position underneath an opponent is this: SEEK ALWAYS TO MINIMIZE THE TIME AND EFFORT SPENT CARRYING YOUR OPPONENT’S WEIGHT. You must make a serious study of the methods and means of reducing your opponent’s ability to impose his weight upon you. This will mostly come down to postural, positional, gripping and tactical factors far to numerous and subtle to list but when they are absent you will immediately be aware as your workload under an opponent will double. Here, Nicky Ryan and Australian grappling superstar, Craig Jones experiment with weight bearing drills after class - note the different demands both athletes have due to their respective roles as top and bottom athlete and how this drastically influences their choices in posture, positioning and grip

Great day of teaching in LA at two of my favorite West Coast schools @5starmartialarts and @dynamixmma showing triangle and leg lock lock systems insights and techniques. We had to cap the dynamixmma seminar at one hundred people - it was wonderful seeing the big class going through some advanced leg lock work and perform it well - our Californian fans are getting the hang of this game!! 🤗🤗 We always love coming out to LA and meeting our friends and followers - always mixed feelings when I return of missing LA and yet happy to see my dedicated students back home in NYC. I shall go and catch the red eye home to be ready to teach the big Monday class at RGA - always a thrill to see the room packed with bodies and dreams - and the will to make them a reality. Thanks again to our gracious hosts and students in LA!!

Learning lessons: Gordon Ryan fought a tough match in his ACB debut against the very talented Vinny Magalhaes and lost a close points decision. Mr Magalhaes got a strong start with a nice guard pass early in the first round. Mr Ryan seemed to prevail in the closely contested action in the next two rounds with several strong leg lock attempts and off balances but could not translate it into points and so lost the decision based on the first round. All credit to Mr Magalhaes for a very good performance. For us - we will have to improve our adjustment to the new rule set and come back stronger next time. The good news is that It’s always an easier thing to fix tactics than technique - so we shall head back to the blue basement and work on that. Wishing you all the best from LA - hope you enjoyed the show! We are in the stands now watching Leandro Lo take on Gabriel Arges - so much talent on this card! Always great to see the super stars of the sport in one room and putting on a show!

Getting ready for the big show: Gordon Ryan and the great Vinny Margalhaes square off at the official ceremony for tomorrow’s ACB event. It will feature a three round match (five minutes per round) scored along IBJJF lines with heel hooks permitted and fitted into 10-9 scoring per round. Mr Magalhaes is a former ADCC champion and one of the most gifted heavyweights in the sport - this will be a tremendous challenge. The card is probably the best I ever saw - I have not seen this much ultra elite jiu jitsu talent in one room since the last ADCC. On this incredible card are jiu jitsu icons, Cyborg Abreau, Marcus Almeida, Leandro Lo, Gabriel Arges, Augusto Mendes, Keenan Cornelius, Yuri Simoes, Romulo Barra, Michael Langhi, Bruno Frazatto, Ari Farias, Edwin Najmi, Luis Panza, Erberth Santos- its like a team of jiu jitsu superheroes! Can’t wait to see what this collection of talent can produce tomorrow!

LA Seminars: I always love teaching on the road. This Sunday I teach two seminars - First is at @5starmartialarts Shawn Williams academy 10am-12pm focusing on Triangle (sankaku) system and its relationship to leg lock system. The second is at Dymanixmma @dynamixmma 2-5pm on cross ashi garami/inside sankaku aspects of leg lock system. Looking forward to showing our approach to the game once again to our LA friends. Note also Gordon Ryan will teach at @pkgla at 12pm That’s a lot of squad methodology for our loyal LA supporters! Hope to see you all and help to get our game to you and perhaps make it yours!

Spoiled brats on the loose in LA: Gordon Ryan and myself head down to train at Shawn Williams @5starmartialarts in a good friend’s McClaren 720 - the only thing scarier than this car’s power output is Gordon Ryan’s driving - here he is about to do another Mario Andretti impersonation 😨😨 Great training at Mr Williams’ academy today - now it’s back to LA home to plot and plan for Saturday and a lighter workout tonight. Wishing you all well from LA!!

LA Bound! At Newark airport getting ready to fly with Gordon Ryan and crew for his debut match on ACB against the Vinny Magalhaes. This weekend I shall teach seminars at Shawn Williams dojo @5starmartialarts and also at @dynamixmma Hoping to see our LA fans and students and show elements of our game 😊😊Gordon Ryan is wearing a Gucci fanny pack that puts mine to shame 😞😞 I am crestfallen. As soon as he falls asleep it’s mine!! See you all in LA!

Very happy to see my sensei, Renzo Gracie, announce that RGA will work with We Defy Foundation - a charitable organization that uses jiu jitsu training to help rehabilitate and improve the lives of injured US combat veterans throughout the nation. I have always believed that jiu jitsu can play a very positive role in our lives outside the dojo, but listening to the stories of returning disabled veterans took that to an entirely different level @wedefyfoundation made me look at the powers of jiu jitsu in a new light and with even greater optimism.

Incorporating systems into your game: I always enjoy coaching experienced athletes with a well established skill set that they have used for years and working with them to take on new skills and add them to their already existing skills as a means of increasing their effectiveness, or even just giving them the joy of new perspectives and skills on top of what they already know. My good friend, Tom DeBlass is a fine example. He has a highly successful game that he developed over many years of Training that saw him win US ADCC trials on many occasions and compete at the world championships on multiple occasions. As he saw the success of the squad (to whom he is very closely linked - he gave Garry Tonon his black belt and is a great mentor to Gordon and Nicky Ryan) he became interested in studying the various systems we employ. Being a skilled athlete with vast experience in jiu jitsu made it very easy for him to pick up the essential concepts and movements and very soon he started having success in the gym. This weekend at Fight2Win Pro Grappling in Philadelphia he went out with the intention of using that knowledge in classic squad style - sit and battle for inside position, then a fight to off balance the opponent (kuzushi) to get an opponent into vulnerable extended positions from where a solid connection via ashi garami can be attained - from there it’s a task of negating resistance, exposing the heel and then proper breaking mechanics. Mr DeBlass did exactly that - and in quick time - just thirty seconds in and victory via outside heel hook was his. It was a fine example off an athlete who had a certain skill set and added to it. If you have been studying jiu jitsu for some time, I am confident and infusion of our systems based approach can do similar things for you. Sometimes people think that my students became proficient because I began teaching them early - in fact I have had many athletes who started very late in their careers with me and had similar success at learning the various systems. Hats off to Mr DeBlass for taking on a new skill set that he did not need, but did so for the sake of knowledge and learning and did a fine job of demonstrating it.

Weekend of victory: Squad juniors, Frank Rosenthal and Jason Rau had a great weekend at Pilgrim Grappling Championships in Philadelphia over the weekend. They were the main event matches. Mr Rosenthal took on EBI Combat Jiu Jujitsu Champion Chad Georges and had a great victory in overtime using elements of our back system to lock in a winning strangle and continue his impressive win streak. Jason Rau won in regulation time via Kata Gatame strangle in regulation time over Quentin Rosenweig, a very tough EBI competitor. It’s great to see both athletes showing they are at that EBI level and rising fast. Outstanding female blue belt, Katya Leontyeva had a tremendous day, winning advanced category gold in both her weight and absolute divisions - every match by heel hook! Today Mr Rosenthal and Ms Leontyeva showed their impressive work ethic by coming back to the gym next day to help Gordon Ryan train in anticipation of his big match next weekend with the great Vinny Margalhaes in Los Angeles. Wonderful to see such progress and the work ethic that makes it possible.

Neiman Gracie wins again! Outstanding MMA jiu jitsu representative, Neiman Gracie extended his unbeaten record in fine style last night with another very impressive submission victory at Bellator 198 - taking out a very tough opponent with a beautiful kata gatame strangle in the second round. It was a great match to watch as Mr Gracie showed the various influences of his father, Marcio Stambowsky, his sensei, Renzo Gracie and Mentor Royce Gracie along with kickboxing coach Jamie Crowder in a very impressive blend that has produced an incredible winning streak that has taken him very close to title contention now. Well done Neiman Gracie!!

When it comes to fighting, most people think in terms of who is strongest, fastest, most athletic, bravest, toughest etc. These qualities are all very good, but the history of all modes of combat, whether individual or group, shows very clearly that the SMARTEST fighter, the one who employs his resources best and to greatest effect while avoiding harm, is the one who usually prevails. Therefore, make your primary commitment to be THE SMARTEST FIGHTER YOU CAN BE. The one who constantly looks to maximize damage to an opponent whilst minimizing damage to himself. Let THOUGHT be your first reflex when entering confrontation and KNOWLEDGE and SKILL your sword and shield before all other resources.

The essential skills of the leg lock system: You might be puzzled by the first two listed essential skills of the leg lock system - grip and inside position is the first, distance and connection is the second. In both cases TWO skills are listed. True - however, in practice those skills are so closely entwined that I usually teach them together and certainly in practice they are usually performed together- so for the sake of brevity I listed them as one skill (yes, brevity- sounds weird coming from me I know 😂😂) Here, Nicky Ryan goes through his grip and inside position drills with Garry Tonon just prior to his winning performance at Kasai Grappling 2. Note how inside position with the feet and a preliminary grip have been attained at the same time to lessen reaction time for his opponent and set up his ability to go to the next step. Seen in this light, you will see heel hooking as we do - as a PROCESS rather than a MOVE. There is a chain of skills where the preceding skill must be completed before the next can be attempted. All my students are highly adept at at working methodically through this process even against tremendous pressure. In this way even skilled resistance can be overcome and victory attained

Open wedges/closed wedges: an important principle of my leg lock system is the closed wedge principle. Ashi garami is essentially a set of wedges around your opponent’s leg and hips. Like most examples of wedging in jiu jitsu, it is designed to INHIBIT MOVEMENT so that you can more easily break your opponent. As a general rule I have a preference for CLOSED wedges over open wedges when it is time to break someone. In practical terms, this means that ONE OF MY LIMBS MUST REINFORCE THE POSITION OF THE OTHER, LOCKING IT IN PLACE SO THAT AN OPPONENT CANNOT EASILY SEPARATE THE WEDGES AND ESCAPE. There are a vast number of ashi garami variations out there, but if you observe my students in operation you will see immediately that whenever they are in a tough match with a skilled opponent, they will go back to the strength and security of closed wedge variations of ashi garami where their legs lock around their opponent with crossed feet or triangled legs. This adds greatly to the tightness of the control. Our two favorite and strongest finishing positions at the top of the breaking hierarchy both feature closed/reinforced wedges - in the case of straight ashi garami variations we favor outside ashi garami. In the case of cross ashi garami variations we favor versions of inside sankaku. Both lock the attacker very securely to the opponent and thus can generate truly intimidating power. Are closed wedges always necessary? No - you can get a lot of success without them up to a certain level. If your opponent is perhaps inexperienced in avoiding heel hooks, then open versions of ashi garami can work just fine- but when you are in a serious struggle against a skilled opponent - work with the security, safety, strength and power of closed wedges when possible.

The leg lock system instructional: There are many different ways to present my approach to leg locking to students. Initially I thought it best to do so in a simple and brief introduction video - show some important moves and counter moves, in the standard format for jiu jitsu instructionals. The more I thought about, the less happy I was with that idea. That was not how I taught my own students. I got so many requests over the last few years to go and teach in many locations, also many visitors here in NYC asked for instruction - but I am one person with some rather serious physical issues and can’t reach many more people - so I thought about teaching a video that would be quite different from the norm- a video where I went in much greater depth using my preferred style of teaching, the scenario/problem/solutions model that I use with my own students. This is a difficult thing to present on video and puts much greater demands on the viewer than regular videos, where the viewer just passively watches some moves and seeks to copy them. Here, I am looking to present a complete working method for leg locking and give the viewer UNDERSTANDING rather than mimicry. My proudest achievement as a coach is to have produced students who were independent, innovative problems solvers who can teach as well as they compete - I don’t want to produce robots. My goal is to do the same with you. The simplest way to state the structure of my system is as follows. It consists of six essential and sequential skills, manifested in three distinct yet linked sub systems, each of which presents at least one central problem along with subsequent problems as the system unfolds; and is given its character by around ten core principles/axioms. This is the way I taught my students and they rapidly became the best leg lockers in the world. It did not create just one good leg specialist, but a ROOMFUL of them, across all weight divisions and body types. If you can invest time, patience and study into it, I believe it can work for you to. LEG LOCKS: ENTER THE SYSTEM will be released soon by BJJ Fanatics

Moves and movement: Jiu Jitsu is usually taught as MOVES. However, every MOVE presupposes that you are capable of the physical MOVEMENTS that underlie that move. The better your capacity to control and direct the movements of your OWN body, the better will be your ability to perform the moves that will enable you to control and direct the movements of ANOTHER PERSONS body. Therefore, take as much pride and interest in your ability to move yourself around the mat as you do in moving an opponent - your performance of the latter will improve in relation to the former. Whatever your age, physical limitations etc, there is always some way that you can increase or improve your own capacity for movement. Whatever gains you make in this area, no matter how small, will aid you in your quest to perform well the many moves of jiu jitsu and thus move and control another person - the ultimate goal of the sport.

In all combat two things are required for victory - the necessary SKILLS and the CONFIDENCE to use them to their full effect. One without the other is worthless. Confidence without skills is merely delusion. Skill without confidence is like unspent money, it’s value is never actualized. When skill and confidence meet, magic can happen.

Ideal positioning and less than ideal: When we first begin to learn a move it is wise to begin study under ideal conditions - your body well aligned in the preferred position for that particular move. In competition and sparring however, IN THE MAJORITY OF CASES YOU WILL HAVE TO PERFORM YOUR MOVES IN LESS THAN IDEAL POSITIONS AND ORIENTATIONS THAT NATURALLY OCCUR WITH MAXIMUM RESISTANCE. As such, we often practice finishes in a range of different orientations - belly up, belly down, inverted, rolling through etc etc. In this way there are no surprises on match day - you will be prepared for any contingency as you go in to finish your move. Here, Frank Rosenthal easily adapts to a belly down rolling situation when he needed to - finishing a fine inside heel hook at Kasai Grappling Championship in fine style - strong preparation in non ideal scenarios made for a flawless finish against strong resistance.

Back attacks: As most of you know, I put a VERY heavy emphasis on back attacks in my coaching of jiu jitsu. In my opinion, the back represents the safest place to be both in grappling and fighting and offers the most high percentage and effective submission attacks, thus do I favor it above even the mounted position and all other dominant pin positions. When I look at modern jiu jitsu I see many talented athletes who are extremely good at GETTING TO and MAINTAINING the back position. But many people struggle to FINISH from the back, particularly without the gi. Part of the reason is the lack of incentive to train finishes. In truth, there is little incentive to train hard on back finishes for a simple reason. If you have taken your opponent’s back then you have scored four points - the maximum in the sport. In most cases you have probably also scored takedown, passing and other pin points as well - so in most cases you will be far ahead on points by the time you get to the back position and thus very likely to win anyway, so there is no need to finish. That all changed with the rise of submission grappling events, where getting someone’s back meant nothing - NOW YOU HAD TO FINISH FROM THE BACK. Many elite athletes really struggled with this, as the evidence of EBI overtime’s will attest. My approach to the back puts equal emphasis upon GETTING TO, MAINTAINING and FINISHING from back position, rather than focusing mostly upon the first two and assuming the third is just a bonus because the match will be won on points anyway. When it comes to finishing skills, I strongly emphasize two crucial themes. The first is an in-depth hand fighting system arranged in a hierarchy designed to pin an opponent’s defensive arms. The second is auxiliary subsystems designed to allow you to ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY rather than restrict yourself to mostly the neck. These two themes are often exhibited by my students in competition and have led to many of their greatest successes. Here, Gordon Ryan, a young master of back attacks, shows his hand fighting skills as he prepares the way for a strangulation in training.

The separation principle: My leg lock system has around ten core principles that give it its character. One of those principles is the separation principle. This is the idea that if we are to excel in leg locking we must separate the mechanism of CONTROL (Ashi Garami) from the mechanism of BREAKING (the heel hook, toe hold, Achilles lock etc). As a general rule we favor implementing the control mechanism first and the breaking mechanism second - though there are some exceptions to that rule. Once you start to implement the separation principle, interesting things start happening. You can start holding and pinning opponents with the Ashi Garami for long periods of time, switching from one form of Ashi Garami to another - in other words - USING ASHI GARAMI AS A TYPE OF PIN - EXACTLY AS YOU WOULD USE DIFFERENT UPPER BODY PINS IN CONVENTIONAL JIU JITSU. You will see that there is a hierarchy among the various ashi garami variations, just as there is among upper body pins; and that you can hold them at will and establish your control/position prior to attempting the submission- just as you would for upper body pins. Thus the separation principle opens the door for a control/positional approach to leg locking that in some important ways mirror the basic philosophy and methodology of classic BJJ. Here, Nicky Ryan drills ashi garami variations with senpai Garry Tonon shortly before his victory over Geo Martinez. Note how he has established complete control over both legs (double trouble principle) in ways that enable him to dominate movement while not even concerned with breaking - that comes later - at a time and intensity of his choosing, since he is in complete control of his partners movement.

A word of thanks to show promotions: I think of all the jobs in grappling, the toughest and most difficult may be one that no one talks about - producing a big show. To put on a jiu jitsu event requires enormous amounts of planning, time and expense. There are so many things that can go unexpectedly wrong and good plans become a disaster. I see enough of the backstage drama and difficulties to be thankful that my coaching job is so simple in comparison! WITHOUT SHOW PROMOTERS ALL THE DREAMS AND GOALS OF THE ATHLETES AND THE DEDICATION OF THE SUPPORTING FANS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE. I always appreciate the efforts of the promoters - they give a stage upon which dreams can be built. I always laugh when I hear people talk about a squad rivalry with 10th Planet and Eddie Bravo. Nothing could be further from the truth. Without Eddie Bravo’s groundbreaking decision to take the risk of a high production show with large viewership and its own rule set, we would all still be a bunch of no name dorks squeezing each other’s legs in my sensei’s basement. I never forget that and am always grateful for his efforts. No promotion will ever be perfect or satisfy all the viewers tastes - that’s why it’s good to have choices. But all the main shows, ADCC, EBI, IBJJF, ACB, Fight2Win, Polaris, Rizin, Global Grappling League, Sapeteiro and yes, even metamoris - did so much to boost the brands of the athletes and take the sport forward. I am so happy to see a new contender among the big shows, @kasaigrappling In only their second show they have greatly impressed me with their production value and athlete recruitment. Led by Rolles Gracie and Rich Byrne, one a former athlete himself, the other a formidable businessman and both deeply passionate about advancing the sport, they have created a top level show in our hometown NYC that is letting both international and local athletes work towards their dreams. From the squad - thanks so much to all the promoters who gave our athletes a chance to show our approach to the game and create change in jiu jitsu and congratulations to new kid on the block, Kasai Grappling for their outstanding work so far. Thank you all.

Develop one strong threat first and build upon that: A key theme of my teaching is that once an athlete becomes proficient in the fundamentals of jiu jitsu (there is no getting around this - the fundamentals are the heart and soul of the sport and any deficiencies in this regard will quickly be revealed in competition) IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT YOU DEVELOP ONE STRONG MEANS OF ATTACK THAT WILL PUT FEAR AND RESPECT IN YOUR OPPONENTS MIND. If you present no threat to an opponent, he will open up his full game upon you, but if he fears certain things, he will close down areas of his game and restrict himself to stay away from that threat of yours. You will find in time that you have a propensity for certain kinds of attack - what it is is not important- some of you will develop an unstoppable sweep, others a powerful takedown, a devastating arm lock - anything that can win a match and which you perform very well will do. For me, it is leg attacks and back attacks. All my students are very strong in this regard. I like them because they are almost always available and create very strong defensive reactions that lead into many other forms of attack. The results of successful leg and back attacks are usually devastating and have a strong intimidation factor that can be exploited as opponents react defensively. Once you develop that first strong threat, you can build organically from there as there will be natural follow ups - but start with one. Here, Nicky Ryan explodes from bottom into an arm drag that exposes the back of Geo Martinez- forcing a strong defensive reaction and adjustments in posture and positioning that he could exploit later in the match with another of his favorite attack methods - the triangle (sankaku) - a fine example of a strong initial threat creating opportunities for another further down the road.

Getting it right: Talented and industrious squad junior, Frank Rosenthal had a superb performance Saturday night at @kasaigrappling championships winning via inside heel hook. You can see him perform flawlessly many of the central themes of our approach to the leg locking game - a fine ankle lace ashi garami ties his opponent up and immobilizes him to allow transitions to a tight closed wedge (in this case, inside sankaku) around the hip and then perfect head position to generate heel exposure on a now stationary target - result? A completely controlled submission on a tough and skillful opponent from 10th Planet who simply runs out of defensive options as the system unfolds on stage. Great result for Mr Rosenthal in his best performance so far and a great example to the other juniors and classmates and indeed, all of you, in the calm and disciplined execution of well rehearsed skills in a pressure situation.

Nicky Ryan and the power of sankaku (triangle): Many of you will remember that a BIG part of my teaching is concerned with the use of WEDGES as one of the key elements in my approach to jiu jitsu. Wedges are useful for many things, but primarily to RESTRICT MOVEMENT. As much as I like wedges, I have a strong preference for a certain type of wedge. Most wedges used in jiu jitsu are OPEN WEDGES - but whenever possible, I prefer CLOSED (reinforced) WEDGES. This is when your limbs are locked together around an opponent so THAT ONE LIMB REINFORCES THE POSITION OF THE OTHER FOR ADDED TIGHTNESS AND CONTROL. You will notice that most of my favorite finishing positions involve the use of closed (reinforced) wedges. So in my leg lock system the preferred breaking positions involve locking our legs together around an opponent’s leg - inside sankaku and outside ashi garami are two well known examples that you will often see my students using. In the case of upper body submissions, I greatly favor the use of triangle locks as they are fine examples of closed wedges around the head and one arm that present a dual threat of strangle and arm lock. Moreover, it features the strength of both my legs against an opponent’s neck and one arm - an obvious imbalance. In this way you can see it is a particularly good way for smaller and weaker athletes to handle stronger athletes. The primary problem presented by the Geo Martinez match for Nicky Ryan was the obvious strength disparity between a mature athlete with great gymnastics background versus a sixteen year old boy. As such, sankaku training was a huge part of his training. Tactically, strong threats to the legs that created reactions that would lead to sankaku and vice versa were the theme of the camp. All my students excel at sankaku, but the Ryan brothers are particularly adept. Indeed, they have their own sequence from the position we call “the Ryan roll.” What an experience it was to watch this wunderkind hit exactly the tactics and techniques he worked so hard on in camp and show everyone again the remarkable property of sankaku as a means of victory over a stronger opponent - a lesson to us all! Photo Jeff Chu

Victory in NYC! Nicky Ryan won his grappling superfight versus the very tough and distinguished Geo Martinez tonight in NYC. He won a unanimous decision and in the final seconds had a fully locked triangle from the back (an advanced element of the back attack system) and appeared moments from a decisive submission victory. In addition he appeared to have the stronger submission attempts throughout the match, along with more positional reversals. It was a truly remarkable performance from this young man. He went through a tough training camp and tonight on the big stage he did everything he trained for perfectly. He has a maturity and elan that is truly remarkable for a man his age. Eddie Cummings won a hard fought decision over the very talented Renato Canuto as he had the better submission attempts and overall aggression. Frank Rosenthal has his best performance ever with a beautiful heel hook victory over 10th Planet stand out Zach Malany in one of the nights highlight moments. I am so proud of these remarkable athletes here in front of their home crowd. Bless you all from NYC! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Go Eddie! Had a great time at RGA this afternoon teaching the Saturday class usually taught by Eddie Cummings - obviously he is busy with the big show @kasaigrappling tonight, but all his loyal students can in and it was great running them through some leg lock material - here we all after class - wishing Eddie the best for tonight! See you all at the big show!

The purpose of the instructional video: My intention in releasing an instructional video series is to
1 - To provide a very comprehensive guide to the core insights and techniques that was shown to the squad and which they had so much success with in competition. I believe teaching a wider audience can create beneficial change in the sport. The idea was to take someone who perhaps lacked access to instruction in leg locking and “start them on the right track” all the way from initiating contact with an opponent to getting a submission against strong resistance.
2 - To enable anyone who was already experienced in jiu jitsu to quickly add on skills from a niche area (leg locks for example) and add them easily to the game they already have spent years practicing. I was very happy to have Bernardo Faria as part of the project because he already has a tremendous world championship winning game - you will see how he can easily add on leg locking skills to an already well developed game.
3 - to change the game of video instructionals. Usually an athlete shows some favorite moves and you try to learn the ones that suit you. My intention is to show a much more CONCEPTUAL approach whose aim is to make you understand the central PROBLEMS of leg locking and a METHODOLOGY OF FINDING SOLUTIONS. The idea is to make you into an independent problem solver who can understand the problems and has a method to figure out solutions. I will show many of my solutions - but do so in a way that will hopefully allow you to gain the ability to figure out your own as well. I want to make students into PROBLEM SOLVERS rather than COPIERS. This does mean the series is much longer than most and requires more viewer patience/interaction. I wanted to teach at the same level of conceptual detail that I taught the squad - that requires more from the viewer but will allow those with the desire and patience to get to a MUCH higher level than merely copying some moves. For those of you who prefer a simpler, shorter and condensed summary of my leg locking game (and many people do better with that kind of instruction) I would be happy to provide a condensed version in the future.

Teaching a wider audience - launching an instructional video series: For twenty years I have taught in the dojo of my sensei, Renzo Gracie. In that time I have had the honor of teaching packed classes and great athletes, but always I was limited to teaching whoever was in front of me. As a result I had a big influence on a small number of people. The most I could do was occasional touring seminars where I could reach a new audience for a few hours. People have often asked me to come and teach but I am only one person and usually preoccupied with my students next bout. Things got worse when my body started failing and my ability to travel and teach was further diminished. My crippled leg has deteriorated to a point where I have to get a knee replacement on the same side as my hip replacement and there are serious doubts about my ability to demonstrate moves if I do this. I feel that my students have done an incredible job of showing my ideas to the world in the heat of top level competition. Many of you have requested teaching but my limitations as an individual with body issues have made that impossible. My good friend, Bernardo Faria, World jiu jitsu Champion, encouraged me to reach a wider audience than the blue basement in NYC through video. I am happy to announce a soon to be released video production with Mr Faria and Micheal Zenga with BJJ Fanatics featuring my leg lock and back attack systems. If people find the material interesting, we can definitely go on to look at many other aspects of our approach to jiu jitsu, but Most Enquiries I received for instruction were leg locking and back attacks - so I started there. Last weekend we went through a marathon filming session showing the complete ashi garami leg lock system - be warned - this thing is so long and complete it makes my instagram posts look short!! 😂😂 I wanted to show the core concepts, tactics, philosophy and techniques that you have all seen my students apply so brilliantly over the years. I wanted to thank Mr Faria and Mr Zenga for their encouragement and guidance on the project. I hope you will enjoy a look at the squad training methodology - more details soon!

Insight, BJ Penn and my back attack system: As many of you know, I am a huge believer in the idea that someone can have a massive influence upon you even when you met them very briefly, or even without ever meeting them. This is done through the power of INSIGHT. Someone can give you a critical insight, some idea that changes your point of view in some significant way that inspires you to change direction and change how you do things. For example, I met Dean Lister once and he gave me a new perspective with a single sentence that changed my jiu jitsu forever. Another huge influence on my jiu jitsu comes from the oddest source - BJ Penn. Mr Penn was in opinion, one of the absolute most skilled and talented MMA fighters of his generation. On two occasions he fought my student, Georges St-Pierre. Both were epic matches in very different ways. In preparation for those matches I studied Mr Penn’s game to help construct a plan of operations. I was extremely impressed by Mr Penn’s use of his legs to trap the arms of his opponents to facilitate strangling them. Now Mr Penn was a man of extraordinary flexibility. Experimentation quickly showed that his arm trap position was very effective, but that few people had the necessary flexibility to employ it as he did. As it turned out, he was never able to get those positions when he fought Mr St-Pierre, but I did not forget how effective that technique was. I immediately began working on means of controlling and trapping arms from rear mount in ways that did not require flexibility. A sophisticated and intricate system of hand trapping patterns and grip nuances quickly got great results. In time I added four auxiliary back subsystems to the main hand fighting system so that the WHOLE BODY could be attacked, rather than just the neck. When the squad rose to prominence, they all proved highly adept at back attacks and the senior students, in particular Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Eddie Cummings, all added key features and insights. The irony is that the entire project started from observing a rival to one of my students, a man I never actually met, but whose insight and example inspired greatly me.

Hanging out with the old gang: At a friends book signing party in downtown Manhattan tonight and ran into two of my favorite people in grappling - Eddie Cummings and Ottavia Busia - Mr Cummings took a short break from training in preparation for Kasai Grappling this weekend where he and Nicky Ryan have exciting super fight action against very tough opponents. He is in great shape and working hard on new elements of his ever developing game and brand. Also looking significantly more stylish these days too! 😳😳 make sure you tune in for @kasaigrappling this weekend in NYC! Should be a great weekend of action!

Balance: One of the key attributes and skills you must develop as you train is a sense of balance. Your ability to transition smoothly from one move to another is vital to your ability to succeed, as no one move will enable you to defeat skilled opponents, rather, moves applied in smooth SEQUENCES will be the means to victory. YOUR ABILITY TO GO EFFICIENTLY FROM ONE MOVE TO ANOTHER IN STANDING AND TOP POSITION, IS ENTIRELY DEPENDENT UPON YOU BEING IN GOOD BALANCE. Any failure in your balance will require you to first correct your balance before you can move on to the next technique. This will give your game a stuttering and clumsy appearance and make it easy for an opponent to seize the initiative during those times when you are trying to recover balance. Developing the skill of KEEPING YOUR CENTER OF GRAVITY INSIDE YOUR BASE OF SUPPORT AT ALL TIMES is thus crucial to your development. Begin this development while drilling your top game. Pay particular attention to the position of your head position and posture and understand that static balance is not the goal - rather, DYNAMIC BALANCE- the ability to hold balance throughout movement, is the skill you are developing. Here, Oliver Taza displays excellent balance whilst working inside an opponent’s guard - this will enable him to calmly identify his next step in the midst of the action and go immediately to it without delay

The underlying essentials never change: Obviously the sport of mixed martial arts is radically different from grappling. Yet there is a definite sense in which the basic demands of all combat sports are the same - only the means of expressing them are different. I find it helps athletes who are making the crossover to teach them in terms of those shared foundational principles so that the many SHARED elements of the different sports are emphasized rather than the many DIFFERENCES. It does not matter whether we are punching, kicking, clinching, performing takedowns or grappling on the floor - gaining angle on my opponent towards his back will constitute advantage. By constantly emphasizing that concept in grappling training, it becomes easy to teach applications of the same principle to that athlete in the new context of striking. Here, just days before his MMA debut in Thailand, Garry Tonon works to find and exploit advantageous angle to punch, just as he did for years to enter into submissions- different context - same principle

Enjoying the show: Great UFC tonight in Brooklyn NY. Another very impressive showing by Khabib Nurmagomedov and Zabit Magomedsharipov to show the depth of Russian talent in MMA. Also another tremendous performance by Rose Namajunas to retain her belt in a great boxing vs Muay Thai stylistic match up. Here I am relaxing with my friend, World jiu jitsu champion, Bernardo Faria, who enjoyed his first UFC live show - always a great experience! Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Controlling movement: A central feature of all good jiu jitsu is that of learning to control an opponent’s ability to move. The best athletes can reduce an opponent’s ability to move to that of a puppet, whose every move is determined by the strings to which he is bound and whose every motion is wholly determined by the puppet master. Note that it is not always possible or even desirable to completely STOP an opponent’s movement - often it is enough, or even better to DIRECT an opponent’s movement - controlling the speed and direction in which he goes. This theme of beginning with stopping, restraining, slowing or directing movement is a central feature of my approach to leg locking. Until you have the ability to restrict or control MOVEMENT, the application of the locks is very difficult against skilled opposition. That is why we strongly separate the mechanism of CONTROL (the ashi garami variations), from the method of BREAKING (usually heel hooks, but there are others). The ashi garami holds an opponent in place long enough for a breaking force to be applied to the leg. What was different about our approach is that multiple ashi garamis were used in a sequence to perform a single lock. At least one of those ashi garami had RESTRAINT OF MOVEMENT as its main task. Probably the most recognized is the ankle lace ashi garami that ties an opponent’s legs together in a way that makes effective movement extremely difficult and sets up some particularly punishing leg attacks. Here, Georges St-Pierre works on binding the ankles together as a prelude to a heel hook variation.

Leg lock mastery and the percentage principle: When I was a beginner in jiu jitsu leg locks had a subversive and mysterious aura to them. There were some people who were considered experts in the field. The criteria by which people were judged as expert was typically THE NUMBER OF LEG LOCKS THEY KNEW. If one person knew ten leg locks and another knew one hundred, the second man was the expert. Consider the work of my students - NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF THE VICTORIES MY STUDENTS HAVE HAD IN COMPETITION AND IN THE GYM - AND NO ONE HAS HAD MORE LEG LOCK VICTORIES OR AT SUCH A HIGH LEVEL - HAVE COME FROM TWO LEG LOCKS - the outside heel hook and the inside heel hook. Probably one of the biggest effects upon leg locking that I have had is to change people’s perceptions about what constitutes leg lock mastery. Rather than see it in terms of the number and variety of leg locks known and performed, I SEE IT IN TERMS OF MASTERING ONLY THE MOST HIGH PERCENTAGE MOVES AND FOCUSING UPON THEM - EMBEDDING THEM IN SOPHISTICATED SYSTEMS OF OPERATIONS THAT TAKE AN ATHLETE FROM THE BEGINNING OF A MATCH TO THE END. Thus mastery is about the DEPTH OF THE SUPPORT SYSTEMS AROUND A FEW HIGH PERCENTAGE LEG LOCKS, RATHER THAN NUMBER AND EXTENT OF THE LEG LOCKS THEMSELVES. I really only teach five ashi garami based leg locks in a serious fashion, along with a few non ashi garami leg locks, and of those five, the overwhelming majority of my time is spent on just two - and from those two came a success rate that changed the direction of jiu jitsu over the last five years. I could teach you a hundred interesting and exotic leg locks - and it would do little or nothing to improve your performance on the mat - or I could teach you two bio-mechanically sound leg locks embedded in systems that could get you to those locks and keep you there against strong resistance - the second option will make you a real master of leg locking - the first will not.

Globetrotting grappler: One of my favorite people in professional grappling is Aussie superstar, Craig Jones. This remarkable young man travels the world for competition, seminars and training. He is a great example of the martial arts ideal of a killer on the mat, but an absolute gentleman off the mat. I had a great time teaching in Australia last time visiting family and had a great experience at Mr Jones’ gym, @absolutemmamelb in Melbourne, so whenever Mr Jones is in town I always like to return the favor. Today he had some great training sessions with young Nicky Ryan. Both Athletes are getting ready for the upcoming @kasaigrappling show in NYC in two weeks- prior to that Mr Jones will fly to Japan to compete and then back to NYC! I don’t know anyone who travels so far so often as this man! Here, Messrs Jones and Ryan relax after working their half guard leg lock entries and sparring rounds.

Close relatives: sometimes there are moves and skills that are so closely related to each other that they simply cannot be taught apart from each other, but instead should be taught as one. An example is juji gatame (the arm bar) and the triangle (sankaku). WHENEVER YOU HAVE ONE, YOU HAVE THE OTHER. Thus I teach them as one unified system. Here, MMA athlete, Asim Zaidi, who often travels to NYC to train submission skills with the squad, shows the results of that approach with a fine interplay between arm bar and triangle attacks as he gets a good win against an EBI veteran in a local grappling match.

Eddie Cummings back to center stage: The Wolverine, Eddie Cummings, one of the most skilled submission hunters I ever had the pleasure of working with, will return to the big show - headlining the @kasaigrappling Kasai Pro 2 event in NYC on April 14. He will take on the extremely impressive Renato Canuto at 160 pounds in a fifteen minute super fight with no points for first ten minutes and then a shift to points in last five minutes. Mr Canuto greatly impressed everyone at the previous Kasai Show, beating out a stacked field with exceptionally dynamic movement both standing and on the ground and showing equal ability in both positional play and submissions. This will be a great clash of very different styles. Mr Canuto is a master of generating movement, but Mr Cummings is, like all my students, trained primarily in disrupting and inhibiting movement,
This should lead to a fascinating match. Mr Cummings has been working hard developing his own brand over the last year independently of the squad, but still very much a flag bearer of the submission grappling/attack the whole body and one of the greatest products of the blue basement. In addition, several of the juniors (kohai) will compete in the card - I will talk about that soon. Looking forward to another great night of grappling in NYC in this very impressive emerging show!

Getting hands taped for the first time: A first MMA fight is never an easy thing. When camp begins, most of the problems are physical - the sheer volume of work is staggering. Much of that work is new, so it has a clumsy, unfamiliar feeling about it. There are myriad small injuries from the punishing training and you don’t have time to let them heal so they accumulate over the camp. As The first fight get closer, hard physical training is reduced and usually avoided altogether in the last week. That’s when the mental problems start. Self doubt, confidence issues, concerns about the opponent’s strength relative to your weaknesses - they all come out. Often they reach a peak in the warm up room. Here, Garry Tonon gets his hands wrapped and certified for the first time just prior to his debut fight last week in Thailand. I remember once at a UFC event, a young fighter in his first event was getting his hands wrapped professionally for the first time and was greatly impressed by the result off having a real professional tape up his fists. When it was done he jumped up and yelled, “my hands feel like they have been dipped into steel!!! When I hit that f**ker he’s going to wake up with a busted face and broken jaw!” The professional hand wrapper looked casually at him and quietly remarked, “I wrapped the other guys hands the same way ten minutes ago...” i usually find that the nervousness peaks at the hand wrapping - why? Because, once the hand wrap is complete - THE ACTIVITY OF WARM UP BEGINS, and PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY is the single best antidote to fear and nervousness that I know of. Shortly after this picture was taken, Mr Tonon went through a solid warm up that brought together all the main themes of the camp helped reduce the natural feelings of nervousness you would expect in a debut MMA performance. Always remember - WHEN YOU FEEL NERVOUS PRIOR TO AN EVENT OF ANY KIND - PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY RELATED TO THE TASK BEFORE YOU WILL HELP YOU MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE.

Why don’t you just call it a honey hole (or 411, or saddle or whatever) like everyone else? Often people ask me why I insist upon a large array of names for moves that most people describe with a single well known name. My reasoning is easy to understand. FOR ANY GIVEN MOVE, THERE WILL BE MANY VARIATIONS WITHIN THAT MOVE - each will have different strengths and weaknesses and areas of application. FAILURE TO UNDERSTAND THOSE DIFFERENCES WILL LEAD TO INAPPROPRIATE APPLICATIONS THAT WILL LOWER MY PERFORMANCE. Let’s look at a simple example. A friend calls me and says he needs me to come over with a screw driver and remove some screws. Being completely naive with regards screwdrivers and handyman work in general, I naively reach into a tool box and grab a screwdriver and head over. Given that there are several different types of screwdrivers/screws used out there - I HAVE PROBABLY CONDEMNED MYSELF TO FAILURE BEFORE I EVEN BEGIN THE TASK. As any task becomes more complex - THIS MUST BE REFLECTED IN THE LANGUAGE USED TO DESCRIBE YOUR ACTIONS AND THOUGHTS AS YOU PERFORM THAT TASK. If I have only a single term to cover a wide array of variations of a move, MY THOUGHTS AND ACTIONS WILL REFLECT MY LINGUISTIC NAIVETY WITH A NAIVE PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE OF THE TASK. If I have only one word to describe a given color, “red” - how good do you think my ability to paint a picture of a scene accurately compared with another person who distinguishes crimson, scarlet, magenta, maroon, garnet, cherry red etc etc will be? The language you use to describe your actions to yourself and others will set the limit on your ability to think about, reason, describe and distinguish the variations within a move that HAVE A GENUINE EFFECT UPON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE MOVE. Here, Georges St-Pierre works one variation of an inside heel hook with an inside sankaku/outside foot leg position that offers some mechanical advantages along with some disadvantages - being able to distinguish this from the many other variations lets me exploit those advantages when i can - a more sophisticated terminology helps us make and describe those distinctions to ourselves and others - greatly speeding learning

Most people teach heel hooks simply as a MOVE. I always teach it as a SEQUENCE. A sequence that begins long before the heel hook is applied and where the majority of time is spent upon INHIBITING MOVEMENT through the use of wedges and biomechanics and where breaking the opponent is usually no more than an afterthought...

Hey gang! We’re heading home! At Bangkok’s international airport waiting for our twenty hour flight home with Nicky Ryan who must now get home to train in preparation for his super bout with the outstanding Geo Martinez in just less than three weeks,
along with his proud Dad. Mr Tonon will stay in Bangkok a few days to enjoy a well deserved rest after a very arduous camp. I am planning on getting back to NYC Monday morning and going straight to RGA to teach the Monday afternoon class and then the Bronx bombers at night. Let’s get the blue basement cracking like electricity and build the heat that forges champions! Barring any airport delays I will be there and need you all to turn that spark into a flame - many competitions coming up and victory goes to those who work hard and smart. See you all in the dungeon ☠️☠️☠️

A word of thanks: Part 2: Thanks to Mr Tonon’s family, especially Mom, who did such an amazing job raising this young man and fully support him through thick and thin, traveling all the way to Thailand to support him. Thanks to my sensei, Renzo Gracie, who gives us a space to train and freedom to develop so the athletes can progress towards their dreams. Thank you to One FC for believing in Mr Tonon’s potential and giving him a chance to showcase his hard work on the international stage. And thanks so much to you, my dear readers, who follow our exploits, tolerate our foibles and share our vision of grappling and martial arts in ways that motivate us and makes us try even harder. Bless you all from Bangkok - sorry for long double post - there are so many to thank!

A word of thanks: Part 1: Being a small part of Garry Tonon’s preparation for his winning MMA debut was a great coaching experience and to see him successfully execute many of the central themes and concepts of an entirely new sport in such a short preparation time was truly impressive. I wanted to thank the many people who played key roles in this young mans incredible development. First, to Mr Tonon himself. He trained three times a day seven days a week, through injuries, physical pain and early frustration and never missed a workout. Due to the fact that I have to teach a high volume of private classes to make a living, the only daily time slot for MMA sparring was immediately after his second grappling class. I did not want him to neglect his main strength, so he had to spar MMA immediately after two hours of grappling - he did it every day without complaint. His work ethic amazes me. Thanks also to Squad seniors Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan, along with all the kohai (juniors) who created the framework of the squad that helped build his brand and a training room that could promote development. Thanks so much to the unsung heroes of the squad - the regulars of RGA in NYC headquarters who come in every day while holding full time jobs and made a room that builds champions - you fellows are the rock upon which this whole enterprise is built. Thanks to Doug Pelinkovic, Mike Jaramillo, Gene Dunne, Brian Glick and Claude Levy, senior students whom I often discuss ideas and concepts of MMA and who provide such a fine sounding board for my developmental ideas. Thanks to Tom DeBlass for being such an outstanding mentor to Mr Tonon all these years. Thanks so much to Ryan Rizco, Jake Shields, Matthew Tesla, Neiman Gracie, Garry St-Leger and Mehrdad for being the sparring partners who took Garry from total novice to confident debutant in just four months. Thanks to Jamie Crowder and Joe Sampieri of RGA Muay Thai for all your insight and help. Thanks so much to Georges St-Pierre and Joe Rogan for extremely valuable input on the subtleties of distance, movement and timing that played a pivotal role in the outcome. Continued...

Victory in Thailand: Garry Tonon won his first ever MMA fight here in Bangkok via TKO in the second round. Prior to the bout, Mr Tonon expressed a desire to use his fledgling striking skills rather than simply rely on grappling. Despite only around four months of MMA training he made remarkable progress and wanted to test his new skills as part of his development. After an understandably nervous start where he took some hits, he settled into his rhythm and started landed his own heavy blows leading to a first round knock down and very nearly finished in the first round. In the second, Mr Tonon took control both in the open and on the fence and ultimately to the floor where he landed many heavy punches and elbows to get a stoppage. It was impressive to see a grappling athlete with no real striking background other than some sporadic pad work until four months ago come out and win via TKO on a specialized striker. Obviously there is still a huge amount to work on, but it was an amazing performance by the rookie. It was also a brave choice to stay with striking when he could have easily gone into submission mode. Previous to tonight, Mr Tonon had never thrown a punch with bad intentions before, but here in his debut he landed well once he got settled in. Any debut into MMA is tough, but doing it in a foreign country, on the main card of one of the biggest organizations in the world, with only four months of experience behind you and big expectations from fans, and still have the presence of mind to work on new developing skills to help long term growth shows remarkable presence of mind. I hope you all enjoyed the bout. Thank you all so much for your interest and support. I know it means a lot to Mr Tonon and it certainly does to me. It was an honor come to Thailand, home of the mighty Thai fighters, a land steeped in martial arts tradition and influence, and make a memorable debut. Now it’s back to NYC to get the squad ready for upcoming grappling bouts!

Working through resistance: Nicky Ryan works on his leg locking skills in sparring tonight. It is never enough to know only the mechanics of the moves you employ - you must be able to apply the moves against knowledgeable resistance - this will be the standard by which you will be judged in competition. Here, Mr Ryan takes his time to control his opponent’s movement through skillful application of an ashi garami variation. Now he will deal with each line of resistance in turn until he can get to the actual application of the lock and secure the finish.

Adapting: Garry Tonon learned some aspects of the professional MMA fighters life today - going to various media obligations, rules meetings, medical checks, preliminary weight and hydration tests etc. In the end, however, the athlete’s greatest responsibility is training, for without that, he or she would never rise to the level where they would have to go through all those chores in the first place - so at the end of a long day - it’s back to the gym for drills. Now we head to a light dinner and back to the hotel. Tomorrow is the official weigh in and then all promotional responsibilities fulfilled.

Fine tuning: Garry Tonon gets some light tag sparring in tonight in Bangkok in preparation for his debut here Saturday night. Obviously intensity levels diminish sharply in the last week but there are always ways to train and improve without maximum power. Watching the young grappling master take on the entirely new world of striking is as fascinating to me as it can be frustrating to him 😜 As always however, his learning speed is very impressive and his work ethic even more so. Now it’s dinner time as we are now joined by @tomdeblass and @jakeshields and Mr Tonon’s mother here for a night in Bangkok. Wishing you all the best and thank you all for your support in this merging of the squad’s submission grappling base with MMA.

Meanwhile...back in the West: While Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan have been preparing for upcoming challenges here in Thailand, Oliver Taza has been competing very successfully in the European Gi jiu jitsu circuit. Mr Taza has, like senior team mate, Gordon Ryan, been training a lot in the gi program in the blue basement and has ambitions in both gi and no gi. This week he entered the ACB European championships and won all four matches by submission to qualify for the ACB world championships later in the year. Here he shows excellent passing pressure to put himself in position to switch between Kimura and back systems to get the submission in the finals.

Two versus one: Putting Nicky Ryan through a tough session tonight in Bangkok. Two opponents versus Mr Ryan over thirty minutes alternating as he stays in the center for the full thirty minutes. Working against two people is never easy - they get a chance to rest while you don’t. Learning to deal with the physical pressure mounting over time as you are fatiguing is a good test of inner resolve and maintaining calm and discipline under tough conditions. Here we reflect on the main lessons learned, the most successful techniques and tactics and the least successful so that tomorrow we can incorporate more of what was working and change or omit what was less successful. Immediately after this, Garry Tonon went into his MMA training - it’s a fascinating experience as a coach to run two two sports back to back and see first hand the commonalities and differences between the two.

First day in Bangkok: The squad went straight into action after marathon flight from the blue basement in NYC to Bangkok Thailand. We stopped by local MMA and jiu jitsu gym generously hosted by @morganbangkok At MMA@Fight Lab - its always a joy to go back to Asia - there is such a strong tradition of martial arts here, especially in Thailand, and the local scene reflects that. Nicky Ryan sparred with locals in preparation for his upcoming bout with Geo Martinez and Garry Tonon went through his MMA drills in preparation for his debut this Saturday. It was good to feel the heat and humidity out here - I always prefer a hot training environment over a cold one. A good workout in Thailand is the best jet lag cure ever invented 😜😜 Now it’s time for dinner and rest -I am quite certain there will be some heavy sleeping tonight! Wishing you all the best from Thailand. What an honor to train in the homeland of the mighty Thai fighters who have provided so much inspiration and technical nuance to the modern game of MMA.

Another squad adventure begins: Killing time at JFK as we wait for the plane to Bangkok, Thailand for Garry Tonon’s MMA debut next weekend in ONE FC. I was actually early for a flight for the first time in my life due to the good influence of my students! Nicky Ryan will come to maintain his training for his upcoming match in Kasai Grappling on April 14. Here he is joined by his Dad. Mr Tonon had his last sparring session today and is excited to start a completely new phase of his competition career. We are all sitting around telling horrible stories about each other. My favorite so far? One time Nicky Ryan was weight cutting for a jiu jitsu tournament and Garry Tonon made him carry a box of freshly baked donuts and hold them for everyone else to eat while Nicky watched and salivated! #evilsensei #thecrueltutelageofgarrytonon. I though I was a heartless and cruel teacher until I heard that one! I have to catch up to that level! 😂😂😂 Twenty four hours from now we will be getting set up in Bangkok and getting ready for training. Wishing you all the best and thank you all for your loyal support.

Nicky Ryan back in action: Nicky Ryan will take on the very formidable Geo Martinez at Kasai Grappling Championships in NYC on April 14 in a super fight put together by the Ryan brothers and and the @kasaigrappling team in what should be a fascinating match. Mr Martinez is a multi time EBI champion and ADCC medalist. He has even defeated a senior member of the squad and gone the distance in a tight loss to another, so clearly his submission defense is of the very highest caliber. This will definitely be the toughest challenge of the sixteen year old Mr Ryan’s career. Ordinarily I am not in favor of teenagers taking on Adult champions, but Mr Ryan showed he could qualify and compete at world championship level, so I will make an exception in cases like this. Obviously there is going to be a significant strength and physical maturity gap here, Eddie Cummings and Jonathan Calestine both told me that Mr Martinez was among the strongest lightweights they ever encountered and could maintain that strength for long periods. Mr Ryan will have to use all his rapidly developing skills to take on such a skilled and tough opponent. This entire Kasai event is fascinating, with several great super fights and a main tournament that should create some fantastic match ups - more on this soon! Hats off to Kasai for creating a great show in the Empire State and giving these two fine athletes a venue to showcase their skills.

There is no learning how to defend a given move until you learn the nuances of attacking with it: Every day I get people asking me how to defend leg locks. “I don’t want to DO leg locks - I just want to be able to DEFEND them.” This is simply setting yourself up for failure. With this approach, Not only will you be unable to perform a leg lock (or any other move you care to name), you will not be able to defend one either. ONLY BY GAINING UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT MAKES A MOVE WORK, WILL YOU BE ABLE TO PREVENT SOMEONE ELSE FROM MAKING IT WORK. You have to KNOW WHAT YOU ARE FIGHTING AGAINST if you are to have any hope of STOPPING a given move - and that means LEARNING THE POSITIVE APPLICATION OF THE MOVE FIRST, AND THE DEFENSE SECOND. You cannot learn jiu jitsu in fragments. The deeper your knowledge of a move, the easier will be the task of frustrating someone else attempting to apply it, FOR BY KNOWING THE CONDITIONS NECESSARY FOR SUCCESS, YOU KNOW WHAT YOU NEED TO DO TO CREATE FAILURE IN AN OPPONENT. Here, Garry Tonon uses his great experience and knowledge of ashi garami scenarios to calmly work his way out of what could be a bad situation - minutes later he would go on to win with a strangle. That calm demeanor in defense comes from endless hours of learning to attack in the same position.

The basis of functional strength is posture: People talk all the time about strength development for sports. There are many proven programs and methods of increasing somebody’s strength over time. When it is time to APPLY that strength in competition however, remember this - EVEN THE GREATEST STRENGTH WILL BE UNDERMINED BY FAILURES IN POSTURE WHEN APPLIED TO A GIVEN TASK. For any given task there is at least one posture that optimizes strength application - deviation from that ideal posture(s) will manifest itself as weakness. Breakdown the most commonly occurring situations and scenarios in your sport and research which postures come close to ideal as far as applying your strength towards your goals. Doing so will maximize the effect of whatever strength you have. Naive strength is one thing, BUT STRENGTH DIRECTED BY POSTURE FEELS LIKE IRON. A weak man with good and efficient posture will outperform a strong man operating from poor posture. Make posture in all the main areas of your sport a serious part of your study. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows perfect posture whilst wrestling on the fence in single leg position - a key part of his sport

Getting ready: Garry Tonon is getting ready for his MMA debut at One FC Iron Will @onechampionship in Bangkok, Thailand on March 24 against his opponent, striking specialist Richard Corminal from the Philippines. Mr Tonon’s introduction to MMA training and techniques began just twelve weeks ago. He was fully committed to his grappling career prior to that and the transition had to be made in very little time. As always he has applied himself with everything he has - but MMA is a deep ocean of moves, tactics and principles and there is still a long, long way to go. The fusion of his submission grappling background with MMA makes for fascinating training sessions and I believe it will be very interesting for spectators as well. Here he works with Welterweight great, Jake Shields on the very new world of standing striking. It is never easy for an athlete who knows what elite performance feels like in one sport, to take on another. They feel very acutely their beginner level mistakes in strong contrast to their usual smooth and efficient motion. Mr Tonon has however, taken on the project with admirable enthusiasm, humor and diligence that points to good progress over time.

Kani Basami: The scissor throw - kani basami - is one of the more controversial moves in jiu jitsu. It is among my favorite moves - all of my students are very good at it and often use it in competition - AND YET I DO NOT PERMIT THEM TO USE IT IN CLASS AND I EVEN WOULD GO SO FAR AS TO SUPPORT A BAN OF THE MOVE IN COMPETITION. Why do I have such an odd point of view towards this move? Kani basami is one of the few moves with a truly unacceptably high accident rate - even when the move is performed well by well trained athletes. A tiny misjudgment of distance and height on a moving opponent can result in a badly broken leg. There are many safer ways to get into your opponent’s legs that work just as well. When I began teaching I saw many incidents involving flying Kani basami injuries and ultimately came to ban in it my classes. Yet this moment proved to be one of the most important of my coaching career. It made me ask a very interesting question. WAS THERE A WAY TO EMPLOY THE EFFICIENT MECHANICAL SCISSORING ACTION OF KANI BASAMI ON THE GROUND? (It would be safe on the ground as you are not jumping your full bodyweight onto a weight bearing leg). Initially I worked with the idea of back stepping from top position and this gave great results that students could use safely in everyday training to enter into inside heel hooks. Things got really interesting however, when kani basami was used from bottom position. The idea was interesting - INSTEAD OF FLYING TO YOUR OPPONENTS LEG IN STANDING POSITION - MAKE HIM FLY ABOVE YOU BY ELEVATING HIM FROM BOTTOM GUARD POSITION AND USE THE POWERFUL SCISSOR ACTION TO ENTER INSIDE HEEL HOOKS FROM UNDERNEATH. This was one hundred percent safe and proved to be extremely effective. How odd that an ancient move, which i do not allow my students to use in training with each other, should become one of the cornerstones of the modern leg lock game used by my students in a new fashion. My decision to ban its use in class more than fifteen years ago created an impetus that created a whole new direction for the move. I have not performed flying Kani basami since my hip replacement - no wonder my poor partner looks nervous! 😂😂

A fun day of training today at RGA when the Hayden brothers, Josh and Jason cane in unexpectedly for a workout with the squad. They have always been among our toughest rivals in EBI competition and other shows. It’s always a pleasure to see athletes in less competitive settings and enjoy a grappling in a way that can’t be done under the pressure of the big stage. Both brothers are highly skilled in submissions and had a fine day’s work with the squad. As much as competition success is a worthy goal, friendship and civility is a more worthy one. Here the Hayden brothers listen to our horrible stories and opinions after a great session of armlocks, leg locks and strangles.

Legend provides inspiration: One of my all time favorite MMA fighters is the great Jose Pele Landi. He was a legend of early MMA back when it was called “Vale Tudo” or NHB. He was a gifted kickboxer with good upper body takedowns who could also mix it up on the ground. He was universally feared and respected for his devastating knee strikes which he could use at any moment in any situation to KO opponents. Imagine my surprise when he began coming in to train with the squad in grappling! Even now at forty four he comes in to train and gives his all. It is amazing to see such a legend trying new moves and working with the youngsters. I am always so impressed when I see people who have the accomplishments to sit back and rest, but who refuse and always seek further growth and new adventures. Sometimes I show the younger athletes film clips of Mr Landi in action and they are always amazed and proud to work out next to such a legend. There is always something special about working out next to a great athlete that lifts the room. What an honor to have one of my early idols work with my students and inspire them the same way he always inspired me.

Concepts versus details: Whenever I teach I try hard to begin with the general concepts that govern the area I am discussing and then flesh it out with details that give students the practical ability to get those general concepts to work. Concepts and details work together in a manner similar to a child’s coloring book. The concepts are like the outlines, the details are like the colors you fill in to make it into a beautiful picture. Jiu Jitsu without concepts to give a general sense of direction will be like a collection of colors scrawled randomly over a page that portrays nothing. Jiu Jitsu without details will be like a rough sketch, colorless and dull. When jiu jitsu has both concepts and details in unison - then you will see a complete and beautiful picture. See your jiu Jitsu along the lines of this metaphor. Start at the conceptual level to give yourself direction. Then over time, add details to add life and color to those outlines. Just as sketch and color together produce art, so too will concepts and details together produce a martial art.

Here is Mr Stuart Cooper’s video on the squad. Thank you so much Mr Cooper for making the time and effort to create such a well produced video illustrating some of our core concepts to our audience. Thank you also to my amazingly passionate and hard working students, especially the pioneers, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. All of you gave an incredible voice to my ideas that I could never have done alone. Thank you all for your efforts - it has been my privilege to be a small part of that. Thank you also to my everyday students - far too many to mention - who provide the testing grounds, the passionate atmosphere and toughness that produced so many champions. Thank you to my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie, who gave me my start in the sport and the best playground to grow I could hope for. Thank you also my dear readers on social media for showing interest in what we do and putting up with my rather clumsy expression of my ideas. I hope you enjoy Mr Coopers video. #Repost @stuartcooperfilms with @get_repost
・・・
@danaherjohn talks about how he broke down the systems based approach to Jiujitsu and then took various niche areas of the game and created systems within systems. This approach saw his students winning matches against much more experienced opponents who had been training far longer.
Full video now available to watch on my YouTube stuartcooperfilms
Audio extracted from The Joe Rogan Experience MMA Show #11 with John Danaher
#stuartcooperfilms #DanaherDeathSquad #Leglocks #jiujitsu #bjj #adcc

The most important part of your workout: Imagine if you had some strange brain disorder that resulted in total amnesia after every jiu jitsu workout so that everything you learned in that lesson was forgotten. Progress would be impossible! Every class you did would be your first class! The basis of all improvement over time is MEMORY - memory allows us to retain information and apply it the next time we work on the same problem so that we do not have to re-learn the same things every time, but can move on to new lessons and accumulate knowledge. IF MEMORY IS THE BASIS OF PROGRESS - SHOULD WE NOT BE DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO ENHANCE OUR ABILITY TO USE MEMORY TO TAKE THE INFORMATION FROM A PREVIOUS LESSON AND APPLY IT TO THE NEXT? One of the most beneficial things you can do as a student is at the end of each lesson to think of the single most important thing you learned in today’s class and ask yourself how you will try to apply that lesson tomorrow. If you can carry just one piece of valuable information from one class to the next, I assure you that you will make fast progress over time and surpass most of your peers. It always amazes me that people who are happy to perform three hours of hard physical training every day will balk at the idea of thirty seconds of easy thinking after that workout that could greatly benefit the next workout and ensure that a year from now they will be far better than they currently are. YOUR WORKOUT DOES NOT FINISH WHEN YOU STEP OF THE MAT - IT FINISHES WHEN YOU USE THE EXPERIENCE GAINED TODAY TO CREATE A PLAN FOR WHAT YOU WILL ATTEMPT TOMORROW.

Spreading a message: I always try to convey our approach to the sport out to the jiu jitsu world in the hope that some people might find it interesting or helpful. The vast majority of the work in getting people interested in our methods has been done by my students, whose outstanding achievements in competition have made many people take notice of our approach. Wherever I can I try to help out through writing or speaking. A small milestone was reached recently when the Joe Rogan podcast went past one million views on YouTube - Mr Rogan generously have great exposure to some of the core concepts of our way of thinking about the game and experimental/Socratic method of learning and teaching that we employ to instill it in the athletes. Thank you all so much for your interest and to all those who helped us get the message out @joerogan @ebiofficial @eddiebravo10p @polaris_professional @flograppling @adccsubmission @ufcfightpass @ufc @globalgrapplingleague @f2wpro Without you all we would just be some weirdos playing twinkle toe footsies in my sensei’s basement! Thank you all and thank you to all my cherished students who gave so much and did so well.

Pushing and pulling: Most of what I teach from bottom position in jiu jitsu follows a simple three step pattern. FIRST, GET AN EFFECTIVE WORKING GRIP. SECOND, GENERATE KUZUSHI (off balancing). THIRD, ATTACK (preferably in complimentary combinations). When it comes time to begin the study of kuzushi, the best place for most people to start is the seemingly simple, yet in practice, very subtle, dynamic of PUSH and PULL. As the Japanese noted so long ago, when someone is pushed, they will push back, when pulled, they will pull back. Learning to read your opponent’s posture and where their body’s exertion is being directed at any given moment is critical to your ability to off balance them through pushing and pulling. If ever I want to PULL someone, I first PUSH them back - knowing ahead of time that they will instinctively push back against my push and thus greatly amplify the effect of what I really wanted all along - a powerful pull. This seems like such a simple concept, but it takes discipline and training to apply it consistently throughout a match and make it the basis of your initial contact with an opponent that ties into all your favorite attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan pulls with the right hand to create a defensive pull back reaction from the great Xande Ribeiro that will create an entry for a strong rearward pushing trip - a good example of the push pull dynamic in operation.

Another day coaching in the blue basement...😂

A fundamental distinction in joint locks - linear and twisting locks: Joint locks can be divided into two broad families. The first are linear or straight locks. Common examples are juji gatame (armbar), ude gatame (straight arm lock) and hiza gatame (knee bar). These locks are probably the clearest and simplest examples of lever and fulcrum in the entire skill set of jiu jitsu. The second family are the twisting or rotational locks. Common examples are Kimura, Americana and heel hook. In general these locks tend to be more complex in nature. Often the relationship between lever and fulcrum is not so obvious and the forces involved are rotational. Athletes can have favorite moves, but I have always believed ALL athletes most excel in several linear and several rotational locks (you can’t only excel in linear or only in rotational). This is because very often the main escapes from a linear lock lead very naturally into a twisting lock and vice versa. Being able to switch mindset from linear to twisting and vice versa in the blink of an eye is thus very important. In addition, linear locks tend to work best on straightened limbs, whilst twisting locks generally work best on bent limbs - when you excel in both, you will be able to attack regardless of the extension, or lack of, in your opponent’s limb. Once students are made aware of the different nature and demands of these two families of joint locks, I find they usually have no difficulty working with both - but they should always be aware of the important mechanical differences between them in order to maximize their use of them. Here, I teach one of my favorite twisting locks - Kimura - to the students of Columbia University and run them through the various factors that enhance performance with this incredibly versatile hold.

A remarkable role model: A sad week at RGA headquarters in New York City - one of the most prominent and successful athletes and teachers Rafael “Sapo” Natal, will return to Brazil for a time to take care of family. Mr Natal’s story is one that should inspire anyone looking to work towards a dream. He learned jiu jitsu from his primary sensei, Draculino and came to NYC when he wanted to transition to MMA so he could work with Renzo Gracie. Working hard in a new country with new language and new culture is never easy, but Mr Natal attacked his goal with everything he had. In a short time he won a dedicated group of students and got into the worlds premier MMA organization, the UFC, where he had a very distinguished career. Mr Natal was beloved by students and workmates alike for his enthusiasm and drive and success. He always radiated an easy going charm while pushing people hard to do their best - his own example was a fantastic demonstration to the students. Last night he gave one of the most emotional and heartfelt goodbyes the academy has ever seen. What an honor to have worked alongside this outstanding young man for so long. He worked so hard and gave so much. He went through a long, complex and painful eye surgery after an injury. I never heard him complain, never saw him waiver from his goals - I only saw him work harder and inspire others to do the same. I am sure fate will bring him back soon to NYC, but I truly admire his decision to put family before self and get that done before he returns. Wherever fate takes him, the entire RGA staff and student body will always remember him as a real mensch - a true jiu jitsu man who represented himself and his team with distinction and honor. Wishing you the best @rafaelsaponatal from NYC

New challenges: The ideal grappler would be one who was equally dominant in both gi and no gi competition, and could even do well in MMA. Obviously such a project is a long term one. Some of the squad members are making first steps in those directions. This weekend, Oliver Taza entered the Canadian Nationals at brown belt and won gold. Here he uses a variation of one of our favorite leg entry set ups, the reverse X guard, to enter into the legs and quickly finish an IBJJF legal knee bar (heel hooks are illegal in this format). It is a nice example of cross over between two different rule sets. Good to see Mr Taza making waves in gi competition while still striving towards his main competition goals

Alma mater: I had the pleasure of going back to my alma mater Columbia University to teach a jiu jitsu seminar yesterday. It was wonderful to see the amazing progress the students have made under the direction of club leaders Andrius Schmid and Jason Yang. Back in the 1990’s the club was started by Christian Barry, Matt Serra and myself. The sport was so different then! Mr Barry advertised the first class as “Brazilian fighting jiu jitsu and Vale Tudo” with a picture of a vicious fight from mounted position. Almost one hundred people showed up for the first class - every angry nut job and lunatic came out of the woodwork of Columbia and showed up in the wrestling room. The entire class immediately descended into a chaotic mass sparring session as dozens of repressed academic types with some kind of obscure martial arts background/fantasy went berserk on each other in a mass rage/ warfare scene that was pure comedy gold! Next class five bruised and scratched people showed up and the Columbia jiu jitsu club was born! 😂😂😂 Time has worked its magic and now it is a very big and well run club - I had a great time showing the gifted students there elements of the squad’s Kimura system and its links to other subsystems we routinely use in competition. It was wonderful strolling around the campus afterwards and reflecting upon the great influence of my dear mentor, Isaac Levi, my Ph.D supervisor, and his insights on research programs that I use every day - albeit in a context very different from what he expected. In the end, learning is learning, no matter what the context. I am so grateful to be able to take the gift of great teaching and mentoring I received and give a small amount back to a new generation of students, despite having completely changed paths in life.

Leg locks in MMA: I am often asked in whether leg locks are effective MMA competition. My answer is always the same - ANY OF THE MAJOR TECHNIQUES OF THE VARIOUS COMBAT SPORTS CAN BE APPLIED SUCCESSFULLY IN MMA IF PERFORMED WELL AND AT THE APPROPRIATE OPPORTUNITY - AND THEY CAN ALL FAIL IF PERFORMED POORLY OR AT AN INAPPROPRIATE TIME. The quality of the APPLICATION is far more important than the choice off technique (within reason). Tonight, Emmanuel Vera, a very talented junior member of the squad, took his leg locking skills into the cage and won his fight in just thirty seconds via Achilles lock. Great to see him training hard and getting the reward of victory. I have always studied and taught jiu jitsu with the notion of application to a real fight in the background. It is great to see some elements of our work getting seen in the context of MMA. Fine work by Mr Vera who continues to impress with his work ethic and results.

Angles for strangles: Nothing beats a strangle from the back to demonstrate clearly the founding principles of jiu jitsu. Positional control that renders even the most dangerous opponents relatively harmless, a submission that can go from fairly gentle all the way to rendering someone unconscious or worse in extreme cases, and one which a smaller person can reasonably expect to apply successfully against a much larger and stronger foe. The first question is always - how do I get there? It all begins with angle. In the most basic cases I MUST BE ABLE TO GET OUTSIDE MY OPPONENTS ELBOW - EITHER BY MOVING HIS ELBOW OR BY MOVING MYSELF AROUND THE ELBOW ( usually both at the same time). This will give me the angle I need to initiate a movement towards my opponents back. A common problem I see here is that students will gain an angle by successfully getting outside an elbow, but then hesitate and lose that momentary opportunity. A phrase that I often use with my students is this - if you can SEE the back, then you can TAKE the back. The most common ways you will be able to see your opponents back in a combat situation is if you get outside his elbow (eg an arm drag) or over his head (eg snap down) or inverted spin around or through his legs (eg berimbolo). As you enter these, or any equivalent move, there will be a moment where you can see the back - even just a small part of the back - and that is where you must move decisively and with purpose. As you spar, LOOK FOR THAT VISUAL CUE that signals opportunity and take it. Of course you will fail sometimes when you first try - that’s normal - but in time the visual cue will be followed by successful action and you will prove to be a dangerous opponent who can literally see opportunity and take it. Remember always that EVERY SUCCESSFUL PHYSICAL ACTION BEGINS WITH THE MENTAL ACT OF RECOGNITION OF OPPORTUNITY, WITHOUT WHICH THE ACTION NEVER WOULD HAVE EVEN OCCURRED. In time you will learn that you can take the back without even seeing the back - but at the start this is the single best way to get students going beyond angle and getting all the way to the best position in the sport. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

The Yerkes - Dodson law: My entire approach to training athletes and preparing them for competition is based around a well known and very simple law described and tested around a century ago by two eminent psychologists, Yerkes and Dodson. Using rats as experimental subjects, they looked at arousal/stress levels imposed upon rats as they tried to learn skills. The results agree well with our basic intuitions in the matter. HUMAN PERFORMANCE AT ANY GIVEN TASK WILL VARY ACCORDING TO THE AROUSAL/STRESS LEVEL, FOLLOWING A PARABOLIC CURVE WHERE LOW AROUSAL WILL RESULT IN LOW PERFORMANCE. PERFORMANCE WILL RISE AS AROUSAL RISES, UNTIL A CRITICAL POINT IS REACHED WHERE AROUSAL/STRESS HAS NEGATIVE EFFECTS RESULTING IN LOWER PERFORMANCE LEVELS. We all have a basic sense of this. When we are apathetic and uninspired, we typically perform tasks poorly. As we become more stimulated by excitement, anticipation, we rise in performance. However, when stress levels reach into fear, shock and extreme nervousness, we fall down the other side of the curve into lowered performance. Subsequent research into the Yerkes-Dodson law revealed that simple tasks are less negatively affected by rising stress/arousal levels. Complex problem solving tasks are heavily affected by rising stress/arousal - as stress rises, performance drops significantly. As a coach, I must be mindful of this as I teach different aspects of the sport. Problem solving is usually done in a relaxed informal fashion after class. Simpler Tasks involving more straightforward physical effort are coached with more stress and arousal. Interestingly, as even complex tasks become more familiar to a student, they are less affected by stress/arousal. Occasional stress tests on a student will show me very clearly how well they have familiarized themselves with a given movement that I want them to excel in. It is well worth your time to familiarize yourself with this basic law of performance and look to see its effects upon your own performance and methods by which you train yourself to improve that performance level.

Divide and conquer: When practicing jiu jiu jitsu, ACTIVELY SEEK TO DIVIDE YOUR OPPONENT’S BODY AND USE YOUR WHOLE BODY TO CONTROL AND ATTACK SEGMENTS OF HIS BODY. This is one of the most fundamental directives of the sport. One of the very best ways to begin investigating this principle is from bottom half guard. A central feature of most variations of half guard is that THEY EFFECTIVELY DIVIDE THE BODY IN HALF AND SEEK TO USE YOUR WHOLE BODY TO CONTROL AND FIGHT HALF OF YOUR OPPONENT’S BODY. Here, I am working aspects of half guard control and positioning with my good friend, Tom DeBlass. You can clearly see that the very nature of the position creates a situation where half of his body is engaged by all of mine. Making this way of thinking central to your game is a key to your future progress - ALL GOOD JIU JITSU IS BASED UPON IT. If you don’t know where to start - BEGIN WITH BOTTOM HALF GUARD, as it is a very clear expression of the principle and has tremendous applicability to everyday training and sparring. Use it to learn the critical notion of selecting a part of your opponent’s body and through grip, movement and connection - owning it.

New directions: Exciting news today - Gordon Ryan signed an exclusive contract with the rapidly rising @acb_jj promotion from Russia. This team has done an amazing job of gathering the elite talent pool of current jiu jitsu and putting on first class tournaments around the world both gi and no gi featuring the best athletes in the sport in tournaments and super fights. Mr Ryan will compete initially no gi and then move to gi matches. This represents a major move for Mr Ryan as he will no longer to be able to compete in a wide array of different organizations as he has done his whole career thus far, but @acb_jj puts on many shows so he is hoping to keep his usual high volume of performances this year. The promotion has an interesting show format featuring ADCC and IBJJF rules, but with the twist of five minute rounds and no guard pulling in first minute. Should be very interesting! Mr Ryan is slated to first take on the very talented ADCC gold medalist Vinny Magalhaes. We always regarded Mr Magalhaes as one of the very best opponents the squad faced in EBI - should be an amazing match between two great world champions!

The return of the newly crowned champion: New featherweight EBI champion Jon Calestine came back today to see his old friends at squad headquarters RGA. He told us all the remarkable story of his victory. The whole adventure began on very short notice as his senpai Eddie Cummings had to pull out at the last minute due to an extremely severe flu. Mr Calestine has only resumed training recently after a severe shoulder injury last year and was quite clearly the smallest and lightest competitor in the field. He spent the week in LA alone and was then told to be ready to compete just two days prior to the event. His friend and mentor Matthew Kaplan had to fly out at the last minute or he would have had to compete without even a cornerman! Despite all the confusion and far from ideal preparation, he stepped up to the plate and delivered a near flawless performance in the true tradition of the squad - gold medal performance with blitzkrieg leg lock attacks to win the matches, the belt, the crowd and the shekels! It was so great seeing him return today and getting an ovation from the more than eighty athletes at the big RGA Monday afternoon class that produced so many squad members and sit next to other squad EBI champions and swap stories of success. Hats off to this talented young athlete who trained so hard, got the opportunity and ran with it! Here, “JC” proudly shows his EBI belt off to the entire class after a tough session. It was an inspiration to everyone in the room to be around that kind underdog success story and of course, wonderful to see a friend and team mate back in the basement telling us the whole tale and laughing about old times and talking technique. For all of you, my dear readers, you could not hope for a better example as you push towards your own goals and dreams, of a young man who trained with purpose and passion until when fate offered a chance - he had the skills and confidence to step up and shine!

Great performance last night by Jonathan Calestine to win EBI 15 in the featherweight division in his debut performance. Mr Calestine replaced his main teacher, Eddie Cummings on short notice after Mr Cummings came down with flu during the week. Mr Calestine was a regular training partner and apprentice in the squad, but left with Eddie Cummings due to concerns about training next to team mates who either did, or could potentially compete against them in the same weight classes. It’s always a tricky thing to deal with this problem. Some athletes, such as Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, are fine with the idea of training with people they will compete against, others, such as Eddie Cummings and Jonathan Calestine feel awkward about it. As a coach I respect and understand that. We still think of them as alumni from the same team and carrying the torch of our approach to the game. Mr Calestine’s strong leg locking pedigree was very much in evidence last night as he quickly heel hooked his first three opponents in regulation and then won the final against 10th planet stand out Geo Martinez in over time to take a great win. Great to see his success as a student and Mr Cummings success as a mentor. There are a bunch of other athletes emerging in the squad who can do similar things in future EBI’s in various weight categories - this should make for great shows as the seniors go in new directions in the future.

Last moments before the action starts: Usually the preparation for a bout is fairly extensive. The vast majority of the work that will determine the outcome has been done already. There is however, the day itself. By far the most important element on that last day is the athletes warm up routine. This is the final preparation for the match itself. After the warm up there is only those last moments of walk out to the stage and the tense moments as the athletes are being introduced to the audience. In These last moments it is critical that the themes and messages to the athlete be very simple - focus on the main themes you think will be important for the bout. Essentially they are short and simple reminders of what you have worked in training for the bout. Keep the athlete in motion, physical motion helps relieve the natural tightness and anxiety that occurs in those moments. Everyone has their own preference on how to act and feel in these moments. Some like the tension and go with serious approach. Others like a more laid back, “just another day in the office” mentality When Garry Tonon went out to take on Ralek Gracie, someone in the audience yelled out in a stentorian voice, “LEG LOCKS DON’T WORK!!” Mr Tonon quipped, “someone’s about to be disappointed.” We all got a smile in before the action 😊 And of course, another smile when he won by leg lock! So in those moments of tension, focus on the simple themes and ideas that you believe will be important to win, keep your body moving fluidly for tension relief and let your own personality determine your pre-contest demeanor. Once the action starts - you will feel right at home!

No matter how much bigger or stronger your opponent may be than you, his one leg will never be stronger than your whole body...although there may be a few times in your life where it’s close! #ashigaramisavedmylife

Double Trouble: One of the founding principles of my leg lock system is that of double trouble. This is the idea that for any given leg lock attack, the overwhelming majority of my opponent’s defensive reaction will come from the OTHER leg. Knowing this, If I can constrain the other leg, MOST OF HIS DEFENSE WILL BE SHUT DOWN FROM THE START AND I CAN DOUBLE THE AMOUNT OF TROUBLE HE FACES IN ATTEMPTS AT ESCAPE. The clearest demonstrations of this principle in operation come from cross ashi garami situations, where the second leg can be bound up to totally negate an opponent’s defensive options and create a quasi pin that rivals even the best conventional pins for control over movement. When my students began using this approach, observers were amazed to see them totally controlling even very talented opponents for long periods of time before finishing. Note that double trouble is a principle - NOT A MOVE - thus it can be applied in many situations and in many different ways. Making it a core element of your leg game will greatly increase your control over struggling opponents and make for more high percentage finishes. Here, Garry Tonon completely ties up the great Shinya Aoki, widely regarded as a master of leg locks himself, in a way that completely negated his ability to defend himself and enabled Mr Tonon to win via heel hook variation soon afterward.

Jiu Jitsu Takedowns: There are many styles of grappling, each has a rule set that encourages certain types of behavior and discourages others. In Judo, primacy is given to takedowns and throws above all else. A well executed throw can end the match at any time. In international styles of wrestling, throws and takedowns are graded by their AMPLITUDE. The bigger the throw, the more points it scores. There is a definite sense then, that in Judo and wrestling, amplitude is the desiderata of throws. Moreover, though it is possible to win Judo and Wrestling mostly on the ground, it is very difficult to envision a great champion in either sport who completely lacked skills in throws or takedowns. Jiu Jitsu on the other hand, looks at takedowns very differently. They score relatively low points and never end a match. Moreover there are many champions who went their entire career with virtually no takedown skills. Even for those who do study takedowns, the spirit in which they are trained and applied is very different from other grappling sports. In jiu jitsu, the key idea behind takedown training is not AMPLITUDE, since all takedowns get the same score regardless of how high or low the amplitude exhibited; rather, in jiu jitsu THE WORTH OF A TAKEDOWN IS ALWAYS ASSESSED BY ITS AFTERMATH. The question is always, WHERE DID YOU END UP AFTER THE TAKEDOWN? Takedowns in jiu jitsu are never seen as and end in themselves, but only as a precursor to ground grappling - so the END RESULT of the takedown is a bigger concern than the takedown itself. It is no good applying a beautiful drop seoi nage throw if it results in your opponent immediately taking your back once you land. Your takedown can score a maximum of two points, while his back control scores four and now your are fighting for survival. As such the spirit of training takedowns in jiu jitsu needs considerable modifications from other grappling arts. Here, former US Judo National champion and double Judo/Jiu Jitsu blackbelt, Garry St-Leger @gstleger shows the Judo ideal of an ippon throw with projection and amplitude in competition. Learning to adapt these skills into a jiu jitsu context is a fascinating study.

Tightness: A crucial concept to understand in jiu jitsu and submission grappling is that of tightness. Once a lock is put in place, it is crucial that there be sufficient tightness that an opponent cannot easily pull out (unless you are deliberately employing a tactic to allow him out to set up another move). The problem is that most people always use MUSCULAR tightness as the means of tightening a lock. Muscular tightness is tiring to maintain and usually inhibits movement. A much better sense of tightness to aspire to is MECHANICAL tightness, where my primary focus is upon a tight fit of my body into that of my opponent. In this way, BODY PLACEMENT AND POSITIONING create tightness around a lock rather than muscular exertion. The only degree of muscular exertion i need is that required to hold my body as a system of WEDGES AROUND THE PART OF MY OPPONENTS BODY THAT I AM TRYING TO IMMOBILIZE AND CONTROL. Here, Garry Tonon shows good mechanical tightness as he enters a juji gatame arm lock from bottom position. By using only enough muscular exertion to maintain his body position, he can maintain the lock for long periods of time without exhaustion and if necessary, move smoothly in response to his opponents defense. Learning to differentiate muscular tightness from mechanical tightness is one of the biggest conceptual steps students can make in their path to excellence.

Jake Shields gets another win: MMA superstar Jake Shields shows once again that he is one of the very few MMA fighters who can hang with elite grapplers in grappling competition today. Last night at Fight2Win he took on Australian grappling icon Kit Dale and took a hard fought decision victory due to use of guillotine and leg lock attacks to win a tight decision. Great to see an athlete take on new skills that he works so hard on with the squad every day getting him great results. People often say to me that they find it difficult to learn new skills on an already established game - I always believed this is a self imposed limitation. If you had the ability to learn one set of skills, why should you find it difficult to learn a new set? The surest way to prevent yourself doing anything is to tell yourself you can’t do it. Mr Shields walked into the gym, saw something he wanted to learn and got down to the business of learning it, never questioning whether he would be able to do so, and last night that can do attitude won him a match.

The return of the Wolverine: The next EBI event in California will feature the return to top level competition of Eddie Cummings - two time EBI champion at featherweight. Mr Cummings is one of my most brilliant and innovative students. He has been working hard the past one and half years developing his own emerging brand of submission grappling with his partner Ottavia Bourdian/Busia. Next weekend you will get a chance to see that hard work in action on stage at one of the most high profile submissions tournaments - EBI - the tournament format that really gave birth to the squad and helped establish them as a force. Watching Mr Cummings today he looked as sharp as a knife - look for some new and exciting elements to his growing game! Of all my students, Mr Cummings always had the game that most closely resembles my own - a game based upon grip and kuzushi (off balancing) from bottom position and then feeding into attacks in combination starting at the legs and then following wherever the action goes - that always makes it a special pleasure for me to watch. Can’t wait to see the Wolverine tear it up again in the format that I believe best suits his style in a weight division that he is made for! Keep your eyes on this @ebiofficial one! Feb 17 in LA at @musclepharm MusclepharmHQ. Once Mr Cummings gets to grips, the action comes on fast!

What will your jiu jitsu look like? One of the most obvious features of jiu jitsu as a sport is the tremendous variation among the many top players as they work for supremacy. It is very clear that there is no one body type, psychology or style that dominates the sport. Rather, we see many very different athletes exercise their unique individuality to get to the top. A natural question to ask is - WHAT WILL MY GAME LOOK LIKE? We all want a sense of identity within the sport. Realize this: your game will be a r reflection of many factors, but three will have the greatest effect. Your BODY TYPE, PERSONALITY and COACHING LINEAGE will be the biggest influences in building who you are as you mature within the sport. We all need to learn the fundamentals and they don’t change much from athlete to athlete, but once you go beyond that into more advanced elements, you will be actively CHOOSING which techniques you will focus upon. Your body type will play a heavy role in those choices. You will also be choosing how you actually apply them (in an aggressive proactive fashion vs a passive reactive fashion for example) and your personality will play a massive role here. The third decisive element is the influence of your various coaches and role models. They have their respective strengths and weaknesses and will teach accordingly, obviously doing a better job with their strengths. This will filter through naturally to the students. These three influences, your body type, personality and teachers, will be responsible for most of the choices you make as you build a game that is an expression of who you are. It would seem that two of the influences, body type and personality, are internal, whilst the third, coaches, are external, but really even the third is internal, since it is an act of choice who we select to stay with as a student. When students ask me what directions they ought to take their game, I always counsel them to relax and let their body type and personality make the decisions for them over time. It will happen organically over time without the need for prompting Photo by @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

The principle of concentration of force: One of the founding principles of all modes of combat, jiu jitsu included, is that of CONCENTRATION OF FORCE. The idea is that I want to take a large percentage of my total strength and apply it upon a a specific target that (A) has a high kinesiological value - if it were damaged the opponent would find if very difficult or even impossible to continue fighting, and (B) represents a small percentage of my opponents total strength. So for example, in the case of a well applied ashi garami, both my legs, my entire posterior and anterior chains of force and both arms are committed against one of my opponents legs. I don’t care how much bigger and stronger my opponent may be than me - it will never be the case that one of his legs is stronger than almost my entire body (if it is, then you should be using large caliber handguns against him, not heel hooks! 😂) The main target of the attack, the knee, obviously has great kinesiological value - once broken it is very difficult indeed to keep fighting effectively - at the very least your combat effectiveness will be severely degraded once it is broken. ANY COMBAT METHOD WHICH MAKES CLAIMS TO EFFICIENCY AND AN ABILITY TO OVERCOME BIGGER AND STRONGER OPPONENTS, MUST MAKE USE OF THE PRINCIPLE OF CONCENTRATION OF FORCE. As a student of jiu jitsu YOU MUST MAKE A LIFELONG COMMITMENT TO THE PRINCIPLE AND A DEEP STUDY OF HOW TO APPLY IT IN PRACTICAL WAYS. The first step on the martial arts journey is recognition of this principle - every subsequent step is simply a further articulation of it. Recognize it and live by it.

Coaching memories - Georges St-Pierre’s first lesson at TUF: The twelfth season of the Ultimate Fighter TV show featured Georges St-Pierre against the very tough and dangerous Josh Koscheck. It would be filmed over six weeks in Las Vegas - the longest time I ever left the Renzo Gracie Academy for. Due to prior commitments, none of Georges other coaching staff of that time could stay for more than a few days, so Mr St-Pierre and I stayed the whole six weeks and split training into standing position and ground where he taught the former and I taught the latter. We had to go against one of the most successful MMA organizations in the world - Team AKA. When the smoke cleared we amassed a victorious record of 8-2 against them and both finalists were from our team. On the very first day of training with our team, Georges St-Pierre stepped up to teach the first class. The team was very excited to learn from arguably the greatest MMA fighter of all time and I was curious to see what he would begin with, as we knew very little about our new students - would he begin with the essentials of stance, motion and jab? Perhaps he might get fancy and show Superman punch set ups and combinations? Maybe strikes into takedowns? Mr St-Pierre surprised everyone, including myself, by starting with a lesson on classroom respect. He taught how to sit, stand, listen and ask questions while instruction was being made. Only then did he get into actual instruction of fighting techniques. We were all rather surprised by this. After class I talked to him about it. He said something I never forgot - only in a room that observes respectful decorum and has protocols for learning behavior is fast progress possible - until that basic necessity is satisfied, nothing else will have much value. I thought it was a beautiful lesson, certainly one that I shall not forget.

How would you do if you had to fight yourself? This is always an interesting hypothetical question - in the case of Georges St-Pierre and Jake Shields it is actually a practical question! I have never seen two athletes so closely matched in skill level, tactics, technique etc in ground grappling. When they spar each other the only difference I see is their appearance and accent - other than that - identical! It’s great to see Mr St-Pierre back in the gym despite his battle with ulcerative colitis. He has had to make considerable changes in his diet to lessen symptoms and still has to avoid certain modes of training, but his grappling looked great as he battled the squad and former rival and now good friend and grappling doppelgänger Jake Shields 😂😂. It impresses me so much to see two great athletes who have a legacy so strong that they could easily stop training altogether and live comfortably as legends, come into the gym everyday and battle the youngsters - giving all of them hell on the mats - an then laugh together after giving each other hell with identical games!

Hands: In every jiu jitsu match you will ever have, whether daily sparring in the gym or the biggest competition of your life - ALMOST ALL INTIAL CONTACT WITH YOUR OPPONENT IS WITH HANDS AND FEET. As such, I put a heavy emphasis on training hands and feet among my athletes. When people hear me say this, they usually assume I am talking about hand and foot STRENGTH, and assume we must do lots of strength work for our grip. I do believe that a strong grip is a good thing in jiu jitsu. Most world champions I have met and trained with had an impressive grip. What I really emphasize however, is hand PLACEMENT AND TACTICS. You can train grip strength for months and make only slight improvements and still run into problems of exhaustion and forearm fatigue - but just a few pointers in hand placement and tactics can make a massive difference in combat effectiveness in minutes. The most common problem I see among aspiring athletes is a tendency to GRIP AND HOLD rather than the much more desirable and effective GRIP AND ENTER. The idea is not hold people per se, but to hold them just long enough to enter into a planned attack. I have a respectable grip strength, but i could not expect to hold a resisting athlete of world championship caliber for more than a few seconds - that’s why developing a mindset of GRIP AND ENTER is so important for your development. Have an idea of what you want to attack with, ascertain what is an appropriate grip to get to that attack, then get the grip and enter. That is the pattern of hand training we usually work with.

Just the act of asking and attempting to answer this question will open your eyes to training methodologies and ideas - perhaps it will change you, perhaps it will make you more confident of what you already believe - but you have to ask and try to answer...

Jumping in: Squad junior Ethan Crelinsten walks around at one hundred and forty pounds. Two days ago he heard a local professional grappling tournament Show The Art Invitational, was having a big tournament at 170 pounds and needed an athlete. He immediately jumped in despite the size difference and today he won the whole event in brilliant fashion - winning all four matches via submission in regulation time (EBI) rules. Here he is relaxing after the show, counting his shekels and plotting his next move 😜 Sometimes a spontaneous test like this can do wonders for an athletes confidence.

Creating a leg lock system: When I first began work on leg locks it became clear that ashi garami Based locks were the most effective. Ashi garami is a generic term that simply means something like “entangled legs.” (An archaic version of it is even part of the old Kodokan Judo syllabus where is refers to one specific leg lock which is illegal in Judo competition) Really it refers to any situation where, at a minimum, TWO OF MY LEGS CONTROL ONE OF MY OPPONENTS LEGS. Because the the legs offer substantial means to control an opponent’s movement, they can be used as the basis of high percentage submissions. There were many different variations of ashi garami, each having its good and bad points. In time I came to believe that one of the most useful ways to help categorize and organize the system was to make a division between three main versions of ashi garami that controlled the legs in ways that were importantly different.
1 Straight ashi garami system
2 Cross ashi garami system
3 Reverse ashi garami Each of these three has a very different methodology of control and submission. As such, a big part of the ashi garami system is to see that really it is three distinct but linked systems embedded within an overall leg attack system. Within each of the three main ashi garami systems there are many different variations of leg entanglement and of course, it is important that one should be able to transfer at any given time between the three. A big part of effective system building comes from discerning the main methods of control and what directions they move towards. Then it is a matter of building infrastructure around those elements until you have effective solutions to the problems opponents create for you. Here, Gordon Ryan works on a variation of reverse ashi garami that leads into very effective attacks on both legs.

A theory of Mixed Martial Arts: For the longest time the sport of MMA has been misdescribed as an ECLECTIC sport. A means of fighting that is a mix of various sport martial arts such as Western boxing, Muay Thai, wrestling, jiu jitsu and others. This is to see MMA a patchwork of various styles sewn together. A much better way to understand it is to see it as four distinct skill sets
1 Shoot fighting: The skill of striking and takedowns in open position
2 Clinch fighting: The skill of striking and takedowns whilst locked in a standing clinch
3 Fence fighting: The skill of striking and takedowns whilst propped on the fence
4 Grapple fighting: The skill of striking, positional exchange and submission whilst on the ground. Each one of these skill sets derives much of its content from various sport martial arts. For example, ground fighting borrows much from jiu jitsu and wrestling, along with striking technique that can be derived from Muay Thai and boxing. It is crucial to understand however, the skill of ground fighting in MMA TRANSCENDS the various martial arts that form its base. Throwing elbows and punches on the ground is a very different action from doing so in standing positions and clinches, so the punches and striking strategy of boxing and Muay Thai must be greatly modified. Submission set ups may be derived from BJJ, but applying them in an MMA context will require extensive modifications. ONCE YOU START ADDING NEW ARTS AND SKILLS, THE OVERALL SKILL SET YOU ARE PRACTICING CHANGES DRAMATICALLY, UNTIL IT BECOMES A NEW, AUTONOMOUS SKILL THAT TRANSCENDS ITS VARIOUS SUBSIDIARY SKILLS AND IS ULTIMATELY QUITE DISTINCT FROM THEM. This is true in all four of the foundational skill areas of MMA. once you grasp this, you see MMA for what it is - AN AUTONOMOUS MARTIAL ART COMPRISED OF FOUR MAIN SKILL SETS, EACH OF WHICH IS HEAVILY INFLUENCED BY, YET DISTINCT FROM, ITS VARIOUS COMPONENT ARTS. Each of the four skill sets transcends and stands alone from the various arts that form its foundation. Getting this vision of MMA through to new fans of the sport will help them in understanding the nuances of the action and appreciate all four domains of the sport.

Senpai and kohai: One of the strongest elements of dojo instruction is the relationship between juniors and senior students. When i was beginning jiu jitsu I had three senpai, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All three were world champions and all three were wizards on the mat whose every training session was downright inspirational to us juniors. It is natural for any beginning student to doubt the effectiveness of the techniques he or she is shown. When you first learn them, they seem difficult and convoluted- impossible to perform on a resisting training partner, let alone an actual fight. More than anything else it is the senpai who create that confidence by providing everyday living proof of the effectiveness of the techniques by using them successfully with skill and elan upon the juniors and beginners. Nothing builds faith in technique better than having them used upon you in a way that makes you feel helpless. This, more than anything else, creates the belief that it works, that you want to possess it and that if someone else can get to that level, then so can you - the three most important beliefs a beginner needs. When i build a room, I invest heavily in instruction of the class senpai. They will always provide much of the backbone of the training rooms ability to create a tide in which all can rise. Here, Nicky Ryan, outstanding kohai, watches his senpai, Garry Tonon, go through his shoot boxing drills - watching, learning, getting inspired in ways that will boost his own performance tomorrow. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

I teach jiu jitsu backwards: Jiu Jitsu always occurs in a SEQUENCE. The most common sequence begins by taking the opponent to the ground, then getting past his dangerous legs, then working through a hierarchy of pins that put increasing pressure on the opponent; and then finally, using that pressure finish with a submission hold. Most teachers of the sport teach in a way that reflects that fundamental sequence. Usually I do too. Most of the early lessons concern getting people to the floor, getting past the legs and working through various pins. Submissions are taught as the end of a long chain of events - the icing on the cake as it were. As such, the majority of training time is spent ON THE PRECURSORS TO SUBMISSION. I think in a standard class this approach makes the most sense for a wide cross section of students. When an athlete comes to me with ambitions to be a champion however, I teach very differently. I BEGIN WITH THE END GAME - SUBMISSIONS. I put an extreme emphasis upon THE DARK ARTS OF BREAKING AND STRANGLING. I look to create a student who has tremendous confidence in their ability to finish an opponent should they be able to get into a finishing position. THIS CREATES A MINDSET IN THE STUDENT TO HUNT RUTHLESSLY AND PERSISTENTLY FOR SUBMISSIONS AT ALL TIMES. If a student does not truly believe they are capable of breaking or strangling an opponent, how hard do you think they will push for the finish in competition? But if they truly believe they can finish anyone given the chance, THEY WILL FIND A WAY TO GET TO A FINISHING POSITION OR DIE TRYING. This creates a very different type of athlete, with a very different mindset and approach to the game. Rather than see submissions as an afterthought to a sequence, try to see them as the very soul of our sport and adjust your training regimen accordingly, even if just for a time - I am certain you will find it a fascinating and rewarding change.

Jiu Jitsu and humor: Anyone who has trained for even a short length of time in jiu jitsu or any other combat sport will tell you that sometimes the grind can be rather taxing. All combat sports have a high attrition rate - jiu jitsu is no exception. I find that humor is probably the single best means of students bonding together and with their teacher. When I teach, I try to use humor as a means of making an important point memorable. We tend to remember something that made us laugh. I also like to see students joking about the game, themselves and each other after class - that’s usually a healthy sign that they are getting along well and building the camaraderie that is essential to a long lasting and unified room. Visitors are quite often shocked at the constant pranks, off color jokes, teasing and taunting that we engage in after class - almost nothing is off limits. Of course this is a serious game where the success is measured in the capacity to break peoples limbs and strangle them in a highly competitive setting - so during training time it has to be all business. Finding the compromise between work and fun takes time and varies from gym to gym. The value of humor to make important information memorable and to build camaraderie cannot be underestimated - but too, the danger of letting a room descend into a clownish atmosphere that can kill progress cannot be underestimated. Ultimately you will have to judge whether you have gotten the balance right by the results of the students and there retention of information and their willingness to stay in the program. When students think of their training as a fascinating, frustrating puzzle to be solved that improves them and their lives in a way that few others can, and brings a smile to their face when friends and acquaintances ask them about why they train - then you have probably found the right balance. Photo @stephaniedrewsphotography

Any given Monday: Teaching the big Monday afternoon class at RGA is always a source of joy and pride to me. It began mostly as a no gi grappling class that had a strong element of MMA ground skills woven in. On any given Monday you could see a large number of MMA athletes mixed with jiu jitsu players working their skills in the floor. One day ace jiu jitsu photographer Luca Atalla was taking pictures at caught this fairly typical scene from years ago - Georges St-Pierre, the great Roger Gracie, Romulo Barral, Gregor Gracie, a VERY young looking Garry Tonon and his mentor Tom DeBlass, along with Shawn Williams and my dear Sensei Renzo Gracie, surrounded by sixty other people in the room. Everyone was getting ready for upcoming matches - some MMA (if I remember correctly this was prior to St-Pierre/Condit) some jiu jitsu - but it is great looking at these old images of the titanic wars that were fought every Monday as the athletes fought towards their goals. It has been my privilege over the years to watch so many of the greatest jiu jitsu and MMA athletes test the ideas and concepts I teach and give the best possible feedback that made it easy for me to see what was working, what was not, what could be improved and what should be abandoned. I could not have had a better group of people over two decades to develop ideas and theories and test them in such a harsh proving ground.

Teaching via heuristics: When I teach I try hard to find a satisfactory compromise between precise details, which are necessary for efficient application of techniques; and HEURISTICS - general “rules of thumb” that give the athlete a broad insight that guides the DIRECTION of their techniques. For example, I could sit in front of you all day and teach a thousand details on variations of ashi garami. Some would be of great value, many would have less value. However, none will have as much immediate value to you as a general heuristic that points you in the right direction in the overwhelming majority of applications and is simple enough to learn once and you will never forget it, you can use it tomorrow and it will never let you down. So if I say, “The athlete whose feet dominate the inside position will always dominate the ashi garami game,” this is a simple heuristic that I push upon all my athletes and which guides so much of their behavior in a simple and memorable way that can guide them for a lifetime. Of course, the heuristic must be backed up by technical details and a training program - but it’s the fundamental insight that can change more than behavior- it can change your way of thinking about the leg game and get you thinking independently about where to go from there. Here, Nicky Ryan shows the benefits of good inside positioning, a skill at which he excels, as he enters a variation of ashi garami in a tough session at RGA.

The four mechanical pillars upon which my approach to jiu jitsu is Based: A huge part of my approach to jiu jitsu is based around what I believe are the four most important mechanical underpinnings of the sport. These are
1 - The principle of LEVER AND FULCRUM
2 - The principle of the WEDGE (inclined plane)
3 - The principle of DIRECTIONALITY OF FORCE
4 - The principle of KUZUSHI (off balancing) Through the lens of these four mechanical principles I see most of the sport of jiu jitsu. Everything I teach, every question I ask, and every answer I offer, will make reference to at least one of these principles. Lever and fulcrum are widely talked about. They are force multipliers that can make the weakest man strong. Wedges are used to immobilize and inhibit or direct movement (among other things) - think of a humble little door stop that can hold any door open even in a hurricane. With regards your own force, a fundamental measure of its efficiency and effect will be the degree to which you apply the force in the appropriate direction. So often we apply large amounts of force in the wrong directions, when a much smaller force in the right direction would have garnered much better results. Kuzushi (off balancing) refers to our capacity to move an objects center of gravity beyond its base of support and destabilize it to create openings for attack. Kano wisely saw the value of this in standing positions. One of my biggest goals is to extend its use into bottom position ground grappling where it can play a tremendous role in advancing our bottom game. I teach jiu jitsu as a primarily mechanical enterprise, backed up by biomechanical and tactical elements. In the future I will talk more about these critical notions. Show me any move in the sport and I will show you how at least three of these four concepts are involved in its operation. Once you learn to observe the sport through these concepts you will see a very different sport indeed. Three of these four mechanical underpinnings have been widely discussed for generations - but the principle of the WEDGE has never been emphasized in jiu jitsu. One of my primary goals as a teacher is to change this.

Techniques and principles: The underlying PRINCIPLES of jiu jitsu (and indeed, all combat sports) are as fixed and unyielding as the night sky, rooted as they are, in the unchanging strengths and weaknesses of the mind and physical body of man. The TECHNIQUES of jiu jitsu, on the other hand, change with the rapidity of the waters of a river, since they are the result of the restless minds of men, who endlessly seek out innovation, change and study in order to gain competitive advantage over each other. Excellence in jiu jitsu must always involve study of both. Once learned, the principles will provide the unmoving bedrock upon which your understanding of the sport will be based. Technique on the other hand, you will have to continually update and adapt as it evolves around you.

Doing time: Whenever you start of a new enterprise there is a period where you have to start off at the bottom and “take your lumps.” A well run and progressive training program can shorten this time, but can never eliminate it. It is up to the athlete to work through it as long as necessary until his or her stint is over. I see this all the time, even in grappling. We all want new skills, but they don’t come overnight. There has to be several attributes in the athlete if he or she is to get through the frustration of the early learning process. First, patience, Second, resilience and third, faith. Patience to let time work it’s magic, resilience to take the early knocks and go the distance required, and faith that a program will create in time the changes needed to take you to your goals. All of us have to do our time. Not just at white belt, but every time we incorporate new techniques and tactics into our game. That ability to endure these times is the key to progress. Here, Garry Tonon does his time just a couple of months into MMA training with the formidable Jake Shields. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Ryan brothers getting recognition: This weekend the Flograppling awards for 2017 were announced. Squad standouts, Gordon and Nicky Ryan were rewarded for an outstanding year. Nicky Ryan won juvenile grappler of the year after double bronze at USA ADCC senior trials and going on to be the youngest entrant in the history of ADCC world championships at just sixteen years of age. Big brother Gordon Ryan won the award for best no gi submission of the year with his superlative guillotine variation upon the great Keenan Cornelius to win ADCC gold as part of the biggest medal haul in a debut performance in the history of the event. We are all so proud of these two brothers and deeply impressed by the dedication and hard work they put in to get these awards. Interestingly, RGA had two nominations for juvenile of the year. Fellow sixteen year old phenom, Rayron Gracie was also nominated. My sensei, Renzo Gracie, and I are very happy indeed to see the future of the academy so strongly represented by these two outstanding youngsters.

Rash guards - Part 2: Now it’s time for a rash guard story that may change the minds of some of the vast numbers of rash guard doubters out there...I am an admirer of the great MMA fighter Jose Aldo - any time he fights, I’m watching. The night he fought Uriah Faber, I wanted to see it. I don’t own a television, so I suggested to a bunch of my students that we go to a sports bar on the upper east side of Manhattan and watch it live and watch the great man at work. As always, I was running a little late and came in wearing my usual attire and began looking around for our table. Now my students and I actively seek out every opportunity to prank/ridicule/make fun of each other, my general weirdness gives them lots of raw material to work with! The entire group of them had dressed in rash guards and Fanny packs! As I sat down there was a noticeable look from pretty much the entire bar as they all simultaneously asked the question, “who the f**k are these dorks and why are they dressed in those gimp outfits?” We all started laughing and started to watch the show. Out of nowhere groups of women started coming up to our table and asking who we were and why were we dressed like that? Were we a sports team? Cyclists? Triathletes? Lunatics? Morons? Suddenly our table was neck deep in curious babes and hotties and the Jose Aldo fight was completely forgotten 😂😂Every single one of my students got multiple phone numbers and action out of that escapade! (I was the only failure 😞😒😂😂) The dudes at the bar were furious and could not understand how a bunch of dorks in wet suits who looked like they had beamed down from the deck of the starship Enterprise had gotten all the female attention 😂😂 So, who knows...maybe you doubters ought to give it a try...my rash guard system worked as well for my students as my leg lock system...perhaps it can work for you too! 😂😂

Rash guards: Part 1: Arguably the question i am asked more than any other has nothing to do with jiu jitsu. “Why do you always wear a rashguard?” First let me dispel a commonly voiced, but incorrect theory. It has nothing to do with fighting or being ready for fights. In my current physical state, an aggressive five year old could easily defeat me with a simple kick to the knee or hip or even a push - a rash guard isn’t going to save me! My reasons are purely practical. First, they are very comfortable, Second, they are easily washed and dried. Third, they are extremely low maintenance/wrinkle free/easily packed for travel etc. Fourth, being a low friction material, they are well adapted for wear under a jacket. Fifth, They enable me to comfortably demonstrate a technique in impromptu social situations to students. Sixth, they are warm in cold weather, yet cooling in hot summers due to wicking effects, and; if caught in rainstorm, they will dry in minutes even while being worn. Seventh, some clothing companies sponsor and support my athletes. I am proud to represent any company that supports my people. Eight, they are free as clothing companies are happy to see me wear their products. Nine, there is considerable variation in rashguard design that can vary from informal daily wear to more formal wear for dates/occasions. When it comes to comfort and utility and low maintenance, I have never seen an attire that can beat track pants, sneakers, rash guard and fanny pack. If i find something more comfortable in the future i will switch to that. It may not be aesthetically pleasing, but I am already rather ugly and odd looking so I don’t even bother with clothing aesthetics as my looks are a lost cause - if I had to rely on looks and charm for anything in my life I would be a homeless beggar already 😂😂.

A night at the boxing show with Mr Freddie Roach and his assistant Marie Spivey: Enjoying some boxing at Barclay center in Brooklyn NY. Always a pleasure to catch up with Mr Roach and listen to the fight wisdom that comes with decades in his craft at the very highest levels. Such a fascinating experience to hear his insight on boxing technique vs the demands of MMA. My privilege to watch great athletes up close through the lens of a truly great coach.

New directions...new skills: Garry Tonon goes through his MMA sparring with @gstleger It’s never an easy transition for a great single discipline athlete to transition mid career to MMA. The sudden influx of new skills can be overwhelming physically and daunting mentally. Elite athletes are well aware of what good athletic performance feels like in their own discipline, so to begin at white belt in three or four new disciplines can be very unsettling - they feel very strongly the contrast between their high skill level in their established domain and their lack of skills in the new areas. Ultimately however, one has to strive to move forward and believe that time and training will work their magic just as it did when they first began. In the end it’s a healthy reminder that we are all white belts in most areas of life and that the general spirit and desire for learning is more important than any knowledge we may have stumbled upon thus far. Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Make it memorable - the fundamental problem of teaching in jiu jitsu: The main concern of most teachers in jiujitsu is the information they GIVE to their students - how much, how complex etc. The study of jiu jitsu is never about how much information you TAKE IN - it is about how much you will be able to RECALL and use under severe stress. RETENTION, NOT OUTPUT, IS THE CENTRAL PROBLEM OF JIU JITSU INSTRUCTION. As such, we need effective methods of improving students ability to recall the large amounts of information we churn out. The most important method will always be the most basic - simple repetition. There are others however, that I find very effective. One of my favorites is the QUESTION AND ANSWER method. When students are spoon fed information they are not actively engaged in the learning process and tend to see themselves in a passive role that quickly leads to inattention, boredom and inability to recall what was taught. Whenever I can, I try to make the student part of the lesson through engaging them in question and answer dialogue where they have to WORK towards an answer. This creates independent and innovative problem solvers rather than robotic followers. It also creates a strong memory association with the learning experience that greatly aids retention. The teacher guides the discussion by asking questions that lead the student in a given direction and the student works for the answers. This leads to a cycle of curiosity, frustration, insight and satisfaction that engages the student and creates a learning process and answers that are both memorable and beneficial - one day the student will be able to put HIMSELF through that cycle and think autonomously. Things we are given for free we attach only small value to. Those things we work for, we value and cherish - this applies to knowledge as well. Photo @stephaniedrewsphotography

THE THREE GREAT KEYS TO COMBAT: Of all the activities that humans can partake in, none is more chaotic and unpredictable than fighting. THE WHOLE PURPOSE OF MARTIAL ARTS IS TO USE KNOWLEDGE AND TRAINING TO CONTROL THE OUTCOME OF COMBAT - TO CONTROL CHAOS. The history of combat sports clearly show that there are definite limits in our ability to do this. IN A WORLD OF UNCERTAINTY THE BEST WE CAN DO IS TO STACK THE ODDS IN OUR FAVOR AS BEST WE CAN. When I coach, I constantly stress to my athletes the need to assert themselves in three critical aspects of combat sports that play a huge role in determining the probability of the outcome. The athlete who can control the DIRECTION of the fight, the PACE of a fight and control the SET UPS and precursors to the main moves used by both athletes will win the vast majority of the matches he or she enters. This a huge topic that cannot be addressed in an Instagram post, but I shall give a simplified example. Georges St-Pierre is a quintessential example of an athlete who career was built around the three general keys to combat. Mr St-Pierre almost always was able to immediately dictate the most basic direction of a fight. If he wanted it on the floor he could put it there at will with his double leg. If he wanted it to remain standing, he was notoriously difficult to take down and hold down. With regards pace, he was always capable of slowing a match on the fence and tiring a dangerous puncher there. He could always return to center octagon and increase speed and generate movement that would set up double legs in the open. With regards set ups, in standing position, he had a complete arsenal of feints, misdirections, jabs and linked Superman punches that enabled him to use his king weapon, the double leg. On the floor he had an elaborate collection of protocols and striking from guard that created pressure to set up his Queen weapon, strong striking allied to guard passing that led either to submission,TKO or a dominance that won the round. In the chaos of fighting, we can never fully determine the outcome, but devoting your time to the study of these three key aspects of combat will always give you your best chance

Joe Rogan and I finish up podcast on various jiu jitsu and MMA related themes in LA. Afterwards, Mr Rogan demonstrated some fascinating thoughts on the use of lead leg and turning side kicks for MMA showing very impressive power and speed. I really believe that the influence Mr Rogan is one of the main reasons why ground fighting is still a big part of UFC events. In an age where most fans just want to see two fighters work in standing position, he constantly encourages and educates fans on the value of ground fighting. As such he has done a huge service to the sport and jiu jitsu. It was a pleasure to talk with him today. Hope you all enjoyed the show!

Meanwhile, back in New York...The squad kohai (Juniors) went on a rampage this weekend at the Rise Invitational Grappling competition last night. My great friend and Renzo Gracie alumni, Matt Serra has a very talented student, Jason Rau, who he sent to train with us. Mr Rau has worked hard to become one of the best in the room and last night defeated 10th Planet standout, Jon “Thor” Blank via submission (sankaku/ triangle variation). In addition, Frank Rosenthal showcased his rapid improvement by winning gold in the event 8 man tournament that featured EBI standouts JM Holland from 10th Planet and Mike Davila. Mr Rosenthal defeated Mr Davila via strangle in the final to take first place. Stanley Rosa from @bxmartialarts also won in a fine display from these talented young men. Great to see their hard work and drive being converted into shekels, notoriety and medals!

Teaching in LA: I went over some of the core principles of our leg locking system at @dynamixmma in Santa Monica today. They did a great job of hosting, bringing in almost ninety people who bravely put up with my foul language and rough manner and overall horribleness. Here I demonstrate the delicate interplay between upper body and lower body forces that are required for maximum effect. When this is done well a staggering amount of force can be brought to bear upon the knee and ankle, even with one hand as I demonstrate here. Tomorrow it’s on to my great friend and fellow Renzo Gracie Alumni, @5starmartialarts Shawn Williams for more jiu jitsu adventures. Wishing you all the best from sunny California!

Danaher airport curse continues...my amazing ability to somehow screw up anything involving air travel continued today. I taught all day and got ready to go to JFK. As soon as I left RGA and massive rainstorm broke out just as everyone went to leave work - massive traffic jams of New Yorkers fleeing the city for the weekend but bombarded in winter rain storm - perfect 😖😖😖 Trying to run to the departure gate on a crippled leg dragging a bag full of rashguards while soaking wet always makes for a pleasant preflight experience 😂😂 No problem - second last person on the plane! (I beat a giant fat dude who was breathing like Darth Vader) Looking forward to LA weather and teaching out West! 😊😊 See you all soon!

Story time: The Renzo Gracie Academy has been a center of jiu jitsu training for almost twenty five years in NYC. In that time so much has happened, so much has changed and so much more to be done. Luca Atalla of Gracie Magazine took time to interview me with regards the early days of the academy, Mr Gracie’s approach to teaching and why he produced such a list of champions. I also talk about teaching the MMA athletes who came to the academy to work on ground skills, the early days of the squad and other subjects. In time these should be released @gallerrapp and renzogracie.com. Lots of cherished memories and a great cast of characters!

Seminar in LA: This weekend I will be in Los Angeles teaching a seminar at Dynamixmma in Santa Monica at 4pm with friends Antoni Hardonk and Josh Fiore. Always a pleasure to get out West and show our methods. Also I will stop by my great friend, Shawn Williams 5Star martial arts academy on Sunday to teach, then on Monday talk to Mr Joe Rogan and friends on his podcast. Should be a busy but fun weekend!

The essential nature of jiu jitsu is control leading to submission. All the various forms of control have a common theme - to restrict, stop and direct movement. Ultimately your goal is to make an opponent’s own body unable to respond to the commands and wishes of his mind and thus, to make your mind master of his body. Then you have true control.

I am very happy to say that next Monday (15th January) I shall join Joe Rogan on his weekly podcast discussing jiu jitsu and the squad along with other topics. Mr Rogan is a great student of the game and very adept at 10th Planet style jiu jitsu as well as more conventional styles of jiu jitsu. He is a great voice for the sport who has done a tremendous job of trying to educate MMA viewers of the subtleties of all forms of jiu jitsu and grappling (not just 10th Planet, as some claim) in UFC competition. Once I was at a dinner and was asked who I believed was the most influential person in jiu jitsu. I surprised everyone by answering that it was probably Joe Rogan. My reasoning was that he talks to a larger audience than anyone and does so with a passion that has probably brought more people to the sport than any athlete. It will be a pleasure to talk with him and friends about the game.

Facing your challenges and fears: A huge part of the martial arts journey is bound up with the notion of confronting and overcoming tough challenges and deep fears. The very nature of martial arts is that of dealing with confrontation, conflict and violence. Any kind of confrontation is likely to create some level of fear response to it. The question is - how will you deal with it? I have seen myriad ways in which different athletes have overcome anxieties to win, so many in fact, that I don’t believe there is any one right way to do it. It will come down to individual preferences. I have always found however, that one approach always seems to help in those times where fear, doubt and anxiety threatens to inhibit your performance and prevent you getting to your goals. YOU MUST AVOID THE TWO PITFALLS THAT COMPOUND FEAR AND ANXIETY AND WHICH LEAD TO INDECISION AND PARALYSIS IN THOSE CRITICAL TIMES WHEN DECISIVE AND WELL DIRECTED ACTION ARE NECESSARY. These are INACTIVITY and INDECISION. Show me a man feeling fear before a major event who is inactive and lacking any plan of action once the event begins, and I will show you a man WHOSE FEAR LEVELS INCREASE WITH EVERY PASSING MINUTE as the deadline approaches. THE SUREST WAY TO RELIEVE ANXIETY IS TO HAVE A CLEAR PLAN OF OPERATIONS AS TO WHAT YOU WANT TO DO AND BE ACTIVE IN YOUR PREPARATION TO ENACT THAT PLAN. In all my years of coaching, I have seen every kind of psychological counseling, visualization, hypnosis etc. I HAVE NEVER SEEN A BETTER ANTIDOTE TO ANXIETY THAN INTELLIGENTLY DIRECTED ACTIVITY. Let planning and activity be your sword and shield whenever fear and anxiety threaten to overwhelm your ability to perform. When you are alone with your fears, they will be your guardians.

Two forms of grappling aggression: There are two primary forms of aggression/attack in grappling - SUBMISSION and POSITION. Interestingly, THE THREAT OF EACH IS MAXIMIZED ONLY WHEN YOU THREATEN BOTH EQUALLY. The squad is primarily known for our heavy emphasis on submission attacks, but we never overlook the need for constant and strong positional attacks at the same time; FOR ONLY WHEN THERE IS A DUAL THREAT TO PROVOKE STRONG DEFENSIVE REACTIONS WILL THE OPPORTUNITY FOR SUBMISSIONS ARISE. Conversely, ONLY WHEN THERE IS A DANGER OF SUBMISSIONS WILL IT BE EASIER TO WORK YOUR WAY TO BETTER POSITIONS. This constant interplay between position and submission AT ALL TIMES, rather than only positional attacks first, and then submission attacks, is a distinctive feature of our game. Most people use the position/submission duality as a SEQUENCE position first, then submission). We like to do this also, but often use it as a DILEMMA (threaten both at all times to make each easier to attain). Here, Garry Tonon applies strong passing positional pressure to open up a submission opportunity on the legs that would take him to victory in this match.

There are three things in which I have total faith and upon which I have built my career. The laws of physics, the ability of a well constructed and rational training program to improve performance in a given task so that over time people can overcome obstacles and fears and get to their goals; and the ability of a few highly motivated and skilled people to create change across an entire population of people. In a world of doubt and uncertainty I would stake my life upon these.

Relaxation, tension and body geometry: A huge part of your success or failure in grappling will come down to your ability to control your opponent’s movements by FITTING THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF HIS in ways that MAXIMIZE CONTACT AND CONNECTION and thus inhibit movement through CONNECTION RATHER THAN MUSCULAR STRENGTH. The insight you must gain is that THE ONLY WAY TO MOLD YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR OPPONENT’S BODY IS TO RELAX AND SOFTEN YOUR OWN BODY. However, the only way to KEEP yourself locked into that position is to tighten yourself. Thus you must play the same delicate balancing act between relaxation and tension that a python does when it wraps around its prey. YOU MUST BE SOFT WHEN MOVING TO FIT INTO YOUR OPPONENT, THEN TIGHTEN TO SOLIDIFY YOUR POSITION ONCE THERE. Often you will have to work in cycles of tension and relaxation to get the job done. Here, Gordon Ryan shows superb conformity to the shape of his opponent’s body - made possible by relaxation- but also tightness to hold himself once there against a very skilled opponent like Yuri Simoes as he patiently works towards a match winning strangle. Photo @banejitsu

HAPPY NEW YEAR FROM THE SQUAD!! Hope we can put some uplifting moments into your jiu jitsu in 2018! Thank you all so much much for your interest and support for our approach to jiu jitsu! Wishing you all the best for tonight and next year! 🎆🎊🎆😊😜🤗🎆

In a sport where everyone is doing their best to keep moving forward and improve - just maintaining what you have been doing and remaining stationary is effectively moving backwards. Being content with your past successes is a guaranteed way to ensure future failures. Keep working hard as 2018 approaches. The techniques and tactics of our sport are limitless- it’s up to you to take advantage of that. Photo @banejitsu

Creating good habits: Training is designed to INSTILL GOOD/SOUND HABITS IN ATHLETES THAT BECOME SO INGRAINED IN THEIR THOUGHTS AND MOVEMENTS THAT THEY WILL MANIFEST THEMSELVES EVEN UNDER THE GREATEST PRESSURE. The path to building those habits is DAILY DRILLING. Drills are often rushed through, ignored, performed half heartedly or otherwise downplayed by students. Let me tell you this - WHEN YOU ARE TRUELY UNDER PRESSURE IN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP COMPETITION, YOU ARE EXHAUSTED, OUT OF IDEAS, CAN’T HEAR YOUR COACH ABOVE THE CROWD, YOUR OWN MIND SUGGESTING WAYS OUT TO QUIT WITH DIGNITY - THE ONLY FRIEND YOU WILL HAVE ON YOUR SIDE IS THE UNBREAKABLE HABITS BUILT OVER COUNTLESS HOURS OF DRILLING TO ACT CORRECTLY AND IN WAYS THAT TAKE YOU BACK TO THE PATH OF VICTORY. Don’t devalue them. Here, Nicky Ryan and Nick Ronan work on their daily ashi garami drills at Musclepharm HQ in LA in preparation for competition that saw both win in fine style by submission.

Double danger: All of us try constantly to improve our skills in the combat sports. Persistent, intelligently directed training will eventually create results and you will develop some weapons that will earn the respect of your training partners and opponents. However, if you want to further your success - ALWAYS LOOK TO DEVELOP WEAPONS THAT WORK AS COMPLIMENTARY PAIRS. The fundamental feature of real combat is RESISTANCE from your opponent as you fight for advantage and victory. It is critical that you have at least one strong complimentary pair of attacks so that as one attack runs into resistance it opens the door for the second attack. The way in which pairs of attacks can compliment each other is varied. Sometimes they compliment each other in terms of DIRECTION (forward and backwards or left/right for example). Sometimes they do it from one side of opponent’s body to another, or from lower body to upper body, so that as an opponent defends one he offers the other. One of the strongest complimentary pairs of attacks among my students was the jab/takedown pairing of Georges St-Pierre. He would use his jab to harass, frustrate, hurt and move opponents. If they did not fight back against it he would easily win the round, so opponents HAD to fire back in order not to fall behind on the scoreboard. The jab is a long range weapon, so that meant opponents typically had to CLOSE DISTANCE to fire back. However, their attempt to step forward and fire back put them in danger of the second complimentary weapon - the double leg takedown - a weapon that he had developed to an extraordinary degree. Mr St-Pierre also had well developed guard passing and ground striking skills that made time on the floor very hazardous for opponents. So they would have to struggle back up to their feet where the same cycle could be repeated until victory was attained. FINDING AND DEVELOPING A POWERFUL COMPLIMENTARY PAIR OF ATTACKS IS A BIG PART OF YOUR EARLY DEVELOPMENT IN THE SPORT. Only when your attacks come in complimentary pairs that take advantage of defensive reactions will you be able to break through the strong resistance you will encounter as you rise in level.

The first battle in any grappling match is the battle for grips: In any grappling bout, whether it be a friendly match in the gym among white belts or a titanic struggle in black belt world championships competition, is the battle to attain functional grips upon your opponent. The number one theme I also coach in this regard can be stated very simply - ALWAYS FIGHT FOR GRIPS WITH A PURPOSE AND A PLAN. So often I see people nonchalantly working for grips first and then try to figure out on the fly what they will do with those grips once they get them. THE IDEA IS TO KNOW WHAT YOU WANT TO DO FIRST SO THAT YOU KNOW WHAT GRIPS YOU WILL NEED TO BRING ABOUT THAT END. This will immediately give your grip fighting a purposeful and energetic feel that will make you stand out in a training room. Here, Gordon Ryan and Dillon Danis settle into position to begin fighting for grips in a hard fought, tactical match that prominently featured grip fighting and grip denial. Both athletes knew what they needed to win and what the other fellow needed to win and had a plan as to what grips they had to get and which they had to deny in order to get what they wanted. Much of high level competition is determined by the outcome of these grip battles. Photo @banejitsu

Back in NYC! Just touched down at JFK and get to renew my love/hate affair with New York - sub zero temperatures and a giant line for a cab filled with obnoxious New Yorkers (I fit right in)😖😖 Hey gang - training begins tomorrow 12pm gi and no gi down in the basement of despair, hope and learning! No rest for the wicked! Lots of material to work on - lots of goals and dreams to fight towards. See you all tomorrow 😊😊

Hard working problem solvers: People come to me all the time asking what kind of attributes they need to need to develop in order to excel in jiu jitsu. Conversely, they will also claim that they can never beat a certain opponent because they are possessed of a certain attribute that they cannot overcome. Thus do I get endless numbers of inquiries asking how to build certain attributes such as strength, speed,
Flexibility, mental toughness etc. etc. These attributes are all good and desirable and will definitely help your progress - BUT THEY ARE NOT THE ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES I LOOK FOR WHEN APPRAISING THE POTENTIAL OF A STUDENT. What I look for can be said in a single short sentence. I look for HARD WORKING PROBLEM SOLVERS. Nothing more, nothing less. When you look at a list of great world champions you will see tremendous variation in physical and mental attributes. BUT YOU WILL SEE TWO THINGS THEY ALL HAD IN COMMON - they worked harder and proved more adept at solving the problems in front of them in the time available than their opponents. How hard working you are is not some innate quality. I ACTUALLY DON’T BELIEVE ANYONE IS LAZY - JUST UNMOTIVATED. WHAT WE CALL LAZINESS IS SIMPLY A LACK OF PASSION IN THAT DOMAIN. (I shall write more about passion and laziness in future posts as I believe they are very important notions in our quest for improvement). As for problem solving, I think this is something we all find happiness in and we all have different ways of finding solutions. Look at the squad as an example. Eddie Cummings and myself come from a formal academic background and our problem solving methods reflect that, with a wordy, fine grained distinctions look to them. The Ryan brothers do not, and their methods of solving problems have a more practical/workshop look to them. Garry Tonon and Georges St-Pierre are somewhere in between - BUT ALL GOT OUTSTANDING RESULTS AND SOLVE THE PROBLEMS OF JIU JITSU WITH EQUAL EFFICACY- just in somewhat different ways. Work on your attributes- but don’t think they are the key to your success - realize that the keys are your capacity to work over time and solve the problems that arise as you work. Photo @banejitsu

Begin with denial: Most jiu jitsu athletes begin their matches with a clear sense of what their favorite moves are and how they want to employ them against their opponent. This is good, but I recommend you begin with something else first. BEGIN EVERY ENGAGEMENT WITH DENYING YOUR OPPONENT THE TOOLS HE NEEDS TO IMPOSE HIS GAME UPON YOU - ONLY THEN DO YOU WORK TO IMPOSE YOUR GAME UPON HIM. Any time both athletes are simultaneously working to implement their own moves, it immediately becomes a dog fight. Top tier athletes typically focus first on shutting down their opponents avenues of attack and only then switch to the positive act of launching their own attacks. Here, Gordon Ryan shuts down the dangerous open guard game of World champion Romulo Barral with his signature body lock. Once Mr Barral’s guard was sufficiently nullified, he switched to a positive passing game leading to a decisive strangle attack - a near perfect demonstration of the denial/impose sequence that is such a key feature of our approach to the passing positional game. Photo @banejitsu

SHOW ME A MAN OUT OF BALANCE AND I WILL SHOW YOU A MAN WHO IS OPEN TO ANY ATTACK YOU CHOOSE. Make your opponent’s BALANCE your primary focus - then you will have the luxury of CHOOSING which attack to follow with, rather than having to smash through your opponent’s full resistance when his balance is undisturbed.

The bicycle wheel: Students often come to me concerned that due to some circumstances in their life, be it injury, career, family/personal, they have to reduce training. Their concern is that with reductions in training time they will lose the skills they had worked so hard to develop. Don’t be concerned. Skills take tremendous work in order to be CREATED OR IMPROVED, but very little work in order to be MAINTAINED AT (OR CLOSE TO) THEIR CURRENT LEVEL. My friend, Jean Charles Skarbowsky, used a fine metaphor to express this idea. Remember when you were a child playing with a bicycle? You could prop the bicycle upside down and spin the front wheel with your hand. When you first began to spin the wheel, it took a fair amount of effort to get it spinning quickly - you had to overcome the inertia of the stationary wheel through effort. BUT ONCE THE WHEEL WAS SPINNING QUICKLY - YOU COULD EASILY KEEP IT MOVING AT SPEED BY PERIODICALLY BRUSHING THE WHEEL WITH A LIGHT TOUCH OF YOUR HAND. Realize this - YOUR PHYSICAL SKILLS WORK THE SAME WAY. Once they are well developed, even minimal efforts will maintain them close to their current level. Have faith that should life and circumstances take you in directions that mean you have to reduce training time - don’t despair. Just stay in the game to the degree that you keep most of what you worked so hard to gain. THE ONLY TIME I SEE PEOPLE DRASTICALLY LOSE SKILLS IS WHEN THEY COMPLETELY ABANDON THE GAME BOTH MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY. All the time I see athletes keep ninety percent of their skills with just minimal upkeep for extended periods of time. As soon as circumstances change favorably you can get back in the saddle very quickly and then devote the extra time and effort to making improvements and innovations- which require considerably more time and effort. Whenever training time gets compromised let the metaphor of the bicycle wheel be your guide.

Victories at No Gi world championships: The squad’s Canadian contingent had an outstanding performance at the No Gi world championships this weekend. Oliver Taza won the gold medal at lightweight brown belt and Ethan Crelinsten won a silver medal at light featherweight brown belt. Both athletes had a very high submission rate despite not being able to use the weapon we are most associated with - heel hooking. These two young men always impress me with the dedication they show to travel long distances to train with us and keep improving. This was the last big show of the year and to see their progress rewarded in this fashion is very gratifying. Thanks also to Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon for traveling out to the competition with them to corner and coach. This has been an amazing g year for Messrs Taza and Crelinsten- both had very strong performances at ADCC despite relative inexperience and now at the IBJJF world championships as well. Expect even more next year as they continue to train hard and make the technical and tactical progress needed to get to the next level of achievement.

Integrated systems: Earlier in the week I discussed a central theme of my approach to jiu jitsu - that we constantly seek to select isolated, high-value areas of the sport and build complex systems around them so that our athletes can have a significant knowledge advantage in that domain. If the athlete can maintain that domain and dominate the action within it - HE OR SHE WOULD BE SUCCESSFULLY CHANGING THE GAME FROM ONE WHERE PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES, WILL, YEARS OF EXPERIENCE ETC ETC DETERMINE THE OUTCOME; TO A SITUATION WHERE DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE DETERMINES THE OUTCOME. If the system itself is sound and the students application of it is better than his opponent’s ability to interfere with it - success will follow. Unfortunately the tremendous success that my students had with certain systems created the impression that all we did was invent some fancy systems in a few areas - legs and back - and that was the limit of their skills. This lead to many accusations of them being “one trick ponies” incapable of beating top level competitors with well rounded games. This year my students did a fine job of showing what our actual approach is, rather than the public perception. ALWAYS THE INTENT WAS TO CREATE DIFFERENT SYSTEMS THAT COVERED THE WHOLE BODY, NOT JUST SUBMISSIONS BUT POSITIONAL ATTACKS ALSO - AND THAT THESE SYSTEMS SHOULD BE INTEGRATED WITH EACH OTHER SO THAT FAILURE IN THE APPLICATION OF ONE WOULD LEAD TO OPPORTUNITIES TO EMPLOY ANOTHER UNTIL A COMPLETE BREAKTHROUGH WAS ACHIEVED. This use of INTEGRATED SYSTEMS is the real goal of all my students and the direction of my work in jiu jitsu. Here, Gordon Ryan uses the interface between our Kimura system and back attack system to work his attacks against the great Xande Ribeiro in a very tightly contested match in ADCC. Mr Ribeiro is doing a fine job of blocking two dangerous attacks at the same time. This kind of sustained multi directional pressure is what you must try to build towards in your training. Photo by @banejitsu

One of the most interesting moments of my jiu jitsu year was accompanying Gordon Ryan to his bout with Ralek Gracie at the legendary Gracie Academy in Torrance CA. After the bout, Rorion Gracie graciously showed us around the beautiful dojo, which features many historical artifacts and memorabilia and even a museum! It was fascinating to hear his perspective on the development and changes of the sport and his insights on the early history of Jiu Jitsu in America. When I first began jiu jitsu, Rorion was one of the chief figureheads of the sport. All my life I trained exclusively with my sensei, Renzo Gracie and had only very sporadic contact with Messrs Rorion, Royce, Rickson and Royler - Helio’s side of the first family. Most of the early jiu jitsu students in America will agree with me that early UFC’s and “Gracie’s in Action” were the major reasons why we got involved in the sport - Rorion was directly involved in both. It was an honor to see the man who had such a profound effect on the history and development of modern martial arts in his dojo. Of course any person who makes major change in the world will have his advocates and detractors - change will always thrill some, appall others and lead to green pastures for some and burnt bridges for others - but I know that I and many others owe him a great deal of gratitude from afar for his efforts to expand the sport and revolutionize modern martial arts. I sometimes wonder if I and many others would even have ever heard of jiu jitsu without his work. It was an honor to be able to show some of the new directions and talents of jiu jitsu in the home of one of the most important historical traditions of the sport.

Orientation, disorientation and control: A common feature of jiu jitsu sparring and matches is the degree to which athletes are put into very contorted positions whilst upside down, inverted, spinning around an axis etc. Usually these situations occur spontaneously and in a very short time frame. Often they are quite different from the usual moves we practice in the gym. In any extreme, uncontrolled scramble situation of this kind, it is vital that the athlete have a general sense of direction and a few key concepts in mind SO THAT THEY CAN CREATE ORDER OUT OF CHAOS AND STEER EVENTS IN THEIR FAVOR. So often I see students clamoring for endless details on a specific position. This is a good thing, but even better is the student who seeks to place the details in ORDER OF IMPORTANCE and focus primarily upon the most vital ones. In wild scrambles where your orientation is very different what you are used to and time is of essence, a few key concepts will be far more useful to you than a mountain of details. Here, Garry Tonon finds himself in a position, ashi garami, with which he is extremely familiar, but in an unusual manifestation - vertical with the foot uncontrolled. Focusing upon the main features of ashi garami control, he was able to rein in ADCC medalist Vagner Rocha and bring this unpromising situation back under control into a much more standard ashi garami so that just a few seconds after this photo was taken, his opponent was tapping in submission to a finely applied heel hook variation. Photo by @banejitsu

Integrated systems: Most of you know that a distinctive feature of my approach to jiu jitsu is to focus upon specific, easily attainable scenarios and build complex systems around them that enable an athlete to control that position and work towards submission. Because the system is very comprehensive it offers the athlete a tremendous KNOWLEDGE ADVANTAGE over his or her opponent in that specific domain which the opponent will find very problematic to deal with and overcome. Very often you will see my students making use of some of our more well known systems - back, front headlock, Kimura, juji gatame/sankaku, And ashi garami among many others. In truth however, ANY ONE SYSTEM CAN COME UP SHORT UNDER THE PRESSURE OF TOP LEVEL COMPETITION. It is of the first importance then, that athletes work towards the most important goal of my approach to jiu jitsu - THE INTEGRATION OF THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS SO THAT THE ATHLETE CAN APPLY PRESSURE WITH ONE, WITH THE ABILITY TO PASS SEAMLESSLY TO ANOTHER AND RENEW THE ATTACK UNTIL THE SUSTAINED PRESSURE BREAKS THROUGH RESISTANCE AND SUBMISSION IS ATTAINED. This INTEGRATED SYSTEMS APPROACH is what all my athletes strive towards. Here, outstanding apprentice (kohai), Nick Ronan shows superb integration of ashi garami and back systems to create extreme pressure on opponent, Mike Davila to get the breakthrough and submission in fine style at @kasaigrappling championships this weekend.

Aussie in Manhattan: Outstanding Australian Grappling star, Craig Jones came by the blue basement to train with the squad in the morning class today! When I was visiting family in Australia, Mr Jones’ gym in Melbourne was very welcoming when I taught a leg lock seminar - it was a pleasure to return the favor and host Mr Jones here in our town 😊 When squad members achieve notable wins we have a tradition of awarding them a finely made knife as we consider the blade the perfect metaphor for our life in jiu jitsu. In true Crocodile Dundee in NYC fashion, Mr Jones looked at the knife and deadpanned, “That’s not a knife...” 😂😂 A wave to all our Australian friends - Mr Jones is an amazing example to us all, Australian or otherwise, as to what can be achieved by dedicated, self starting individuals far away from the more well known centers of the sport.

Quest for improvement: I love the excitement of watching junior students working hard to catch up to the skills of the inspirational seniors and drive towards their goals and dreams. Jason Rau has been doing exactly that. This weekend he entered sapeteiro Invitational 185 pound division - despite being a 170 pound athlete- and took gold - winning every match by submission in regulation time. Mr Rau has a formidable arsenal of attacks that just keeps growing, but sankaku (triangle) and ashi garami Based attacks are his favorites. He used both to win the gold. In the finals he faced EBI standout Josh Hayden, who has a reputation as a strong leg locker and a very difficult person to leg lock. Mr Rau had no problems breaking through and getting the win via heel hook variation to take a fine victory. This all happened prior to the big Kasai show last night and it was inspiration to his team mate and great friend Nick Ronan, who got the good news and then went out on stage to win via strangle in his superfight with Mike Davila. A great weekend for these two friends and students of our approach. This constant quest for improvement is the heart and soul of jiu jitsu study. We all need a reason to get up and go every morning - without such a reason every step is an effort - but when you have a passion and goal every dawn is a renewed chance to get what you want and your feet feel light indeed.

Victory in New York City: Gordon Ryan capped off an incredible year in NYC tonight, defeating multi world champion and two time ADCC gold medalist Yuri Simoes by submission with just seconds left on the clock after a dominant display of reversals and guard passing pressure. This has been an amazing three weeks for Mr Ryan. In a three spree he defeated Ralek Gracie, won EBI 14 and defeated a two time ADCC champion in a weight division above him. Garry Tonon competed in the tournament and had some memorable moments in his characteristic style but did not want to play the point game that is required to win the format. Young gun Nick Ronan had a fine performance in the preliminaries- putting on a submission clinic on opponent Mike Davila culminating in a fine strangle from the back. It was great to be able to represent our style in our home town in Kasai grappling’s inaugural show. Hope you all enjoyed the event!

Working against resistance: Daily drilling of moves is a good thing, but only live sparring will get you proficient in your ultimate goal of being able to control and submit a fully resisting opponent who is trying their best to defeat you. The first line of resistance on the part of your opponent IS THEIR ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE WHAT YOU ARE ATTEMPTING TO DO TO THEM. Only when they make that recognition can they formulate a defense. A huge part of success in combat then, is TO DISGUISE YOUR REAL INTENT UNTIL THE LAST MOMENT. The best attacks typically begin with feints and misdirection that subvert your opponent’s ability to read and recognize your real intent. Once you have gained proficiency in the fundamental movements and skills of the sport - go further AND MAKE MISDIRECTION AND SUBTERFUGE YOUR PRIMARY SKILL. More than anything else, you will need this to break through knowledgeable resistance and bring about the ends you seek.

Kasai Grappling Championship: This weekend the squad will go out for the last time this year at the First Kasai professional grappling championship. Garry Tonon will enter the 170 pound tournament against some of the most talented Welterweights in the world, most of whom are world champions or ADCC veterans. Gordon Ryan will take on two time ADCC gold medalist and multi time BJJ world champion, Yuri Simoes. This a tremendous line up of talent for an inaugural event. The organizers have done an incredible job of getting the best athletes in a first class venue in a show with great production quality. Rich Byrnes and Rolles Gracie have assembled a tremendous team of experts and I am really looking forward to what may become one of the premier grappling organizations. The rule set is a great compromise between positional skills and submission skills that will reward purposeful action and punish passivity - a first period of submission only and then if no submission, a period with conventional points scoring to decide a winner. It’s wonderful to have in here in NYC - we normally have to travel to get to premier shows. The squad is working their way through the week getting prepared. Check out @kasaigrappling - it’s up to us as jiu jitsu fans and athletes to create the support that can give the athletes a forum to showcase the sport! Hope you all enjoy the show!

The remarkable Jake Shields wins again: With all the excitement of EBI 14 this weekend, we must not overlook the great achievement of Jake Shields in Submission Undergound Grappling. He took on outstanding jiu jitsu world champion Gilbert Burns in an EBI rules format and won a hard fought victory in overtime via riding time. Mr Shields is a fine example of an established athlete working hard to learn new skills at a time when most athletes are happy to just keep doing what they have done before. Every day he is in the gym working hard with the young killers. He is one of the very few MMA fighters in the world who can go with truly elite grapplers and win or at the very least, give them one hell of a test. His work ethic is an inspiration to the younger athletes and his great results a well deserved reward for his great efforts.

Victory in Texas: Gordon Ryan won his fourth EBI title tonight in Austin Texas in a tough tournament - winning three hard fought elimination matches and then a dramatic overtime finish against Australian grappling star Craig Jones. Mr Jones has had a breakout year with an outstanding performance in ADCC and now again in EBI 14. In a very memorable overtime, Mr Ryan had to use all his escape skills to break out of a tight juji gatame armlock. He was able to prevent his extended arm from going into hyperextension and then strangle Mr Jones in the next exchange. Two outstanding victories in two weeks for Mr Ryan - now it’s back to NYC on a 5:45am flight to NYC to resume teaching and training as Mr Ryan and Mr Tonon prepare for the Kasai grappling tournament in NYC next weekend! Thanks to Onnit Gym here in Austin for hosting a great EBI event. Also thanks to Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila for putting on another great EBI and giving all the athletes a great venue to express their skills in a thrilling format. Thanks to all our loyal fans for your support as the squad takes on all comers 😊Wishing you all the best in NYC - to my students in NYC - see you all tomorrow 😊

Training in Texas: The squad arrived in Austin, Texas and straight to workout room. Here we are in The Center for Veterans Of Foreign Wars - Post 8787 - Veterans Jiu Jitsu. It’s great to see a community center dedicated to Veterans of America’s armed forces and an honor to work out there. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan go through their submissions drills before EBI 14 tomorrow night and then afterwards Mr Tonon went through his MMA drills. Texas has its own unique charm. Now it’s back to the hotel to rest and hopefully watch a very exciting looking UFC card tonight. Wishing you all the best from Texas!

Victory in LA - Part 2: Big wins via submission by both Nicky Ryan and Eddie Cummings at Fight2Win Pro in LA tonight! Both wins were via strangulation from the back after reversals from bottom position. Nicky Ryan, just sixteen years old and recent purple belt defeated twenty five year old 10th Planet black belt Ricky Lule and Mr Cummings defeated Jacob Sandoval, a talented blackbelt from Cobrinha. Fight2Win continues to impress with strong shows that mix grass roots support for local talent mixed with big name main events in exciting venues. Thanks also to Musclepharm who provided a great training center all week. Special thanks to Garry Tonon who thanklessly worked hard all week to help Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan and Eddie Cummings prepare for their respective matches in between his own MMA training. Now the squad heads to Texas tonight to support Gordon Ryan as he seeks to defend his EBI Open weight title in Austen. Thanks as always for your support and interest in our work and progress. Wishing you all the best from LA 😊😊

History: It was an honor to go to the legendary Gracie jiu jitsu head quarters in Torrance for Gordon Ryan’s match with Ralek Gracie. Inside the dojo was a beautiful mini museum of Helio’s side of the family - a side I am not very familiar with as I trained exclusively under Renzo Gracie and the Gracie Barra lineage. It was a wonderful experience to be a small part of the match and then walk around and observe the famous dojo with its memorabilia and images from the past, all the way back to Helio through the early days of MMA/UFC in the United States. There were so many iconic images from the beginning of the UFC, events that I had long forgotten but which were important in my early development and inspiration. Our sport changes and adapts so quickly that it is very easy to lose historical perspective and get entirely wrapped up in current developments and emerging trends. In truth however, whatever achievements we make today are only possible because of the work and achievements of our forebears in the art. In addition, these earlier authorities often came at problems we still deal with today from a very different perspective, which can often provide insight to a thoughtful person today. Sometimes an old idea, combined with contemporary context, can be a path to something new.

Going old school - California style: When Gordon Ryan defeated Ralek Gracie at the legendary Torrance Gracie Jiu Jitsu academy on Sunday, I got a chance to talk to jiu jitsu icon Rorian Gracie and some of his students about the early history of Gracie Jiu Jitsu in The United States. Gracie Jiu Jitsu was first taught out of a small garage here in California! There were no schools - it took a long time for the first Gracie’s to build a following and work their way up to becoming one of the foremost martial arts in the world. Well, here I am in California, teaching private classes out of...a garage! Ha ha! Looks like things have come full circle!! New school Jiu Jitsu - leg locking 101 - taught old school style out of the garage 😊😊 Here my friends Josh and Chris from @dynamixmma go to work on ashi garami and other skills. Cars replaced by mats and we are ready to go! Now it’s on to team training as the squad pairs with Keenan Cornelius to get Gordon Ryan ready for EBI 14, Nicky Ryan ready for Fight2Win and Garry Tonon ready for MMA debut some time next year. I always love to take inspiration from the past and love to give credit where ever I can to those who came before us and made our work possible. It’s a pleasure to get a small sense of what it must have been like for those Jiu Jitsu pioneers who gave birth to Gracie Jiu-Jitsu here in California and helped make it possible for people like myself to find happiness in the sport.

Back in training: After the excitement of Gordon Ryan’s victory in Torrance yesterday The squad was back in the gym today, joined by Keenan Cornelius. Here, Mr Ryan battles Mr Cornelius while Nicky Ryan goes toe to toe with Garry Tonon in the training cage at Musclepharm HQ in LA. Mr Ryan is preparing for a very tough field in Texas this weekend at EBI 14 Open weight tournament while his younger brother will take on outstanding 10th Planet Black belt Ricky Lule here in LA Friday night. This evening it will be more grappling training and then MMA work for Mr Tonon. In jiu jitsu as in life, the higher your goals and aspirations, the more you must demand of yourself. The more you want - the more you must give - in sweat and effort. When people TALK to me about their goals and aspirations, I don’t even listen. I WATCH WHAT THEY ACTUALLY DO TO BRING ABOUT THOSE GOALS AND ASPIRATIONS AND SEE HOW MUCH THEY ARE WILLING TO GIVE IN THE ATTEMPT. Only then will you really see how serious they are.

Victory in LA: Gordon Ryan defeated Ralek Gracie at the Metamoris event held at Gracie Academy Headquarters in Torrance today. On a bet placed shortly before the match he limited himself to sankaku (triangle) and juji gatame (armbar) attacks - the bet was that it had to be performed between ten and twelve minutes - a closer time frame than the ten to eighteen minutes he declared earlier in the week. At ten and half minutes he secured the submission win via sankaku variation. It was an honor to be at the famous Torrance academy and see so much history and meet people who were heavily involved in the early history of jiu jitsu in the United States. It created a fascinating atmosphere for the match, which had the no time limit rule structure of early matches in the history of the sport. Now it’s back to the gym to get Nicky Ryan ready for Fight2Win Friday night, Gordon Ryan ready for Sunday night, Nick Ronan ready for Kasai grappling event in two weeks and Garry Tonon ready for MMA!

It ain’t easy keeping up with the squad: At the house of our gracious host Mo Jassim, his faithful English Bulldogs have been keeping us company as we work hard on submission skills in preparation for upcoming events. Looks like the last ashi garami session took a toll on this poor fellow! Having fun out here on the West Coast. Looking forward to early seminar at Shawn Williams academy tomorrow before the metamoris event and then back into training! I think by Sunday night I will be sleeping right next to this bulldog! 😂😂

Polishing the edge: When sharpening a dull knife, the initial work is heavy grinding of the edge on very abrasive surfaces that remove metal in ways that gradually change and thin the edge geometry to Bring back the sharpness. As the sharpening process continues, progressively finer abrasives are used that remove less and less metal. At the end of the process the edge of the blade is polished by the finest abrasives. At that point there is no more metal removal, just light polishing that leaves a mirror smooth edge that gleams and cuts like a razor. So too in jiu jitsu contest preparation. During the normal training cycle, the work is heavy and designed to change the athletes skill set. As the contest approaches, the training changes to light work designed to polish already existing skills. Here, Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan, Garry Tonon and Nick Ronan polish their skills for upcoming events at Musclepharm HQ in LA. Following this approach creates an athlete who arrives on match day with skills as sharp as the finest blade

Next stop California: The squad heads to LA - big Gordon Ryan discovers he is no longer capable of fitting in regulation seat of Airbus 300 and must go in cargo. Preparation in NYC has been good. Now training in LA with old friend Shawn Williams. We shall stay in LA for next week to prepare for EBI 14 Open weight. Three tough matches/Tournaments in three different parts of the country in three weeks 😳 Gordon Ryan knows how to prepare for holiday season! 😜😜 Can’t wait to see Eddie Cummings and Nicky when they arrive for their matches in LA along with Garry Tonon riding shotgun - it’s all West coast for the squad this week! I wanted to wish you all a happy Thanksgiving from the squad. Hope you all got a chance to recharge batteries and get ready for training again! 🇺🇸😊

The return of the Wolverine: Eddie Cummings, founding member of the grappling squad, will be returning to the stage at Fight2Win Pro 56 against Jacob Sandoval, an outstanding black belt from the great Cobrinha, in LA. He will be headlining the event alongside Nicky Ryan. Mr Cummings has been working hard in the shadows - always seeking improvement and refinement of his game. Everyone knows his prowess in leg attacks - he was the first to show our leg lock Ashi Garami system to the world. Less well known - mostly due to the overwhelming success of his leg game - is his great proficiency in upper body attacks and his positional game. It will be great seeing him back in action 😊😊 Interestingly, of all my students, Mr Cummings has a grappling game which is the most similar to my own, based upon off balancing (kuzushi) from bottom position into Ashi Garami, sankaku (triangle) and back attacks. Keep your eyes on this one to see some modifications and improvements on an already devastating game!

Ryan brothers back in action: Gordon Ryan is preparing for a tumultuous end to the year with three major engagements back to back. First he takes on Ralek Gracie in a submission only match in LA, then a very tough field in EBI 14 in Texas where he defends his open weight title, then Straight back to NYC to take on double ADCC gold medalist Yuri Simoes - a truly great champion in a weight division above his in the new Kasai event. Sixteen year old purple belt Nicky Ryan will take on 10th Planet adult black belt standout Ricky Lule, who in addition to being a fine jiu jitsu player, is also an excellent wrestler in what will be an exceptionally tough test for the gifted youngster. The match will take place in LA at Fight to Win pro (Eddie Cummings will be there to compete on the same night - more on that soon!) The squad will head to California on Thanksgiving Day in preparation for these big events and stay for a week. We are hoping to connect again with our Californian fans and show some interesting new directions in our training program. This was always my favorite photo of the Ryan brothers. It conveys well their focus and shared vision and experiences - attributes that have brought them both astounding progress in very little time. The only odd thing about the photo is a sinister Michael Myers impersonator lurking ominously in the background...

Sankaku/Triangle: Jiu Jitsu is about using a large percentage of our strength against a small percentage of our opponent’s strength at a vulnerable point of his body. No move exemplifies this sentiment better than sankaku - the triangle. In all its many variations it uses the strongest part of our body - the legs and hips - to isolate a weak part of an opponent - the neck and a single arm - in order to strangle or armlock him. As such it a big part of our approach to the sport. As a coach I use sankaku as a crucial measurement of a beginner students progress - the day I see a student consistently and persistently entering into and looking to finish with triangles, I know he or she is on the right path and making good progress. It shows me clearly that they are using their legs as the forefront of their attacks and are developing the leg dexterity and movement skills that will enhance their game overall. Rookie grapplers do the majority of their work with their arms - experts do the majority of their work with legs and hips. Here, Garry Tonon shows superb leg and hip work to lock on a devastating sankaku attack on his way to a record fifth EBI title in LA

When the body’s work is done, the mind’s work begins: At the end of each workout, it is crucial to spend time evaluating the sparring and assessing which skills were employed successfully and which were not. This kind of analysis is the key to making ONE WORKOUT BUILD UPON ANOTHER SO THAT OVER TIME FORWARD PROGRESS IS MADE. Improvement is only possible if the lessons of one session are applied in the next. This requires a clear articulation of what was working/failing and why it was working/failing and a plan of how to build upon success and overcome failure in the next session. Without that, one workout follows another with little sense of progression. Photo by @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Fighting to the top: The entire pattern of human existence is based upon competition. Combat sports are an excellent means of preparing our minds and character for that reality. In jiu jitsu, as in life, nothing comes for free. In order to get people to take notice of you, you must achieve something. As time passes and your achievements grow, you will gain recognition from your peers. This simple vision is the basis of our progress within the sport. I always love to see the apprentice students (kohai) working hard to make their mark. Young Nick Ronan, who splits time between the squad at RGA and my team mate Matt Serra’s school in Long Island has been making waves on the local grappling scene. Today he won a local eight man tournament in which he had to take on EBI veterans. He won every match by submission, using some advanced elements of our leg and back attack systems. Just a few weeks ago he won another tournament, again every match by submission and again against black belt EBI veterans ( he was a purple belt at the time and just received a brown belt) Amazing to see a young student who has not been training long at all show very clearly he is already at EBI level performance. I find daily inspiration in the hard work of my students as they grapple with much more than just jiu jitsu, but with the eternal human struggle to make their way in a competitive world where hard, intelligently directed work combined with self belief are required to make us stand out from the crowd. Work your goals one step at a time - start small and grow over time. Every hurdle jumped takes you closer to your final goal. In truth we are all apprentices, so their struggle to advance is close to our own heart.

The fundamental principles of combat are universal: One of the more fascinating aspects of working as part of an MMA camp is the interplay between the various specialist coaches and listening to their perspectives on fighting within their domain and in MMA. I have had the honor of working alongside many great coaches. One who greatly impressed me was Freddie Roach. His vast experience at the highest levels of boxing makes him a fascinating and captivating repository of knowledge in both the history and theory of the sport. Each of the various arts that comprise MMA has its own approach to victory in unarmed one on one combat. The broadest division is that between the grappling arts, which typical focus upon maximizing control as a prelude to strangles and joint locks as the path to victory, versus the striking arts, which use mastery of distance, positioning, timing etc to create situations where sufficient kinetic energy can be imparted upon a vulnerable part of the opponent’s body to end the fight. Then within each of these two approaches there are many different variations, each of which goes in different directions or emphasizes different aspects from the others. Underneath all the differences however, the basic pillars of a rational approach to personal combat remain the same. “ALWAYS SEEK SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE INITIATING AN ATTACK,” “SEEK POSITIONS FROM WHERE YOU CAN ATTACK YOUR OPPONENT MORE READILY AND WITH GREATER EFFECT THAN HE CAN ATTACK YOU.” Fundamental Maxims like these hold true across the board. Only when we get down to specifics on how to actualize the maxims do we get differences. Once you see this clearly, all the various arts can become a source of learning for you and the cross over from a single art to MMA becomes easier. Here I discuss boxing footwork patterns with Mr Roach and their application to MMA on the morning of Georges St-Pierre’s return to the UFC. Interestingly there was much common ground in his insights with footwork patterns in boxing for standing grappling in Judo and Jiu Jitsu. Movement is movement, advantage is advantage, whatever form in which they are made manifest.

Regardless of your martial art, be it grappling or striking - VARY THE LOCATION OF YOUR ATTACKS AND TARGET THE WHOLE BODY. When my three senior grappling students, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan first exploded on to the national and international grappling circuit, people were shocked at their efficiency in attacking the lower body - a target that had been systematically undervalued throughout the history of jiu jitsu. Their tremendous success in this regard had a downside. People thought we were advocating leg attacks above others. This was NOT the case. All of my senior students are just as proficient in upper body attacks. When they train with each other, the attacks are evenly distributed. When they train with outsiders they tend to score much more on the legs since their opponents are not familiar with our system and usually struggle to resist in that area. WHEN YOUR THREATS CAN BE TARGETED OVER THE WHOLE BODY, OPENINGS WILL APPEAR WITH FAR GREATER REGULARITY THAN IF YOU TARGET ONLY A LIMITED AREA. This is true in all martial arts, not just grappling. As your opponent moves to resist a threat in one direction he will become vulnerable not another. Here, Georges St-Pierre digs hard to the body of rival Michael Bisping. The power of the blow is apparent and Mr Bisping HAS to address it with defensive measures. You can clearly see how those defensive measures have made him vulnerable to a second blow with either hand upstairs to the head or with the right leg to the lower body. Such is the way of all martial arts. In grappling you must have at least one very strong means of attacking legs, arms and neck so that you can distribute your attacks across the whole body. VARIATION OF DIRECTION OF ATTACK AND THE RESULTANT UNPREDICTABILITY IS A CORNERSTONE OF AN ATTACKING GAME.

Structure and movement: A good coach can look at a student whom they have never met or seen before and within a few seconds of observing them train, know very accurately their skill level. What are the cues they look for to make that assessment? An answer to this question will tell you a lot about what is truly important in your daily training and what is merely frivolous. The two most fundamental aspects the coach will first observe are structure/posture and movement/transition skills from one position to another. Excellence is these two foundational aspects of the sport immediately suggests not only competence in the sport, but also an ability to easily learn new skills upon those already attained. Deficiencies in structure and movement suggests the opposite. YOU CAN HIDE MANY DEFICIENCIES IN JIU JITSU- BUT THOSE TWO YOU CANNOT HIDE, FOR THEY WILL PERVADE EVERY ASPECT OF YOUR GAME IN A DETRIMENTAL WAY. A good therapy to this common problem is to look regularly at the best athletes in the sport in competition or sparring (randori). Don’t do what most people do, which is look only at the move being performed in order to copy it. Rather, spend time looking at the structure/stance/posture of the athletes and their movement patterns. Preoccupy yourself as much with studying MOVEMENT as much as MOVES and you will gain something much greater from your observation than a single move - you will gain insight into the foundations of ALL moves rather than one. Here Georges St-Pierre shows flawless body structure and dynamic movement as he transitions from a single leg to a head inside double leg as part of his preparation for his bout with Michael Bisping. Even a novice could look at this photo and see the apparent efficiency of the performance that comes from strong physical structure allied to efficient movement from one structure to the next.

Last moments before the action begins - keep it short: I am known as one of the most long winded people on the internet 😉😜 a reputation that you, My long suffering readers, know is well deserved 😉😉 but when a match is just about to start, I am a man of few words indeed. I actively look to take the main themes of the training camp and crystallize them into short pithy phrases that remind the athlete in a simplified form what he or she worked so hard upon and what we believe are the keys to winning this match. This is not the time for discussion or articulation - but for action. A quick collection of bullet points convey the main ideas and often serve as a valuable means of focusing upon the essential themes required for victory. I also find they can calm nerves as they convey a plan of action that the athlete can focus upon in those last adrenaline charged moments. Here, Gordon Ryan and myself run through some brief advice to a very relaxed looking Garry Tonon, who would use it perfectly to take another submission victory around ten minutes later.

Know how you intend to win and practice relentlessly: Here is a photo of Georges St-Pierre practicing the very elbow strike to strangulation sequence on the ground against his opponents guard position on Saturday afternoon November 4 at 3pm in Madison Square Garden that would lead to victory that same night. This was part of his grappleboxing program design to create enough pressure to force an experienced and mentally tough opponent like Michael Bisping to turn and expose his back to a stranglehold. Here we work the sequence from elbows to strangle in front of empty seats and curious construction workers as they prepare the arena for the big show. Around eight hours later, Mr St-Pierre would perform exactly this sequence in front of a packed audience under the lights and cameras. It is critical the athlete have a strong plan of attack and the means to enact it. Improvisation is a wonderful thing to observe, but so is a well conceived plan backed by a training program that builds the skills and tactics required to make it work when everything is on the line. Clarity of purpose is crucial in professional fighting. This marriage of ground striking with submission was the focus of ground training in this camp and this was the last training session before the event, held in the actual cage where it would all transpire in front of the world.

Gordon Ryan vs Ralek Gracie: The squad returns its focus to submission grappling as Gordon Ryan takes on Ralek Gracie in his hometown of Torrence, California on the 26 November. The squad has faced Mr Gracie before, Garry Tonon overcame a big size difference to win via leg lock. This time the match is a no time time limit submission only match. Mr Ryan will be the same weight and height as Mr Gracie. He has boldly declared that he will limit himself to only two forms of submission - the juji garami armlock variations and sankaku (triangle) variations. Just one week after this match, Mr Ryan will take on the field at EBI 14 open weight and then the next week take on the formidable double gold world champion Yuri Simoes in a mixed submission/points event, going from California to Texas to NYC in three weeks against some of the world’s best! That is certainly a tough way to end the year. Training and preparation is under way after going in very different directions assisting Georges St-Pierre prepare for his great bout with Michael Bisping. Back in the basement of despair and knowledge again and researching.

Experiment with mixed results: The victory by Welterweight Georges St-Pierre at middleweight to gain a new world title was a bold experiment with a truly great result, but was not without its problems. The fundamental problem was always going to be size. Mr St-Pierre always walked into the octagon around 189 pounds on fight night throughout his career. This made him a very averaged sized Welterweight. In order to move up to middle weight, Mr St-Pierre took on a nutritional program designed to facilitate weight gain and hold weight during the rigors of a full fight camp. The result was a disaster. Two weeks into camp he developed severe stomach pains and vomiting. Initially it was suspected that he had an illness, but all tests came back negative. The situation deteriorated to the point that for two weeks of a six week camp there was no training at all. At a critical point we gave him a two day window to either get back in the gym or call off the fight. The first grappling workout he had he vomited heavily prior to workout and then went to work. The next day he had the worst standing sparring session I have ever seen him have. Finally the stomach issue issue resolved itself to a degree where he could train satisfactorily and the workouts improved dramatically- though the vomiting continued all the way up to the day of the fight. He was eating so much more than usual in an attempt to keep weight on and stay close to 200 pounds. When he went through the final weight cut the big question was, would he return to his bigger size? The answer was a resounding no. On fight night he weighed in at 190.5 - almost identical to his usual fight weight as a Welterweight. The great effort to increase size just didn’t work out and Mr St-Pierre went in to win the title as a mid sized Welterweight. It seems his body just finds a comfort zone around 190 pounds for fighting after a weight cut and no amount of work to change that has any effect. It’s one thing to gain weight, it’s another to do so through a fight camp culminating in a weight cut and then regain the weight. It seems his body has an optimal weight for athletic performance which cannot be drastically changed

Coaches and athletes - The case of Georges St-Pierre: An interesting part of the story behind any great athlete is the influence of various teachers and coaches upon his and her development. A feature of Mr St-Pierre is that he had a long time affiliation with highly specialized coaches. He had specialist boxing coaches, culminating in Freddie Roach, specialist Muay Thai/kick boxing coaches, of whom Firas Zahabi was foremost, specialist wrestling coaches, mostly from the Montreal Wrestling club (the importance of Montreal Wrestling club, particularly Victor Zilberman and Gia Sissaouri, in Mr St-Pierre’s development has never been sufficiently acknowledged in the MMA press - they were a tremendous resource throughout his career). I was the ground/jiu jitsu specialist. However, THE REAL KEY TO MR ST-PIERRE’S SUCCESS IN MMA WAS NOT IN ANY ONE ASPECT OF THE SPORT, BUT RATHER IN THE INTERFACES BETWEEN EACH SKILL AREA SO THAT HE WAS MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE, THE KING OF UNIFYING DISPARATE SKILLS INTO A SEAMLESS WHOLE. No one coach taught him this - his coaches were specialists - but he was the quintessential all rounder. The only logical conclusion is that Mr St-Pierre is personally responsible for the majority of his development in the area that bought him his success. He was not a passive learner - BUT AN INNOVATIVE SELF RELIANT INTEGRATOR. Whatever assistance myself and others may have offered, the primary credit must go to Mr St-Pierre himself. Watching his adaption of our specialized knowledge into his own integrated art has been a privilege

Tension into triumph: The day of a big headline fight is always one of prolonged tension and anxiety. When Georges St-Pierre goes to fight he rarely sleeps the night before and the team spends the whole day together periodically reminding ourselves of the main themes of the camp, then distracting small talk, crass humor, anything to pass time. Being the headline fight means the bout will not begin until around midnight - that’s a long day of anticipation. When there is a great result it is a tremendous feeling of release and happiness - one so strong it is difficult to convey in words. A camp is a grueling six to eight weeks of obsession culminating in the longest and most anxious day. Most of our lives are built upon this pattern, only in less extreme form - of working hard to get to a goal, the joy of getting there or the pain of failure, and then on to new goals and repeating the cycle of desire, striving, success/failure and then a new adventure - but nowhere is it more clearly seen than in the path from fight camp to fight day to aftermath. In times of victory you will never see greater joy, in defeat, never will you see greater heartbreak. It is the pattern of all our lives, made more extreme by being compressed in time and amplified.

Calculated risk: Probably the single toughest thing for a professional athlete to do is comeback from a long period of inactivity either to to injury or retirement and come back into the competitive arena. Inactivity is death to an athlete. Combat sports in particular are very unforgiving of those who step away and then try to return into the maelstrom. History reveals a mixed bag of success and failure. Muhammad Ali came back after a three year hiatus and even with the benefit of warm up fights, lost his first title fight back in action. Sugar Ray Leonard took three years off and came back to edge Marvin Haggler in a controversial decision, then had other comebacks with mixed results. Floyd Mayweather had some brief retirements of around two years and came back successfully. Dominick Cruz had two years off for knee surgery and came back to win again. Study of great comeback success and failure convinced us of several things. If the athlete had maintained a rigorous training schedule throughout the time off and worked to develop new weapons then success was certainly possible, despite the obvious disadvantage of ring rust. Mr St-Pierre attacked the skills required for FINISHING ability - harder striking and submissions. The time off meant that he was not under constant demand to ready himself for a next opponent, but could develop new skills. He developed very strong leg submissions from bottom position and excellent back finishes from top position working with the squad. Working with his striking coaches he blended boxing, Muay Thai and karate with increased emphasis on punching power and accuracy. The question was HOW to return. As a Welterweight? That would do little to enhance what he had already achieved. It would just be more of the same. I pushed for a match at middle weight as this would represent something genuinely new in his career and add to his legacy in a significant way. This was however, a big risk. Four years is a LONG time, plus a new weight, with no warm up. In the end, you can juggle risk and reward as much as you want - the final step is always into the unknown- and in that realm courage and self belief are your ultimate guide and refuge.

Victory in New York! Georges St-Pierre came back after four years of inactivity to win the UFC middleweight title against the great Michael Bisping at Madison Square Garden tonight. It was perhaps the most dramatic fight of his incredible career. Despite his incredible past successes there have always been three constant criticisms of his work, the first, that he did not finish fights, the second, that he never fought above his weight, and the third, that he fought in a tactical fashion that made some of his fights convincing, but unexciting. Mr St-Pierre took time off to train and reconfigure himself in a way that would enable him to prove people wrong. He worked with Freddie Roach on his punching power and with the squad on submission skills and tied everything together with Firas Zahabi. Tonight he stormed back into the octagon and finished a great opponent in a heavier weight class above his own in a very dramatic and action packed fight. This fight had it all - striking, takedowns, submissions- all encased in back and forth action. When Mr St-Pierre first mentioned to us his desire to come back, it was me who suggested taking on Mr Bisping. My reasoning was that all his career, He had beaten tough welterweights. If he came back as a welterweight it would add nothing to his legacy. Only a significant change in octagon demeanor and weight made sense, so we began planning. All credit to Mr St-Pierre and his worthy opponent Mr Bisping. We are all so proud!

Last workout: Here is the crew after a final light sweat in midtown Manhattan as Mr St-Pierre ran through his final drills in preparation for tomorrow night. It’s been a pleasure to watch him working with Firas Zahabi, Freddie Roach and Jorge Blanco in standing position. Looking very sharp from feet to floor. Back to Hotel now for hijinks, stories, laughter. Wishing you all the best wherever you are 😊😊

There’s nothing like the big show: Georges St-Pierre returns to the UFC. Feels like the old days - the crowd energy, the buzz and the anticipation. This one hell of a card - three tremendous title fights and a mix of new talent and returning stars. Fascinating to watch how different fighters connect with the fans in different ways - now it’s just waiting time...

The lonely vigil: Georges St-Pierre goes through light sauna in what was the easiest weight cut of his life. At the end of his welterweight career he was among the smaller men of his division, so making weight a division above was very simple indeed - just a few minutes in the oven and his official weigh in is complete now at 184.8 pounds. We are off to breakfast and recharging the batteries. Good to see so many familiar faces at the UFC staff and fighters and coaches 😊😊 Big hello to my great friend and one of my inspirations @1carlosmachado1 who is here with old friend @wonderboymma

Counting down - the inversion of discipline: Georges St-Pierre and the team, Firas Zahabi, Freddie Roach, Jorges Blanco, Gordon Ryan, Phil Nurse, Erik Owings and myself get final preparation done in midtown Manhattan. Normally the challenge for athletes is to possess the discipline to get to the gym and train hard. In fight week there is a total inversion of discipline - now the discipline is required not to work out hard - BUT TO STOP YOURSELF FROM WORKING OUT HARD SO THAT YOU FOCUS ON LEAVING EVERYTHING YOU HAVE FOR THE CAGE RATHER THAN EXPENDING YOURSELF IN THE GYM. Just a light sweat, reinforcing the themes of the camp - the athlete has to be stopped from going too hard now. Now it’s light dinner time and then sleep and weight loss tomorrow - wishing you all the best from NYC and looking forward to the show at Madison Square Garden - America’s traditional home to combat sports.

Final phase: The last elements of preparation for Georges St-Pierre’s comeback bout on Saturday night began last night here in NYC at RGA. It was great watching him do pad drills with Freddy Roach, Firas Zahabi and Jorge, then grappling drills with Gordon Ryan. During the day, Garry Tonon and Mr Ryan are beginning their first steps in MMA training. It’s never easy to go from excellence in one sport to absolute beginner in another, but both men are enthusiastic and willing to put the time and study in - that alone gives me confidence they will make quick progress in this new skill set. Back to work teaching now. Mr St-Pierre has a public workout this afternoon and then a main workout tonight. The blade has already been sharpened - now it’s just final polishing to send him into the cage with an edge like a razor Saturday night.

Why submissions? Most people who follow the adventures of the squad in Jiu Jitsu competition know that we put a huge emphasis on submissions both in training and competition. A natural question to ask is - why is this the case? Why not just take the safer route of points/advantage victory? A big part of it is our philosophy of jiu jitsu. We define it as control leading to submission. We see control merely as a means to an end - submission - but the end is everything . Most jiu jitsu practitioners see jiu jitsu as “position before submission.” As such, the majority of their training time is spent on positional control with submissions seen as a “icing on the cake” - something desirable but not essential. This is a good and sensible approach, since the point structure makes positional dominance the most likely way to win a match, and in addition, in a real fight, good position allows for strikes on the ground that can open an opponent up and even end a fight. One of the main reasons for our unusually heavy emphasis on submissions is that we see them as the GRAPPLING EQUIVALENT OF A KNOCKOUT PUNCH. Just as there is something frightening about an opponent throwing very hard punches with skill and bad intentions at you, so too, it is intimidating to come across a grappler who is not just looking to get a position on you - but to BREAK you. It is the submissions of Jiu Jitsu that more than anything else, make it a MARTIAL art. Without them it would just be another form of grappling among many. These are some of the reasons we strive so hard to increase our submission skills in addition to the other skills of the sport and why we have a strong interest in sport formats that encourage athletes to exhibit their submission skills. There are many skills within Jiu Jitsu, all are necessary for success, but none catches our attention like a finely applied submission hold!

Rules of engagement: Any time there is a sport competition it is absolutely crucial that everyone involved have a crystal clear understanding of what the rules of the competition will be. It always surprises me how often, even at elite level, athletes and coaches are unclear about the rules of the event they are participating in. A sound practice before big events is a rules meeting where any underlying confusion can be rectified. Here, Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila, head referees of EBI tournaments, go over rules with the athletes prior to the big show. Here we discuss the exact interpretation of back escapes in overtime scenarios. At this event, we did not need any overtimes as Garry Tonon won all his matches in regulation time, however, in the past, knowledge of the rules combined with technique has been an important factor in the success or failure of athletes in these match winning/losing tie breakers. Remember, all forms of losing are a bitter pill to swallow for a hard working and passionate athlete,
But none is so bitter as having everything you needed to win, and losing nonetheless because of a simple failure to research properly the rules of the event. How strange that there are so many athletes who are fully prepared to put hundreds of hours of exhausting work into physical preparation for a tournament, but who are not willing to put fifteen minutes of easy work into understanding the rules that will play a huge role in who wins and who loses.

Outstanding talent - Rayron Gracie: One of the most talented youngsters at RGA in NYC is fifteen year old, Rayron Gracie, son of the late Ryan Gracie. This young athlete is very big and powerful for such a young man, but more importantly, he is a very keen student of technique. He came to NYC to train with my dear sensei, his uncle, Renzo Gracie. In his time here we have seen an incredible rise in his effectiveness that shows tremendous promise for the future. This past weekend the young world champion got another chance to show the world his progress at the Kasai grappling event in NYC - he won gold in both his weight division and absolute - IN THE ADULT DIVISION!! This was no surprise to us here in the gym - we see him doing extremely well against black belt adults every day, but it was certainly a shock to those watching who do not know this young man. Mr Gracie is doubtless one of the top prospects to carry the torch into the future for the first family of grappling. It’s a pleasure to see his progress under my sensei and his cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor Gracie and also our great mutual friend, Bernardo Faria. Look for more great performances from this young man - this is just the beginning! 🇺🇸🇧🇷

Exciting news: Just released today is the news that a new grappling organization @kasaigrappling will be running a premium event in Brooklyn NYC December 9th with the headline event being Gordon Ryan against the great Yuri Simoes. Both Men won gold in their weight divisions in the ADCC world championships this year. Mr Simoes also won gold in the previous world championships and now has the great distinction of being a double gold medalist in two different weight categories. He is one ADCC weight class heavier than Mr Ryan. The two have met before, at EBI 6 Openweight, with Mr Ryan winning via strangle in overtime. However, Mr Simoes was not familiar with the rule set and had fought an exhausting battle with Garry Tonon in the previous match. This time he is working in a much more familiar rule set - ten minutes submission only, then if no result, six minutes overtime with all submissions legal, but IBJJF type points scored (though no advantages- there must be a positive score). It’s a tremendous match up between two great athletes in their top form. Mr Ryan will be juggling training in Gi, EBI open weight training, MMA training and this event as well! Should be an interesting holiday season! 😳😜 Very happy to hear about the emergence of a new high level grappling show in NYC- it is run by Rolles Gracie - a man who truly understands the game and the athletes- this first show sounds like a firecracker! There will also be a superstar eight man tournament on the same night that I will talk about soon!

It’s a family affair: Proud moment for Garry Tonon as he wins EBI 13 in perfect fashion - every match via submission in regulation time to take the maximum prize money - and for the first time in front of his family as Mom and sister came all the way to California to watch his thrilling performance. Here we are backstage after the big show as a very youthful looking Mr Tonon (shaving the beard and dropping a little weight makes him look like a junior high schooler 😂😂) tells his family about his adventures and his sister reminds him he still sucks and mom tells him to wash the dishes after dinner. It was a joy to see the pride on his family’s faces after such a stellar performance and the happiness that that gave Mr Tonon. Back in NYC now - heading to RGA and then on to the Bronx to see how the bombers are doing with their submission grappling training.

Flawless victory: Garry Tonon won an unprecedented fifth EBI title here in LA tonight - every match by submission - three heel hooks and a sankaku (triangle) variation to win the maximum possible prize - Twenty thousand shekels. It was one of the most impressive performances in the history of the event. Mr Tonon defeated the man he narrowly lost to via points at ADCC - Wagner Rocha - but tonight he turned it around with a brutal heel hook variation to win a decisive victory. The tightness and power of his locks was matched only by the relaxed fluidity of his positional movements into attack positions. We are all so proud of his tremendous achievement. Congratulations also to some other incredible performances tonight. 10th planet athletes, PJ Barch and Nathan Orchard went through some absolute wars to make their way up the tournament brackets. Old rival Wagner Rocha had some incredibly tough matches and prevailed all the way through to the final. It made for a very exciting event overall that was a pleasure@to be a small part of. Hope you all enjoyed the show. Now it’s back to NYC to prepare for Georges St-Pierre back in the UFC and then Garry Tonon in a combat jiu jitsu event back here in LA! Thanks again to Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila for putting on another amazing show and helping take this great sport to a new level.

Garry Tonon makes weight for EBI 13 and answers UFC fightpass/Television commentary questions in his own...unique...style...

Teaching in California: The squad had a great day of teaching in LA today. I had the pleasure of teaching at the dojo of my great friend Shawn Williams @5starmartialarts It was great to see the Californians are really improving in the leg lock game! Mr Williams students along with some talented visitors went through some of our counter attack game and did a very fine job assimilating difficult material and made it work well. There is no doubt in my mind that the overall level of submission grappling is improving around the nation as I observe it in my teaching and traveling. Mr Williams and I talked at length afterwards about emerging trends in contemporary jiu jitsu, he has some fascinating views on this topic which I am sure he will talk about when he commentates for big jiu jitsu events in the future. Afterwards Mr Tonon went through his final workout for EBI 13 tomorrow night at the Orpheum in Downtown LA. He is looking very sharp and lean for this 155 pound event. Now it’s back to the hotel room to map out the remainder of Georges St-Pierre’s grappling training for the UFC show on November 4. Wishing you all the best from LA!

Danaher airport curse continues: My propensity to run full speed into disaster at airports continues. Despite being early for the first time in my life to JFK, a major slowdown of the security boarding system combined with massive Friday night crowd created the longest lines I have seen in my twenty fives years in NYC. Then a long walk, a bus ride to a separate gate area followed by another long walk to furtherest extremity of terminal, a last sprint on crippled leg to gate and I was last person boarding with barely a minute to spare! 😂😂😂 Somewhere in a past life I must have DEEPLY offended the gods of flight. A strange thing about the worlds greatest city - it is serviced by the worst three airports I have ever encountered. Perhaps they could go all the way and add burning hoops and scorpion trapdoors to make getting to ones plane an even greater challenge. #whydontothercitieshavethisproblem. Now it’s on to LA to meet up with Messrs Tonon and Ryan to get ready for another big challenge in EBI 13 at our old home of the Orpheum theater. I shall teach a seminar tomorrow at my good friend and team mate, Shawn Williams at @5starmartialarts It will be a pleasure to see our West Coast friends and fans again 😊 See you all soon!

Photo @supersaiyanmagicalgirl

Young guns running amok: Squad apprentices (kohai) @jasonraubjj89 @nick.ronan and @frankrosenthal11 dominated the action last weekend while we were away training Mr St-Pierre and Mr Tonon. The Rise grappling event featured east coast talent - at the center of the action was Matt Serra BJJ and RGA. Two of Mr Serra’s students train regularly with us in the basement. Jason Rau won his superfight via heel hook submission, Nick Ronan had an outstanding performance using our back and front headlock systems to strangle four opponents back to back and take gold in the main tournament and Frank Rosenthal won a superfight via submission in short order. Great to see these talented young athletes going out and developing their resume and their brands - and doing it in the best way possible - convincing victory out on the local stage with an eye for bigger wins ahead - a fine example to all those among you looking to build your name in the sport. A big hello to our brothers out on the island at serrabjj - same lineage - working together. Mr Serra was always an inspiration to me and it’s a pleasure to help the progression of his students in any way. Back in NYC now! Heading to the basement to see how everyone is doing and get our training back on - then off to LA and return to Montreal to get Mr Tonon and Mr St-Pierre ready for action!

Nothing beats a good day of training in preparation for a big show: Georges St-Pierre wraps up a strong day of training - he will need more like this to take on an adversary as tough as Michael Bisping. Working with grappling standouts Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon is tough enough - to do it after a full kickboxing sparring workout shows the kind of drive and skill this remarkable athlete possesses. Tomorrow morning we fly back to the basement in NYC to train the rest of the squad and then it’s off to LA to watch Mr Tonon compete in EBI 13. A hectic week, but the squad wouldn’t have it any other way 😊😊 Wishing you all the best

It all starts with a plan: Getting the direction of today’s training through to the troops at breakfast - then it’s on the gym to make it happen. Georges St-Pierre and Garry Tonon prepare for their respective events over the next few weeks. Going over the specifics of ground work for two very different sports is always a fascinating enterprise. Watching the best do it right in front of you is an honor and a privilege. We have an outstanding cast of characters here at Tristar gym for the training session - one down - now on to the next!

At the airport with Gordon Ryan and the ghost of Hugh Hefner: Heading North to Montreal to resume grappling training with Georges St-Pierre this week. Waiting on a plane - Newark airport. The squad will prepare one athlete for MMA and another - Garry Tonon - for submission only grappling as the four time champion returns to his roots at EBI 13 in LA this Sunday. I love the test of different rule sets and sports - it always brings out the best in the squad. Looking forward to seeing the team up in Montreal including my black belt student and very talented MMA coach, Firas Zahabi. Wishing you all the best!

Great day at Renzo Gracie Academy charity seminar: The squad came out to support one of our academy’s great characters, Shy Aces. Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and myself taught a seminar featuring some key elements of our approach to the game. The students did a fine job of absorbing a lot of information and some difficult moves and by the end looked like a worthy gang of leg locking fiends! Thanks so much to everyone who attended - hope you enjoyed the lessons - keep experimenting with what you learned and growth and expertise will inevitably come.

One step at a time: When competing at world championship level - the finishes don’t come easy. At the recent ADCC world championships, Gordon Ryan shocked the world by exhibiting a submission rate of around seventy percent across two weight divisions despite the fact that half his opponents were former champions and/or medalists. A big part of his success in this regard is our approach to working through resistance one step at a time. This requires that we first identify where we want to be/what we want to accomplish, then what problems the opponent is creating for us that are currently preventing us from getting there. Then we must establish what ORDER these problems need to be addressed if we are to work systematically through each problem towards our desired end. This requires a certain calmness on our part. It’s difficult to solve problems in a state of agitation or excitement. It also requires a clear goal on our part and the ability to identify the obstacles in front of it being created by our opponent. Lastly, we need the ability to put the problems in a list from first to last and the knowledge of how to solve each in turn. Working along these lines every day in the gym creates the results you saw Mr Ryan achieve. It was surprising to many to see such a young athlete working so calmly and methodically against very dangerous opponents to get breakthroughs. This calm step by step approach is the one I reinforce every day in the gym with my athletes. The physical speed that different athletes pursue it varies, but the mental process underlying it never does.

Jiu jitsu and friendship: Though the purpose of jiu jitsu is ostensibly that of controlling an opponent in ways that lead to his submission, there are other elements involved in the study of the art that run deeper than this. Perhaps the most important is friendship. Jiu jitsu is fought alone against a single opponent, but it is practiced in a community. That community, due to its strong sense of shared goals, frustrations, hopes, dreams, fears, failures and successes, becomes extremely tight. When one of our number falls, we all feel the jolt. One of RGA’s most beloved students, the inestimable and highly unorthodox black belt Shy Aces, has a dear friend who has fallen upon hard times and needs help. Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan and myself will teach a seminar in our home gym - The Renzo Gracie Academy in Manhattan- to help raise funds for Shy Aces friend. It will be this Saturday at RGA at 11am until 1pm. We will be showing our approach to jiu jitsu to anyone interested in coming by. You can call RGA or contact Shy Aces on Facebook (yep, there’s only one 😜😜). Shy tells me it’s nearly sold out now but we will do our best to get you in. Gordon Ryan will teach tasteful tattoo selection, social media decorum and manners, modesty training for young adults and how to avoid overdosing on protein powder. Garry Tonon will teach hair coloring technique, how not to drive an automobile if you wish to live a long life, and prioritizing chicks over cash and championships. Shy Aces will teach an introduction to car jacking and high speed chase strategies. I will teach some jiu jitsu. Hope you can make it if you are in the city! 😊😊

Nothing beats a strangle: I have always given a special priority to strangles in my approach to jiu jitsu. At the higher levels of the sport there is tremendous resistance to any form of submission hold. Occasionally you will run into an opponent who simply chooses not to submit to a well applied joint lock and is prepared to keep fighting even after taking extensive damage. The truth is that the decision to stop fighting after being put in a tight joint lock is exactly that - a decision. In the case of a strangle, once it is well applied, THE DECISION TO KEEP FIGHTING IS NO LONGER YOURS. Whether you choose to keep fighting or not is no longer up to you, since if you choose not to tap you will simply pass out - the outcome of the match will not be altered by your decision. Thus in any highly competitive situation, if you are presented with a choice between a stranglehold and a joint lock, all other things being equal - I ALMOST ALWAYS FAVOR THE STRANGLEHOLD (of course there will be some exceptions to this general rule). Here, Garry Tonon does a good job of first attaining the positional control that makes strangulation possible, now comes the battle to apply the strangle itself, never easy on a skilled opponent.

Side by side in Montreal: Interesting coach experience in Montreal coaching Georges St-Pierre for his upcoming MMA bout against the great Michael Bisping and Garry Tonon for his upcoming EBI 13 event in LA. Obviously there are big differences between the skills and tactics of the two sports and it was fascinating to watch the athletes interact in both domains. Here, my black belt student Firas Zahabi, head of Tristar MMA gym and I discuss the day’s training and plan for the next few weeks in the light of our observations. Heading home to NYC now for a full day of teaching tomorrow back in the blue basement at RGA. Another day, another airport lounge and a set of problems in need of solutions 😊😊 To all my dear students back in NYC - see you tomorrow- let’s get the room ready to sharpen the squad!

Tough training in Montreal: Great grappling workout here in Montreal, Canada with MMA icon, Georges St-Pierre asssisted by UFC veteran Frances Carmont and squad members Garry Tonon and Jake Shields. Creating a sound training structure for the grappling component of the camp over the final three weeks is the priority- got a strong start today and more for the future. Running over some interesting thoughts for running Mr Tonon’s EBI camp alongside Mr St-Pierre’s camp - would require some logistics and planning- will run it by sensei and see what we can do in these three weeks. Big hello to all my faithful and long suffering students back in the basement - and wishing all the squad/RGA fans well from Montreal.

Traveling band: Garry Tonon and myself at LaGuardia airport getting ready to board plane to Montreal. Going back to where it all started - MMA with Mr St-Pierre. Another huge upcoming challenge for the Montreal native and the squad is happy to be a small part of it. Thankfully traveling with Mr Tonon ensured that I would actually be on time for the first time in my life 😊😊 You know it’s a sad day when Mr Tonon is the most responsible person in the group!! 😖😆 Looking forward to another challenge whilst also getting Mr Tonon ready for EBI 13 in two weeks! To all my students in NYC - don’t forget our beloved sensei Renzo Gracie is teaching the big afternoon class tomorrow (Monday) afternoon - he carries a mountain of knowledge within him and really knows how to communicate it 🤗🤗 Take advantage! Can’t wait to hear all about it when I get back! See you all Wednesday! 🇨🇦🇺🇸

Renzo Gracie Academy does it right: One of the great features of The Renzo Gracie Academy is the depth of teachers that enables our team to take on multiple projects simultaneously and get it done. Tonight Jake Shields, Garry Tonon and myself fly to Montreal to train Georges St-Pierre in preparation for his upcoming bout with the great Micheal Bisping on November 4th in Madison Square Garden here in NYC. That means I won’t be in town to teach the infamous Monday afternoon class at RGA. However - great news - my dear Sensei, Renzo Gracie himself is taking over! Tomorrow the noon class will be filmed for Brazilian television as Mr Gracie runs the show. Let me tell you now - this is not something you want to miss. I always try to tell people what it was like to learn from Mr Gracie in my early days and always struggle to do it justice. Now is your chance to see it for yourself - you will love it! 🤗🤗 Can’t wait to work with Mr St-Pierre and can’t wait to hear the stories of my sensei teaching in his unique and unrivaled style! Great week ahead for RGA in NYC!

Back to our roots: The squad initially made its name in the submission only grappling scene. That was a deliberate policy on our part. My three main students, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan were adherents of my belief that jiu jitsu must be understood as control that leads to submission. Submission only tournaments were the best way to express our approach to jiu jitsu and bring attention to it. Our favorite venue was EBI as it offered an exciting rule set, well run organization and great visibility. Since then, the squad has moved into other rule sets and venues with great success, but we never forgot where we started and what we stand for. Coming up soon we go back to our roots for EBI 13 The lightweights. Garry Tonon returns to the Orpheum theater against a stacked field including outstanding ADCC world championships medalists, Wagner Rocha and AJ Agazarm, two 10th planets standouts, former EBI champion, Nathan Orchard along with the extremely talented PJ Barch Also there will be Bill Cooper - former EBI finalist - and as with every EBI, new talented athletes fighting to make their way into the upper echelons. Mr Tonon is beginning his journey into MMA now, but is anxious to train hard and put in another strong showing in the event that did so much to spur his development. Keep your eyes on this one! It’s going to be a great show!

Squad senpai officially loses his mind - goes on tattoo rampage in midtown Manhattan: Gordon Ryan fresh off the most successful debut performance in ADCC world championships history decided a good first move upon return would be a bucketful of new tattoos 😳💥😳. Mr Ryan’s earlier tattoos are a constant source of banter and ridicule from team mates here in the blue basement. This time he appears to have put more thought into the project and had the Indian goddess Kali, some of whose followers formed a sect based around strangulation- hmmmm....perhaps he is taking that back attack system thing too seriously! 😂😂 Along with, how surprising, some King motifs 😜😜 Whatever one thinks of the tattoos, I have to admire his dedication to the project - a marathon nine hour session to get it done quickly so he can return to training in the least time. I hope this does not set a precedent where every time he wins something he gets another giant tattoo - there’s not much room left at this point!

Australian jiu jitsu gets a hero: One of the features of this years ADCC world champions was the growing internationalization of jiu jitsu/Grappling. Russia had a strong team and though they did not win medals this time, they impressed with their skills. The local Finnish team had much to cheer about with a standout performance by 10th Planet representative, Elvira Karppinen. USA had a great showing via Gordon Ryan, JT Torres and Orlando Sanchez among others. One of the really unexpected breakthrough performances however, came from the Australian team. This was a shock to many, but not to me. Most of my family has moved to Australia and after my hip replacement surgery I went down to see them. I taught seminars there and was impressed by the enthusiasm and skill of the locals. At one gym in Melbourne my demonstration partner for a three hour seminar on leg locks was Lachlan Giles, who had distinguished himself in EBI events here in the US. After the seminar he talked to me about the local team and a talented fellow called Craig Jones. I got to see him up close at EBI 11 - he did not win, but I thought his game looked very impressive and he and Lachlan were doing a great job developing their game, even having some success with some of the material we worked at the seminar. On the first day of ADCC, Mr Jones was absolutely one of the most impressive performers, with two fine submission victories over heavily favored Leandro Lo and Maurilo Santana - both extremely well established world champions. This is increasing internationalization of the sport and greater diversity on the medal podium is a very healthy thing for the growth of the sport. It is also a welcome reminder that anyone in any location from any gym can beat the best if they create a sound training program and have the discipline to stick to it. Well done Mr Jones and hats off to the Australian jiu jitsu culture that created such great competitors in relative isolation from the more well known centers of the sport. 🇦🇺🇦🇺

Hiding an ace up your sleeve: An odd thing about many great jiu jitsu players is that very often they are known primarily through their favorite moves (tokui-waza). People expect to see them in competition and they become that athletes signature move. Many great athletes however, are also extremely good at other moves and often use them in the gym with great success but for some reason the opportunity to use them under the lights on the big stage just never seems to arise and that move just never gets used publicly. This is often a good thing for an athlete, for it means they have a highly refined and developed weapon that no one knows about and which thus has great surprise value. A good example occurred in the recent ADCC world championships in Finland. Gordon Ryan has one of the most devastating guillotine strangles I have ever seen. Every day in the gym I see him use it to great effect - yet in competition his leg locks and back strangles are so successful he does not get many opportunities to use it. In fact he never used his guillotine in a high profile event previously. In the finals of the 88kg division Gordon came up against the great Keenan Cornelius. The two had met before in a very different rules format and Mr Ryan had won via concentrated leg attacks leading to a final breakthrough. This time it would be very different. Mr Ryan focused upon controlling the head and shoulders rather than the legs and hips and sank his guillotine from a standing start and controlled it to the ground for the win. His teammates always knew he had a world class guillotine- but few others did. The excellence of his execution combined with the surprise of its use got the breakthrough when Mr Ryan needed it most - giving him the rare honor of winning gold in a debut performance. We all have our favorite moves - just because you have a reputation for some moves does not limit you to those. Keep developing more and who knows - when you really need them they will be there for you to get the breakthrough that your usual big guns may not be able to secure. Photo @banejitsu

Aggression: A key feature of good jiu jitsu is a spirit of active aggression throughout a match. When I say aggression, I don’t mean it as we do in normal daily discourse, where it typically has a negative connotation and usually implies antisocial behavior. In a sport context it simply means the desire to actively pursue victory, in particular, the most complete victory possible, in the case of jiu jitsu - submission victory. It is a desire to go out and actively pursue the ideal of the sport - control leading to submission. One of the biggest problems in previous ADCC events has been slow paced tactical play where athletes sought to win by doing the least work possible, by taking the least risk. This is a very successful strategy for many, but it runs contrary to the spirit of the sport and makes for disastrous viewing. The most popular competitors have always been those who took risks and had the skills to make those risks profitable. I was very happy to see the officials at this years world championships actively calling out stalling penalties on a regular basis to keep the action moving. The result was a much faster paced event, fewer overtime periods, and a very high rate of submission for such an elite field of athletes. Some of the biggest names in the sport got caught in submissions this year and it made for very compelling viewing. In general I prefer the athletes to do the work of winning and losing themselves, with as little referee intervention as possible, but this ADCC showed how good work by impartial officials can significantly improve an event and help keep it in line with the ideals of the sport. Coaches must take the bulk of the responsibility for making athletes compete with an aggressive spirit, but some help from competent and fair officials is a welcome helping hand. I came away form the event thinking it was one of the most exciting in years and hope that this trend can be extended into future events. Photo by @banejitsu

Reducing intensity - increasing effectiveness: When preparing for a major competition, the intensity of the training sessions must be correlated with the time remaining before the event. Our camp for ADCC 2017 put a heavy emphasis on standing grappling/takedowns (tachi- waza) which is typically more physically demanding than ne waza (ground grappling ). In the final week in Finland prior to the event, I eliminated live standing grappling from the workout and focused entirely upon drilling and limited ne waza sparring. This was to give the athletes a chance to physically recover from a grueling two and half month camp that had severely tested their bodies and to reduce the likelihood of last minute injuries. In the final days it is very unlikely that any additional training will improve performance - there simply is not enough time to adopt new techniques. Instead the focus is upon coming in healthy and rested. Here, Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza go through ashi garami drills three days before they got to use them so effectively on the big stage at the world championships. Learning to vary the intensity of workouts is a big part getting athletes to peak at the right time. For those who are not actively competing, it is still a crucial concept. Varying workout intensity is a fine way increasing longevity in the sport by decreasing physical demands on days when your body is not ready for high output. Not every day needs to be maximal effort. I would rather see an athlete consistently workout seven days a week with big variations in intensity than say, twice a week at maximum intensity over the course of a year. Just as we don’t try to live every day of our lives at maximum intensity but rather follow a pattern of easy days with intense days interspersed among them, so too, we ought to act similarly with our workouts.

Counter offense: One of the key themes of our approach to jiu jitsu is a heavy emphasis upon counter offense. Whenever your opponent goes to attack, he must to some degree open himself up in order to initiate that attack. If the initial attack can be contained or nullified, he will, for a short period of time, be left in a vulnerable state of extension and open to your own attacks. Some of the most frustrating experiences we can have in jiu jitsu involve attacking an overly defensive opponent who will not open up at all. Counter offense gets around this problem by allowing him the initial attack so that his defensive posture is broken. Most people are happy enough merely to defend any given attack - BUT THE BEST DO NOT SEE AN OPPONENT’S ATTACK AS SOMETHING TO DEFEND, BUT RATHER AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO LAUNCH THEIR OWN ATTACK. This requires more than technique. It requires a mindset that is not satisfied with stopping an opponent from doing what he wants to do, but only with using that as an opportunity to do what WE want to do. Here, Gordon Ryan stops the single leg takedown attempt of the great Keenan Cornelius and is already thinking about how he can use his opponents over extended position to his advantage - in this case via a combination of Kimura grip and sumi gaeshi throw. Always remember that there are two main families of attacks in jiu jitsu - direct attacks and counter attacks. If you do not fully exploit the latter you are losing half of your attacking opportunities.

Reflections on ADCC 2017 - The lesson of Xande Ribeiro: One of the stand out performers at this years ADCC world championships was doubtless the great Xande Ribeiro. He had some truly memorable matches including an epic showdown with the man generally believed to be the best currently active jiu jitsu player in the world, Marcus Almeida Buchecha. In addition, Gordon Ryan’s toughest victory was over Mr Ribeiro in a match so close it could easily have been ruled a draw in any other setting. An interesting feature of Mr Ribeiro’s game this year was that he chose a very traditional style - he pulled closed guard on many of his opponents, especially those he believed were better than him in standing position. In an age of leg locking and innovative open guards, this is rarely seen in contemporary no gi tournaments. It was a brilliant decision however, as Mr Ribeiro was able to apply three of the best arm bar attacks from bottom position closed guard in ADCC history - on very tough opponents. The Technical precision and composure of his attacks was impressive not only to the crowd, but also the other athletes watching from the sidelines. Mr Ribeiro’s brilliant ADCC performance paints a very clear lesson to all athletes in the sport - WHICH TECHNIQUES YOU SELECT IN PURSUIT OF VICTORY IS NEVER AS IMPORTANT AS THE DEGREE OF TECHNICAL PRECISION WITH WHICH YOU APPLY THEM. Don’t obsess over which techniques are best, the truth is, almost all the major techniques of the sport can be used to attain victory - worry more about how good you are at applying whatever techniques you choose for your arsenal. Trends come and go - but technical excellence and precision in the execution of your chosen moves never goes out of style. Mr Ribeiro’s fine performance was all the proof you need.

Memories ADCC 2017: The recent world championships in Finland were doubtless a source of great pride for me due to the accomplishments of my students - first for qualifying an unprecedented number of entrants and secondly for fine performances in the event itself. One of my favorite memories however, and one that I shall treasure for all my life, was my time cornering my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie in his Masters rematch with the former ADCC champion, Sanae Kikuta. They had fought an epic MMA match years ago, with sensei winning via his legendary guillotine stranglehold. Once again they had a closely contest match - with Mr Gracie winning a very close bout due to higher work rate/passivity penalty. It was a great honor to watch sensei prepare for and contest his match - I have watched him spar ten thousand times over two decades in the gym - seen changes and adaptations in his game as he gained in age and experience- to watch it all up close and be a small part of it was a memory I shall always cherish. Photo @banejitsu

It’s a long way to the top: One of the more remarkable aspects of our younger team members at the ADCC world championships is how little training time they have had in total. Gordon Ryan’s total training time in the sport is substantially less than the time most of his opponents have been black belts. Nicky Ryan has trained less than three years. Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza around four. Part of the reason for this is the heavy emphasis I put in truly progressive, directionally fixed training programs. Another part of it however, is the dedication my students had to enter competitions whenever possible - traveling long distances and enduring tough camps for each one. My students all had an excellent sense of progressive competition. People know that ADCC and EBI are currently the major no gi events. No one however, gets straight to the big shows. The pattern all athletes must follow is to begin small and build incrementally over time until you have sufficient experience to make waves among the best in the sport. I can think of no better example than Gordon Ryan. For years he tested himself in small shows against unknown opponents. Building upon each minor success until by the time he got to his first ADCC show, he was more than ready to get to the first place position on the podium and gain a higher medal account than any athlete in ADCC history in a debut performance. Here, from some time ago, Mr Ryan battles the impressive grappling and MMA star, Antonio “Shoe-face” Carlos Junior as part of his quest to get to the highest level. That day he prevailed via triangle (sankaku) submission - another rung in the ladder leading to his deepest goals. This idea of incremental progress is just as important to those of you who choose not to compete or have limited competition aspirations. The only difference will be that you use different yard sticks appropriate to your different goals.

Reflections on ADCC 2017: The rise of submission only grappling. The last few years have seen a significant growth of a new facet of grappling - the submission only movement. It was spearheaded by Mr Eddie Bravo’s EBI shows, which quickly gave rise to others based on a similar format. Unfortunately the movement ran into a lot of entrenched resistance when it first emerged - as most new ideas do. For years I heard numerous complaints that these shows attracted only mediocre talent and exhibited only limited skill sets. I just smiled and said nothing. I knew the criticism was based on the erroneous idea that a new movement would emerge fully mature. That is not the way the world works. ANY NEW MOVEMENT TAKES TIME TO DEVELOP. Submission grappling is no different. ADCC is almost twenty years in existence. If you look at early ADCC competition it often looks amateurish compared with contemporary events. EBI type competition has only been around a few years. It was a pleasure to see athletes who have figured prominently in submission only formats do so well at this years ADCC. Gordon Ryan, Wagner Rocha, Craig Jones and Elvira Karppinen were either Medalists or were able to take on and defeat prominent champions in ways that would have to impress even the harshest critics of submission only events. Our squad had its beginning in sub only events, in particular EBI,
We don’t forget that and will always be grateful for Mr Bravo giving us a great format to make our start in. I am happy that the world got to see that sub only grapplers can play a strong role in other forms of grappling. Rather than see ADCC and submission only as opposed formats, I hope the effect will be to break artificial and unreasonable divides between them. Given more time I expect submission only athletes will mature and develop in much the same way ADCC athletes have and lead to many dual champions in both styles - each has so much to offer with regards skill development of the athletes involved.

Golden boy: Gordon Ryan had the weekend of his life at ADCC world championships- the grappling Olympics. In the most successful debut performance in the history of the sport he won gold in his weight category and silver in the open weight category. There were too many notable features in his performance to list them all in one post, but I will say this is one of the most memorable performances in my entire coaching career - it was a privilege to play a small role in his preparation and then observe up close this incredible debut. Mr Ryan is not even close to his full potential and is determined to improve for future world championships. This is only the second time an American has won two medals at one ADCC (Mark Kerr won double gold in the early days of ADCC). Our whole team is so proud of his great accomplishment, as are his Mom and Dad, who traveled all the way from New Jersey to watch their Uber talented progeny. So much great work from the whole squad - I will say more in the near future. I hope you all enjoyed the big show. Happy that the approach we bring to jiu jitsu and try hard to communicate to you all through words and deeds had such a strong showing. I am so proud that my dear sensei Renzo Gracie was there (he had a fine win today which I shall talk about very soon) and that I could make him happy with the teams performance. Wishing you all the best from Finland. I will head home to NYC soon to begin the training of Georges St-Pierre for his comeback fight November 4. Thank you to ADCC for another great show - thank you to all the athletes who participated- so many legends among them -
Your presence and achievements fill me with pride for our sport.

Great first day for the squad: Very proud of all our team members who put on such a strong performance today. Our two Canadian boys Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza both had great matches - attacking relentlessly and impressing the crowd with their submissions arsenal. Young Nicky Ryan at sixteen was by far the tournaments youngest competitor@-
He had a fine match against a black belt no gi world champion lost narrowly on points, but impressed everyone with his attacking style in such an elite event. Tom DeBlass had two titanic matches at heavyweight, winning the first and losing the second on a tight referees decision against last adcc world champion. Jake Shields looked great in his match but as he seemed to be controlling his way to win he got caught on a sweep and then additional points as he tried to recover - impressive as he was fighting two weight categories above his own to avoid clashes with team mates in his actual weight category (170 pounds). The two standout performances came from squad seniors, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. Mr Tonon won tough matches against the Brazilian trials winner and also the very talented world champion Marcelo Manfra. Mr Ryan had a tough match against his very talented and tactically sound rival Dillon Danis- taking a narrow decision win due to getting a full leg locking position just as time expired and then getting close to a back position in overtime. He saved his best performance for his second match against multiple world and former ADCC champion, Romulo Barral. In a classic display of positional play, Mr Ryan was able to take home down, pass his guard twice, then take his back and finish with a tightly applied stranglehold. Day 1 is over - now it’s time to prepare for tomorrow, recharge batteries, plot and plan and head into day 2 😊😊 So proud of our young athletes performance in the Olympics of grappling - they will be back even stronger next time! Excited for the continuation tomorrow- hope you are all well and enjoying the show! 😊😊 Quick salute to our Australian friends - Australia had an amazing day through the incredible work of Craig Jones who had a breakout performance, Submitting two jiu jitsu legends today

Nicky Ryan chows down on sushi and teriyaki chicken and then finishes off with green tea ice cream before the official weigh-ins at ADCC while his jealous team mates sit empty handed around him 😂😂😂 #reapthebenefitsofbeingthesmallguynickyryan He then proceeded to weigh in fully clothed and with his back pack on! 😂😂

Squad gets last light workout in: When the squad travels, we always like to get a light workout in the day before competition. Today we worked out in a place like no other before! This jiu jitsu gym in Finland is a former nuclear bomb shelter! It is deep underground encased in reinforced concrete! It looks like something from a James Bond movie - a jiu jitsu lair! 😂😂 We work out every day on the blue basement back in NYC, but this is a whole new level of dungeon! The squad was joined by beloved sensei Renzo Gracie and superstars Lovato Jr and Xandre Ribeiro among others. It was great watching everyone roll together and listening/watching a great interchange of jiu jitsu ideas and concepts used by so many great champions. Experiences like these are always among my favorite coaching memories. 😊😊 Now it’s off to rules meeting and official weigh in 😊😊

So proud of Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj who has just been announced as a starting athlete at the 2017 ADCC world championships under 66kg division after another athlete failed to make weight. Mr Ryan won bronze medals at both North American adcc trials and has now won the distinction of being the youngest ever competitor in the history of the event, having recently turned sixteen years old (he won bronze medals at trials at age fifteen). At a bodyweight of only 134 pounds he will not only be the youngest competitor but also by far the smallest. Here Mr Ryan orders a big dinner to try to beef up for the weekend 😂😂A jealous Garry Tonon let's him know how he feels about the youngster eating like a king while he can eat no more than salad 😂😂 Hats off to young Mr Ryan who has come such a long way in such a short time - representing his country after just two and half years of training and setting a record before he even steps on the mat 😊😊

Unknown talents of the squad: most people know the squad has some very respectable submission skills - tonight I learned they have a whole other side to them that I never knew. After evening the workout it was time for dinner - fearless leader Garry Tonon immediately went to the kitchen with his able assistants Matthew Tesla and Ethan Crelinsten where he immediately went to work cooking a splendid feast for the entire squad!! Here he is doing his best Gordon Ramsey impression as Gordon Ryan calls out instructions from his Anthony Bourdain book in the background. Amazingly no one has died of food poisoning yet. Nicky Ryan appeared to eat more weight of food than his actual body weight while Tom DeBlass drank from a massive bottle of Pepsi in between salmon and asparagus- truly the diet of champions! 😂😂 They say from chaos comes order - there was a hell of a lot of chaos in the kitchen but a very orderly dinner was served, so I guess it's true!! Now it's bed time and on the road to the competition tomorrow 😊😊

Teaching and training: A very nice seminar here today in Finland at JKL Fight Club @jkl_fightclub where I went over our approach to leg locking and ashi garami. Afterwards we switched gears to contest (shiai) preparation with the squad doing final preparation work. Tomorrow we head back towards Helsinki and the arena in Espoo, close by. Thanks so much to our hosts here in Finland who made us so welcome and made for a great seminar today.

Sharpening the edge: The squad went through drills and sparring in Finland today and tonight. Everyone looking sharp as the days count down. Finland is a deeply impressive country - it reminds me a lot of the Southern parts of my old homeland, New Zealand. The people are extremely sensible, practical and extraordinarily well educated. All those I have met are multi lingual and well versed in world history and politics. Tomorrow we will go through another two sessions, joined just now by big Tom DeBlass who came of the plane plus a three hour train ride and straight on to the mats to put in great work - always an inspiration to the younger students 😊In between I will teach a seminar on leg locking to our Finnish hosts and fans at JKL Fight Club where we love to train. Now it's back home to plot and plan over some good local food 😊😊Wishing you all well from Nordic Europe!

Damn! That was close! Once again my astounding skills to be late for everything - especially airline travel - come to the fore. Barely made flight to Finland despite catastrophic traffic, apparently due to presence of our President in NYC between Renzo Gracie Academy and the airport. God bless the ladies at check in desk and security who felt sorry for me and rushed me through! 😇😇Looking forward to seeing the squad and our Finnish friends and of course, the elite of our sport at ADCC. Can't wait to meet up with my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie when he arrives. Mind racing with multiple projects - ADCC, Georges St-Pierre returning to UFC, upcoming EBI's including a slap grappling edition featuring Garry Tonon - should be an interesting time! Wishing you all the best! 😊😊

Bigger opponents: Probably the single biggest problem that beginning students will face - and one which will continue to be problematic through their entire jiu jitsu career - is that of dealing with bigger opponents. The game is hard enough already, but becomes significantly more difficult when your opponent enjoys a size advantage. There are a great number of methods that can be employed to lessen the effects of size difference in grappling, but the two I put the most emphasis upon are back positions and ashi garami. These are the two positions where a bigger opponent will find it more difficult to employ his weight advantage over you. In the case of ashi garami, your opponent's weight goes into the floor rather than directly down on to you. Success or failure in the ashi garami position is almost entirely a question of who knows more about the subtleties of leg and foot positioning. Due to the fact that bodyweight cannot be used by either player in this position to pin the other, knowledge of limb positioning becomes the rubric of success rather than size. Bear in mind however, that this good feature comes at a price. By it's very nature, ashi garami prevents you (as well as your opponent) from using bodyweight to pin him, so it tends to have a very different form of control from that typically used in jiu jitsu. This takes a lot of getting used to. Moreover, it entails a much greater degree of exposure to counters than the more standard attacking positions of the sport and thus requires a very deep knowledge of safe and unsafe positioning if it is to be used successfully at higher levels. Once students learn to get around these issues they quickly learn that the various variations of ashi garami, along with back positions, represent two of the very best means of reducing the effects of bodyweight disadvantage in grappling.

All rational approaches to combat are founded upon the idea of creating an asymmetry between your ability to attack your opponent successfully and his ability to attack you successfully. The greater the asymmetry, the greater will be the chance of your success. There are many fine attacking positions in the sport of jiu jitsu, ashi garami, the mounted position, knee on stomach variations etc. However, none can match the power of the rear mount/back position when it comes to creating this asymmetry in your favor. The very nature of the human body is well adapted to dealing with threats from the front, but poorly set up to deal with threats from the rear. Much of your training then, most be devoted to getting to, maintaining and finishing from this position. Here, young Nicky Ryan works hard on his skills utilizing our back attack system, an area that he excels in.

Jousting for advantage: The core principle of combat is this - ALWAYS SEEK TO GAIN SOME FORM OF PRELIMINARY ADVANTAGE BEFORE ATTACKING. Only then will you able to secure victory by DESIGN rather than by good fortune. This requires first, that athletes be able to understand exactly what constitutes advantage, second, practical methods of getting there and third recognizing the opportunity once it has been attained and acting upon it. The first is a question of knowledge, the second, a question of skill, the third a question of confidence - how interesting that two of the three are mental elements and only one physical...

Mixing things up: Great training in the Monday afternoon class in the blue dungeon today as two different directions of grappling training took place alongside each other. The squad got ready for ADCC grappling world championships while Georges St-Pierre got ready for his MMA fight on November 4 in the UFC. It's always a fun and challenging coaching experience to look for the common ground between them and also emphasize the important differences in ways that help prepare the athletes for very different challenges. Somewhere in between the takedowns, the positional advantages and the submissions are the answers for both. Great to see old rivals Georges St-Pierre @georgesstpierre and Jake Shields @jakeshields getting each other strong for upcoming challenges. The Ryan Brothers @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyryanbjj continue to amaze me with their progress. Garry Tonon @garrytonon has been electrifying the training room lately with his skills. Wonderful to see my great friend Shawn Williams @shawnwilliamsbjj back on his hometown mats at RGA 😊along with the very talented wrestler Kyle Cerminara. What a room! Always great to see the fine balance of competition and cooperation between athletes, friends and training partners that is the core of fighting to the top in sports and in life.

Forethought gives us direction - remembrance gives us strength. New York is more than the worlds greatest city - it is the world compressed into five small boroughs- where American values let the whole world reach for the sky, then, now, always....we don't forget. 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Reflections on my Sensei: One of the most valuable attributes a jiu jitsu player can have in order to make sustained progress over long periods of time is a SENSE OF CURIOSITY. Quite often I talk to senior instructors who complain of getting burnt out through constant teaching. Burn out is a real problem for hard working students, competitors and teachers alike. The root cause of the problem is a sense that one is doing the same thing every day without progress. This feeling can be soul destroying and in some cases, even push people out of the sport. The best antidote to this problem is to nurture a sense of curiosity. When you are fascinated by the nature of your field of study and constantly asking how you can know more about it, investigating new ways of looking at and understanding it, and experimenting with new ways to perform within it, burnout will rarely be a problem. My sensei, Renzo Gracie and I are almost exactly the same age. I did not start jiu jitsu until the very late age of twenty seven (I had done other martial arts, but in jiu jitsu I was a very late starter as very few outside Brazil had really heard of BJJ prior to 1992). When I started jiu jitsu as a white belt, MY SENSEI HAD ALREADY BEEN LEARNING IT FOR TWENTY TWO YEARS! Yet at no time have I ever seen him tired or jaded of teaching or learning techniques. Today we talked about guard passing and he was very excited to show some new concepts of guard passing he has been working on lately - showing the very same enthusiasm and drive I would see daily when I was a white belt more than two decades ago - it was fascinating stuff. It was a great reminder of how that sense of endless curiosity is the root of enthusiasm and success in both teaching and learning - the moment a man loses that, it is only a matter a time until his study and teaching suffers. I believe the key is to always keep one question in mind at all times - IS THERE A BETTER WAY OF DOING THINGS THAN YOU AND YOUR PEERS ARE CURRENTLY USING? As long as you push this question to the forefront of your consciousness the game will always be exciting and continue to make you grow - just as it does for my sensei.

Escape, evasion and following through: When learning submission holds, one typically begins with the skill of GETTING TO THE LOCK. That is difficult enough on good opponents, however, as you go against good opponents you will soon find a whole new challenge awaits you - THE SKILL OF FIGHTING THROUGH AND OVERCOMING SKILLED (and sometimes wild/unorthodox) RESISTANCE TO THE LOCK AND GETTING TO THE FINISH. You must be able to anticipate and counter common defensive measures to your attacks, mapping out strategies ahead of time as to what you will do when the usual escapes are attempted. Sometimes when unorthodox escapes are attempted, you must be able to improvise on the spot. Remember - NO ONE WILL REMEMBER HOW MANY SUBMISSIONS YOU ATTEMPT, ONLY HOW MANY YOU FINISH. Constantly work on your ability to follow through your submissions against resistance. Live sparring is the most important form of training for this. Here, Nicky Ryan follows the unorthodox rolling movement of his opponent in the midst of a triangle (sankaku) attack, following the motion through to a mounted triangle to get the finish.

Two different pairs of eyes will look at the same event and see two entirely different narratives: Whenever we look at some event unfold, there is an interpretive element where we fit the event into a story mold that allows us to make sense of it. This is an essential part of our human nature. Nonetheless, it can have a limiting effect where it makes us see certain things and completely ignore others. Sometimes those things we ignore are the very things we ought to be focusing upon. As such, it's always a healthy thing to consult other well informed and knowledgeable people's opinions or thoughts on a given subject/event that you are working on. At the very least they will often make you question your own view more thoroughly and in ways that help your project. In some cases they can save you from making potentially disastrous oversights - either way it's a usually a good thing. Very often I consult the views of my senior students and teachers and almost always find some profit in it. There is no need to do everything yourself at all times, and often there are dangers of oversight associated with such an approach. THE SKILL YOU WANT IS NOT SO MUCH SELF SUFFICIENCY, BUT THE ABILITY TO DISCERN VALUABLE INPUT FROM ALL RELEVANT SOURCES AND MESH THESE WITH YOUR OWN TO CREATE IMPROVEMENTS.

Counting down to the world championships: There is nothing like the ADCC world grappling championships to bring together the best no gi grappling talent on the planet. Our primary direction in training and style is towards submission only style, but no submission grappler would deny that ADCC currently brings the greatest talent pool in one place every two years. It's an amazing event to be a part of - it has a an international flavor that makes it stand out from other events. Last time it was in the homeland of the sport - Brazil - this time it is in the Nordic nation of Finland. I am extremely proud that our small team succeeded in qualifying more people for the event than any other. Half of our competition team are youngsters in their first adcc, but I am confident they will qualify and compete for many more. Training has been a joy to watch and the change in competition rules from our usual events created new directions in training are exciting for me as a coach and for the athletes created a great deal of growth in a short time. Everyone is looking forward to meeting up with the world's best and growing as a result. I feel all the athletes on our team who are going have already made big strides forward just in the preparation phase from who they were only two months ago, and that sense of improvement made necessary by meeting the best in competition will only get stronger as the event itself unfolds. In the end, that's the greatest benefit of all competition- personal growth out of the stimulus of intense opposition.

Brothers in arms: There is no question that in jiu jitsu, the single most important factor in your progress will be the manner in which you train. HOW you train is far more important in determining your rate and extent of progress than WHO you train with. Nonetheless, having good people around you can definitely play a positive role in your development and make progress easier. When I was a student, my big brothers (Senpai) on the mat were Matt Serra @mattserrabjj , Ricardo Almeida @ricardoalmeidabjj and Rodrigo Gracie @rodrigogracie . They were always a huge inspiration to me and the other beginners. Sensei Renzo Gracie @renzograciebjj gave us the directions and the senpai gave us the physical interaction that created progress. This tightly woven sense of mat brotherhood, based upon relative experience and skill level creates a symbiotic relationship between juniors and seniors that helps both. Juniors learn fundamental skills whilst seniors get to practice advanced attacking skills on less skilled opponents as a prelude and stepping stone to applying them in championship situations. This healthy sense of mutual benefit is one of the keys to a healthy and progressive training environment where the skills needed to attain dreams can grow to the required level. Sometimes that mat brotherhood goes beyond the metaphorical level and has a genetic basis - real life brothers Gordon @gordonlovesjiujitsu and Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj work hard in preparation for the 2017 world championships. A very big part of the astounding progress of Nicky Ryan is the day to day work of grappling his outstanding brother - after learning to cope with that level of pressure, other assignments can seem easy!

The tale of the army of darkness: one time after an EBI show, if I remember it correctly it was an EBI that Eddie Cummings won, the squad was relaxing after a good nights work backstage at the Orpheum theater in Los Angeles where the event was held. Mr Cummings, Tonon and Ryan were doing interviews joined by Ottavia Bourdain, I went outside to reflect on the nights work and ponder over where improvements could be made. As I stood outside a rather strange looking Californian fellow who looked like a genetic splicing of Nicholas Cage and the bad guy from the 80's classic Stallone movie "Cobra" approached me. He stood silently in front of me, staring with an intense gaze. Finally he addressed me in a gravelly voice. "DANAHER...I watched the show...leg locks...everywhere...leg locks...no escape...I see what you've done." Rather taken aback by his dramatic opening, I answered, "Thank you, sir...ah...what actually have I done?" The stranger stared at me awhile and then answered, "your students...Cummings, Tonon, Ryan...very impressive...I see what you've done..." Again I replied, "ah...what do you think I've done." The rather ominous nature of the conversation continued. "I see the way you walk...the way you move...your hip...your knee...you're in PAIN...I see what you've done..." Rather intrigued by this strange dialogue I said back, "I'm sorry sir, I don't really follow you, I'm not really sure what you think I've done." He immediately replied, "You've raised an ARMY OF DARKNESS. They travel around breaking everybody's legs - so that everyone else feels the same pain you feel - THAT'S WHAT YOU'VE DONE!!" And with that dramatic statement the stranger wheeled around and shuffled off into the shadows of central Los Angeles.

Catching heels, counting shekels: squad apprentice Jason Rau stepped up to take on four opponents on route to gold at Global Grappling Leagues 170 pound tournament yesterday - defeating all opponents by submission to take the prize money. Mr Rau has been training very hard - he suffered a severe rib injury and showed great fortitude in training through it and then competing despite limitations in mobility. The hard gym work paid off as he was able to get to his favorite moves, three heel hooks and an arm lock for the winners place on the podium. Here he relaxes with team mates Frank Rosenthal, who took bronze and Damien Anderson. Great to see the kohai (apprentice) students going out and winning local while dreaming international - that is the mindset we must all take on if we are to maximize our potential in the sport.

Observing, analyzing and adapting: As a coach, the single most important part of my work is the process of observing the gym training and competition matches of my students and their peers, analyzing their successes and failures and finding the causes of these; and then adapting the training program to be able to replicate those successes and avoid the failures into the future. YOU AS A STUDENT MUST ENDEAVOR TO DO THE SAME WITH YOURSELF. Of course your coach will be able to help, but recognize that he has many others to help also, and so only a certain amount of time and attention can be paid to you. The bulk of this work must be done by you. This might seem ludicrous advice to someone who is a beginner in the sport, since they may not feel qualified to make such observation and analysis, let alone adapting your own training program. Don't worry, you will learn in time. Just as you learn the physical skills of the sport over time, despite beginning from a state of ignorance, so too will you learn over time the greatest skill of them all - the ability to assess your own success and failure and make rational modifications to your behavior to bring more success and avoid previous failures. The problem for most people is that they approach jiu jitsu as a PHYSICAL quest - that's natural, since a huge part of the sport is physical. The whole "observation, analysis and adaption" aspect is largely mental. It requires you to put as much work into your THINKING about the sport as you do your workouts. As Ford said, hard thinking is the hardest work of all - that's why most people do everything they can to avoid it. Yes, you need your coaches, especially in the early days, yes, they will give you great insights and guidelines - but don't get lazy with your own self reflection - ULTIMATELY THE LEVEL OF JIU JITSU YOU ATTAIN WILL BE THE LEVEL YOU DESERVE. it is crucial that you take a proactive role in the observation, analysis, adaptation cycle - especially as you climb the ranks and gain experience. In the end you will not only experience much greater sports performance, but also a deeper sense of satisfaction that comes with self expression in your art.

Comeback: Anyone who plans a long term investment in jiu jitsu will have to go through at least one big comeback before their time in the sport is over. Life has a way of taking us out of our plans and sometimes our training gets derailed. The ability to come back, get back to where you were, and then move past into a new level of development is critical if jiu jitsu is to be a lifetime activity for you. Georges St-Pierre @georgesstpierre is beginning his comeback now as a professional MMA athlete, but the very same trials he is currently going through - doubts about his ability to regain past form, to be able to present new skills beyond the old ones, the ability to keep with an ever changing sport - these are all things YOU will have to go through whenever circumstances take you out of the sport for a time. It's important to scale back the early workouts - there will always be time to go harder in the future. Gradual progress over time always trumps unsustainable surges in the long run. Here, Mr St-Pierre works on elements of our back attack system with one of the true masters of it, Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu Afterwards they went through some hard sparring in standing position, a skill in which Mr St-Pierre excels. It was a great example of two outstanding athletes using their domain of excellence to benefit the other, so that MUTUAL benefit - the finest and most sustainable form of benefit - can occur.

Composure: There are many important attributes that athletes must possess if they are to rise to the top echelons of competition. One attribute that I attach great importance to, but which does not get much attention in most people's minds, is COMPOSURE. The reason I value it so highly is because I see jiu jitsu first and foremost as PROBLEM SOLVING ACTIVITY. It is awfully difficult to solve complex problems in a state of mental exhaustion or chaos. Having a clear mind is the prerequisite to identifying a problem and searching for ways to overcome it. Many people identify combat as a battle of WILLS. The person who wants victory more will take it. Whilst I agree that there definitely is a contest of wills, the MEANS by which that contest is decided is typically through one persons superior ability to create problems for their opponent while solving those problems the opponent creates at a faster rate than the opponent can. This is best done by maintaining a level of composure that facilitates thinking, whether it be conscious thought, or semi conscious reflexes honed by training. It is thus of the first importance that in your gym training, you train this attribute of composure just like you train other attributes such as strength, speed, flexibility, tactical aggression or passivity etc etc. I often find students really struggle with developing composure. We all have natural instincts in stressful situations. In combat, these often push us in the direction of maximum effort/aggression in ways that preclude thinking/problem solving. The result is a short period of thrashing about followed by exhaustion leading to greatly diminishing performance as time passes. We all put great value on developing our physical attributes -
But you may be pleasantly surprised how much more successfully you can use those physical attributes when you work equally as hard to develop your mental attributes alongside them.
Begin with composure - for only then will your physical actions be governed by a mind that is calm enough to actively seek to solve problems rather than fight instinctively. Here, 15 year old Nicky Ryan shows great composure while hunting for another submission

Guard passing and submission only tournaments: Quite often I am asked if the skill of passing guard - the skill of getting past your opponent's legs and into upper body pins - is a worthwhile skill for someone interested in submission only tournaments. The idea here is that in a tournament without points scoring, it is not worth the effort of passing guard because one does not receive points for doing so. Accordingly, it might seem a better idea just to go straight to leg locks where there is some chance of outright victory via submission. My answer to this is very clear. It is definitely worth your while to work hard on your guard passing skills and apply them EVEN IN SUBMISSION ONLY MATCHES WHERE GUARD PASSING SCORES NO POINTS. The reason is simple - only when an athlete has well developed guard passing skills can he or she distribute their submission attacks OVER THE WHOLE BODY. The moment you limit your attacks to one part of the body (legs) you have become predictable and thus less likely to break through a skilled opponents defense. As a general rule, I prefer to see my athletes attacks legs predominantly from bottom position. When on top, I like to see them initiate with hard passing work - even in submission only tournaments - so that the whole body becomes a target, rather than half of it. This ensures that an opponent will find it difficult to put anticipatory defenses in place. An unfortunate consequence of the success of my students with leg locks in competition has been a misunderstanding guard passing skills are not necessary for submission only tournaments - this is, in my opinion, a major error. Here, Gordon Ryan works hard to pass the guard of one of his most formidable opponents, powerful world champion Yuri Simoes, in a submission only EBI tournament Photo by Blanca Marisa Garcia

Confidence may be a mental attribute, but it's birth is physical - the hours, months and years of training that create superior technique which leads to victory. The first victories will be small, unheralded gym victories, seen by no one other than yourself. As those small victories accumulate they will be replaced by ever bigger victories until an unshakable faith in your ability walks within you and people call it confidence. Yes - in its mature form it is a mental attribute, but never forget that its infancy was physical.

Coming back: One of the toughest things for a professional athlete to deal with is coming back to his or her sport after an extended lay off/retirement. During that time off two things happen. First, there is an inevitable decline in the athletes performance without the incentive for growth spurred by upcoming competition. Second, the sport itself progresses forward in the athletes absence as new athletes uncover new avenues to victory. The combination of these two makes a successful comeback a very difficult thing - the longer the lay off, the tougher the task. An interesting feature of this weekends match between the great Floyd Mayweather and Conor McGregor was that Mr Mayweather was coming back after a two year absence. There were several moments where that lay off seemed to be evident as his overall movement quality was not as high as it normally is. History shows many examples of both success and failure in coming back. One of the great successes was that of the great Sugar Ray Leonard coming back after three years to take on the formidable Marvin Haggler. He took a controversial victory and showed it could be done even against the very best opponents. On November 4th at Madison Square Garden, George's St-Pierre will take on Michael Bisping after a massive four year lay off. Not only is the time off a problem, he will fight at a heavier weight class. This will surely be the most difficult comeback project I have ever been involved in. The success or failure of comebacks is often related to the amount of training the athlete has engaged during the time off, their motivation levels coming back in and the physical state of their health. Mr St-Pierre never got out of shape in retirement and has trained well throughout. He is very motivated to try the challenge of the bigger weight class. The two biggest problems will be his health (two major knee operations and recent eye issues leading to surgery) and the degree to which the game itself has evolved in his absence. Due to the relative youth of MMA as a sport, it changes and evolves with great rapidity. This will be a fascinating camp, played out among the warnings and inspirations of past comebacks.

Reflections on the big show: As is usually the case, most people are focused upon the RESULT of the Mayweather/McGregor bout last night. The truth is, to anyone familiar with both sports, the RESULT was never in serious doubt - all rounders generally don't step into the domain of a refined specialist and beat them in that domain. The result was never the interesting feature of this bout. What IS interesting is the ramifications of the MMA vs boxing debate. As I have seen so many times in similar match ups in the gym, the MMA athlete did quite well early in the match and can create a competitive first few rounds. However, there is a dramatic difference in energy expenditure on the part of the MMA athlete versus the more efficient boxer. As such, there is an inevitable change over as the match progresses. Mr Mayweather was doubtless aware that this would occur and waited patiently for the mid/later rounds to switch from a passive game to one of forward aggression. What has become clear however, is this - ELITE MMA ATHLETES ARE CONSIDERABLY BETTER EQUIPT TO HANDLE A BOXERS GAME THAN BOXERS ARE TO HANDLE AN MMA FIGHTERS GAME. There is almost no chance an elite boxer could get to a tenth round with an elite MMA athlete. Even if the bout permitted kicks and elbows/knees in the clinch, the outcome would almost certainly be different. If takedowns and ground work were allowed it would be over in seconds - any one of the innumerable clinches in the fight would be an immediate takedown from which a boxer is extremely unlikely to recover. Mr McGregor may have (predictably) lost the bout, but he won something much bigger. He showed that the endless criticism of MMA in standing striking over the years is grossly exaggerated. At elite levels they are highly competent and can provide a good match for a time with even the best boxers in the boxers domain. The daring Irishman may have lost a bout, but he won the cultural war between boxing and MMA and showed clearly that he can do far better in their domain than they can in his. For the courage, self belief and skill it took for him to do that, he can always count me as a fan

Tonight is the biggest fight show of the year - a fight that has been dismissed by many knowledgeable pundits as farcical but which has nonetheless garnered more viewer interest than any boxing event in a very long time. On the face of it, this is a huge mismatch. Mr Mayweather is unquestionably the finest boxer of his generation and arguably of all time. He is both a master technician and a master tactician in the ring who has made the best boxers of his time look ordinary when matched with him. Mr McGregor is an an outstanding MMA fighter with an amazing penchant for proving doubters wrong. In truth however, this project would be the equivalent of having Mr McGregor compete in an IBJJF jiu jitsu tournament in a gi against say, Rafa Mendes - do you really think he would prevail against Mr Mendes under these conditions? My experience of watching very good MMA athletes spar against elite boxers in the gym is always the same - they are quite competitive for the first 3-4 rounds and do surprisingly well. Then around the 5th round the elite boxer begins to figure out the unorthodox or awkward movement and begins to employ ring craft tactics to tire the MMA athlete by making him work harder than he is, making him miss punches etc etc. around the 8th round a very noticeable shift occurs where the elite boxer takes over. I expect a similar pattern tonight- though probably taking less time, given the incredible skill level of Mr Mayweather. Mr McGregors only advantages are youth and size, but heavier punches are not much use if they are thrown at a target that can't be hit, and Mr Mayweather is as always, in fine shape and has never tired in a fight. I would consider it a fine victory for Mr McGregor if he survived 12 rounds and had some competitive rounds among them. Like most people, I love to see an underdog take on impossible odds and win, so my heart is with Mr McGregor, but my mind knows this is exceedingly unlikely. In a world of uncertainty I will offer you one certainty that I truly believe - however well Mr Mcgregor does in tonight's boxing match, I ASSURE YOU IT WILL BE MUCH BETTER THAN MR MAYWEATHER WOULD DO IN A REAL FIGHT AGAINST MR MCGREGOR.

Pioneer: Probably the most challenging assignment for a jiu jitsu coach is to go into an area that has no jiu jitsu background and start a program from the ground up to produce good athletes and a jiu jitsu culture. The fruit of that culture can expand the sport and over time, convert naive students into knowledgeable teachers who can in turn create new students and a sustainable expansion of the art in what was once a place devoid of jiu jitsu. My sensei, Renzo Gracie was a true pioneer. He came to the United States when there was almost no knowledge of jiu jitsu. I still remember him having to tell us in beginners class that being bottom mount and bottom guard position were not the same and that one was desirable and the other was not! Yet from those unpromising beginnings he forged a very large body of students that now sustain themselves and contributors the sport in ways that would have seemed impossible twenty five years ago. One of my favorite jiu jitsu pioneers is Mauricio Gomes, one of only a handful of men promoted to black belt by Rolls Gracie and father to the greatest jiu jitsu exponent of all time, Roger Gracie. He is in many respects, one of the fathers of BJJ in England. He and his son, Roger have produced a great number of talented athletes in a country that got a relatively late start in the sport of Brazilian jiu jitsu. Our recent trip to England was more than just a chance to catch up with Mr Gomes- it was also a chance to see just how far jiu jitsu has progressed on English soil. There are many more schools and students than even just a few years ago, and the level of skill is rapidly rising. Here I talk to Mr Gomes about his incredible achievements in Great Britain and his plans for the future. I have always said of British jiu jitsu, they may have started later than others and with fewer instructors, but the black belts they got, spearheaded by Mauricio Gomes, Roger Gracie and Braulio Estima, were the very best they could have hoped for. With these outstanding men at the helm and the rapid growth of the sport, I have a feeling English and European jiu jitsu will be a power house in a short time!

Strength begets strength: ADCC world championships camp. The squad is working hard on new skills. The slog of training is always at its toughest about half way through. Days just seem to blend into each other and the aches and pains mount rapidly. Much of what gets the athletes through is the camaraderie among them. Shared suffering is easier to bear than lonely suffering - but most important of all is a sense of purpose. Purposeless suffering will break in a man in a matter of hours- but if a man has a purpose that he holds dear, he can endure any conditions indefinitely. Keeping the athletes eyes open to their end goal is critical in these hard weeks where the body and mind are put to trial. Here, Gordon Ryan goes through another tough workout with teenage sensation and world champion, Rayron Gracie, son of Ryan Gracie. Both have a tremendous future the extent of which, like all of us, will be determined by their ability to cope with the pressures of training and preparation by remaining focused as much on where they want to be in the future as where they are now.

Roger and me: Last weekend the squad went to London to compete in Polaris grappling, winning all three matches. London is the base of one of my greatest friends in the sport, Roger Gracie, who, along with his great father, Mauricio Gomes, teaches jiu jitsu in England's greatest city. At Polaris, the squad met up with Mr Gracie and Mr Gomes in the warm up room as we got ready. I asked Mr Gomes if he would like to assist in cornering the squad - I have always found his insights very illuminating and instructive and he has a good calming presence about him in the hectic atmosphere before a match starts. Suddenly Mr Gracie excused himself and said he had to go. The staff of the show advised us that it was time for Oliver Taza to go out and begin his bout. Mr Taza was scheduled to fight the outstanding British black belt Ross Nicholls, who is widely considered the best British black belt and has won many British and European titles. Oliver is a brown belt (he should actually still be a purple Belt according to IBJJF Regulations) but trains very hard and has made great progress in a short time. Last time they met, Mr Taza won via heel hook. When we went down to the stage I was shocked to see Mr Gracie in Mr Nicholls corner - and Mr Gracie was equally shocked to see me in Mr Taza's corner!! Neither of us had any idea that the opponent was one of our students! 😂😂We just laughed and wished each other luck. It was an unexpected honor to corner against the greatest jiu jitsu player of all time - the best part is that Mr Gracie's father was in our corner! 😂😂It was a great match between two very impressive youngsters, arguably the best of the night. Mr Taza prevailed that night with positional play - he could not get a submission breakthrough against a much improved Mr Nicholls - but it gave me a wonderful coaching memory of cornering against one of my best friends with the help of his dad! 😂😂😂 Here we are laughing about the confusion afterwards and enjoying the rest of the show. In the near future I want to talk about Roger Gracie's online teaching platform - I sincerely believe it offers an unprecedented opportunity for students to learn the highest level jiu jitsu

Sometimes when you win...you lose: Garry Tonon came back to the gym immediately for training after his victory in Polaris Grappling over the weekend - an admirable action to be sure. He had tired of his blonde frosted haircut meant to parody his rival Dillon Danis and tried to dye his hair black - unfortunately his hair dying skills do not match his grappling skills and today he showed up with blue hair!! Nice work champ 😂😂😂 #youmayhavewonthebattlebutdillonwonthewar

EBI champs line up: Today saw the return of inaugural female EBI champion, Erin Blanchfield to training with the squad. Here she joins fellow EBI champions, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan, along with future EBI champion, Nicky Ryan and her primary coach, Karel Pravec after a great Monday afternoon training session. This tough and dedicated young lady makes the long journey from hometown to NYC daily to train with squad regulars and keep pushing her technical depth and expand her repertoire. Great to be back in NYC and seeing everyone (even a very jet lagged Garry Tonon god bless him 😜😜) back on the mat and getting ready for upcoming challenges.

Meanwhile...back in New York City: The squad had a big weekend in London, winning all three bouts at Polaris 5, but back in NYC Gordon Ryan stayed home to compete in The Grappling Industries absolute no gi event as part of his ADCC preparation. He won first place, taking every match by submission and showing great progress in positional control and linking that with submission skills. Grappling Industries put on a very fine event for local athletes and it was great to Mr Ryan step in and get back on center stage. The advantage of local shows is that they can provide excellent stage experience with no significant interruption to ones training schedule - ideal when the world championships are right around the corner. Moreover, because they are local, they tend to involve matches with known local rivals and thus provide a great measure of progress when you can assess previous matches versus current matches. As such they are a great resource for athletes to both prepare for big events and gauge their development over time. Here Mr Ryan relaxes on the podium and it seems, looks to gauge his progress in the skills of flexing and posing 😆😜 in addition to his ever growing jiu jitsu skills.

Success in London: The squad won three out of three at Polaris 5 grappling championships here in England. All three matches were tough, hard fought affairs where positional domination on the floor, takedowns on the feet and a higher work rate of submission attempts got the wins. The squad always looks to win via submission, tonight we got close, with some training, next time we will work even harder for the breakthrough! Thanks to Polaris for putting on a great event in a great location. Thanks to our opponents who showed great skill and always provide us the tough resistance that creates improvements in ourselves. I fly home very early tomorrow to get back to teaching the other squad members in preparation for ADCC. By midweek everyone will be back in the Apple working towards new goals 😊😊 Hope you all enjoyed the show!

All weighed in: All athletes weighed in today for Polaris 5 in London. Garry Tonon faces the very talented Dillon Danis. Originally the bout was set for 170 pounds, then modified to 180 pounds as Mr Danis is competing in a higher weight category in the upcoming ADCC world championships. Today he weighed in at 184 so he will have a good size advantage. Mr Danis has greatly improved his wrestling and leg locks since the two last met - both factors that will make this a very tough rematch. Jake Shields goes up against British strong man and jiu jitsu stand out Daniel Strauss, who must be among the strongest men in the game. Apprentice Oliver Taza will battle against local stand out Ross Nicholls. Last night of training tonight - nothing too intense - as the athletes go into final phases of preparation for the big show in O2 arena here in London. This marks the first time that Polaris will be available on UFC fightpass - the same move that helped propel EBI into the spotlight of grappling world. Here's hoping the exposure can take our sport to a new level of viewer participation. Happy to see rising stars like Mr Tonon and Mr Danis and established stars like Mr Shields along with Shaolin and Cael Uno creating a buzz and interest level that in time will pave the way for expansion of the sport overall.

Grass roots jiu jitsu: The squad went out into East End London to train tonight at the new gym of UFC fighter Claudio Silva #claudiohannibalsilva who has opened a new school and does a fine job teaching jiu jitsu. The squad spends most of our time in a basement in NYC so it's always a pleasure to get outside and train in new places around new people. It often reminds me of my early early days in jiu jitsu when my dear sensei Renzo Gracie would teach in small clubs and Dojos to tiny groups. It is like going back to the grass roots of the sport - small groups of dedicated enthusiasts learning our craft far from the big centers of the sport. I always feel like it's good for ones soul to do this - to go back to where you started from and get that same feeling of wonder you had as a white belt - it's a rejuvenation we all need periodically. Here Garry Tonon, Jake Shields and Oliver Taza work their submission skills as I run them through a workout at Claudio's little London gym #claudiohannibalsilva Preparation is going well - at this stage it's polishing skills rather than developing skills - more of the same tomorrow as show time gets close!

New guys in town: Squad standouts Garry Tonon and Oliver Taza get a great workout in at a local school here in London #10thplanetlondon. It was fun making the switch back to pure submission grappling training rather than the more positional work we have been doing lately in preparation for adcc world championships. It's always nice to workout in a new room and work under a different vibe and atmosphere. Now time to get back to hotel shower and get dinner - more of the same tomorrow! Two days of fine tuning and then the big show at O2 Arena London!

On the road again: Back at JFK airport, headed to London for Polaris grappling featuring Oliver Taza, Jake Shields and Garry Tonon taking on tough opponents on the other side of the Atlantic. Note to all - NEVER allow Garry Tonon to book your airline tickets - EVER - I have been booked into a four hour wait at exciting Manchester airport before connecting to London 😒😖😣#ihopedillonbreaksyourlegandstranglesyougarrytonon. It's been a while since we were in Old Blighty (England) - looking forward to seeing everyone. The squad has been training hard and looking to show our brand of grappling to our English fans. Ironically as I leave NYC we have some classic grey London weather! Hopefully it's sunny NYC summer weather in London 😊😊getting ready to take off now - see you in England!

Reflections on my sensei - real respect vs superficial respect: my sensei, Renzo Gracie is widely acknowledged as one of the best jiu jitsu coaches of the modern era. For his students, most of our lessons were technical in nature - but some of the most memorable had nothing to do with technique, but instead with other aspects of the sport. One day I was away with the squad, traveling for a match. Mr Gracie stepped in to teach the afternoon class that I usually teach, so I was not there to witness the lesson, but heard it second hand from those who were there, but it's importance was apparent as soon as I heard it. A visiting athlete who has considerable exposure on the grappling circuit and who often visited to train was present for the class. As Mr Gracie began teaching, the visitor sat on the sidelines and played around with his phone. The rest of the class went to work as Mr Gracie went through technique and drills. Eventually it came time for live sparring (randori). The visitor suddenly put down his phone and decided it was now time to enter the class. He approached Mr Gracie and bowed solemnly and asked to join in the sparring. Mr Gracie did not even look at him, he said, "next class begins at 6pm." The visitor was surprised. "I can't train now?" Mr Gracie replied, "we've been training for forty five minutes while you played with your phone - now you feel like training? My sensei has the most transparent face I ever saw. When he is happy, everyone can see it - and when he is pissed off - everyone can see that too! 😜😜 The visitor wisely stepped off the mat. Superficial symbols of respect don't count for much compared with actions that convey REAL respect - training with commitment and giving your all. No one cares how solemnly you bow or how many times you say "osu" or any other mere symbol of respect if your actions convey the opposite. Don't get caught up in the symbols - worry about the substance. My sensei never asked us to bow, call him "professor" or say "osu" to everything he said. The only thing he asked was that we gave our best effort - that was the only form of respect he taught and, for us as students, the most important we could learn.

Heading out: You can have as many coaches and training partners as you want around you; all your friends and family, thousands of cheering fans, in some cases a whole nation - but in the end ONLY ONE THING COMES WITH YOU INTO THE CAGE OR ON TO THE MAT - YOUR PREPARATION. In those lonely few moments before your name is called and the arena roars there is no lying to yourself. If your preparation was thorough it will lift your spirits and buoy your confidence; if not, whatever fears and doubts you have will be amplified tenfold. In training, whenever your spirit is diffuse and motivation lacking - picture yourself heading out to the arena. Understand that every forward step in training, no matter how tiresome, repetitive, boring, will be part of a shield against the fears and doubts your future self will feel when your name is called.

Illusion: When athletes go out to compete in high level shows there is always much fanfare and bombast as they enter - lights, music, cheers and boos. All this is to create an illusion - the illusion that what is about to transpire is something bigger and greater than they have ever done before. The simple reality is that IT IS EXACTLY THE SAME THING YOU DO EVERY DAY, it just so happens to be performed in front of a group of strangers in a noisy and colorfully lit arena instead of your gym. The only reality is you and your skills set/preparation vs him and his skill set/preparation adjudicated by a referee under an agreed upon rule set - ALL ELSE IS ILLUSION, NO MATTER HOW STRONG THE FEELINGS AND THOUGHTS YOU HAVE WITHIN YOU TELLING YOU IT IS REAL. Acknowledge this and go forward with confidence, deny it and go forward in fear and anxiety.

Memories: Jiu jitsu is best seen as a lifetime activity, so along the way there will be a vast store of memories for all of us. Keeping track of them is often a great way to help stay motivated and reflect on progress and make future goals. I was very lucky as a student to study under my dear sensei, Renzo Gracie, quite possibly the most charismatic man in the sport - a master technician and proponent of open experimentation in development that made him a creator of a student body with greatly disparate styles and viewpoints. Under him were his senior students, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie, who did so much to motivate and inspire us every day in training. Every time I cast my mind back to those early days, I find reasons to remember old techniques and insights I never should have forgotten, goals I lost track of and should never have stopped pursuing, and most important, reasons to laugh and smile. Don't lose track of these memories - they are yours and yours alone. No one can take them from you, few can understand the value they hold in your heart. Whenever you feel you are losing your way - they are the best means to get you back on track. Cherish them as you would your best techniques and accomplishments. Here, my fellow students, Shawn Williams and Paul Creighton and myself finish up another session with our dear sensei - this must be around the late 1990's - early 2000's - the only rashguards you could buy then were made for surfing 😜 Never lose sight of cherishing your time in the sport, the characters, the hopes and dreams, the temporary failures and the laughter. Remembrance of the past makes for a stronger future.

Ink to paper: A big day for Georges St-Pierre today as he inked the contract for his return to the octagon on November 4 in the world headquarters of the fight world - Madison Square Garden, New York City, against current middle weight champion, Michael Bisping. This is a huge test for Mr St-Pierre. First, it will be four years since his last fight. Second, it is in a weight class above his own. By the end of his career, Mr St-Pierre was a very averaged size welterweight, now he is taking on a big middleweight. In addition, Mr St-Pierre has been through two acl surgeries - this will be a very stern test indeed - no warm up fights - right back into the fray after a very long lay off against the bigger champion. However, in my coaching experience there has never been an athlete so well suited to taking on the most difficult of tasks and finding a way to break through to success. Mr St-Pierre is much more than a great athlete. He is a strategist of the highest order,
Both in preparation and in the cage. The professionalism of his approach is unparalleled in my experience and I am certain that on November 4th he will be ready for action and these two legends of the octagon will put on a show worthy of the incredible fight history of Madison Square Garden. Grappling training will run concurrently with the squad's preparation for adcc world championships and will make for some incredible training experiences I am sure. Looking forward to seeing the troops gather for another battle and a Season of plotting, scheming, training, experimenting and learning.

When the action's done: when most people think of a training session, they only focus upon the physical work aspect. Every bit as important as the physical work is the feedback that the successes and failures of the session offer as guidance for future workouts - what needs to be improved, which aspects are showing potential, errors to be avoided etc etc. Of course there are days where we are all tired and just want to talk about anything other than jiu jitsu after a session (usually sex and violence or jiu jitsu scandal 😂) but most of the time we always conclude with a brief assessment of what was good, what was bad and what needs to be changed for next time. Only in this way can training be PROGRESSIVE rather than just an endless slogging of one athlete against another. All of my best athletes are extremely adept in this post session feedback analysis. We usually gather as a small group after class and discuss the three main lessons learned and hold a brief congress on what we can do to improve next time and then switch conversations back to mocking/ridiculing each other, any absent friends, anyone else we can think of and then steer the conversation back to sex and violence 😂😂Here I go over post workout reflections with one of the most astute (and obsessive 😜) workout debriefers I ever knew, Eddie Cummings. A big part of his rapid skill acquisition was his relentless self analysis of success and failure in training which we could trouble shoot after class to help prepare for the next session.

Sensei in the training room! My sensei Renzo Gracie has always been my most important guide and influence over the years in jiu jitsu, so it's always a pleasure when he comes in to observe and train with us. Currently the squad is preparing for the tough test of ADCC world championships competition. The specialized tactics make for a harsh training session. Mr Gracie brings so much experience of ADCC style competition and his insights as he watched the young guns prepare was fascinating. Here, the RGA Monday afternoon class relaxes after class with sensei 😊

Order of importance: Very often students come to me with a desire to learn the many precise details of a given move. This is a healthy and good attitude, as precision is very important for the successful application of moves in jiu jitsu. However, it is critical that BOTH THE INSTRUCTOR AND THE STUDENT BE ABLE TO RANK THE DETAILS IN ORDER OF IMPORTANCE, SO THAT MORE ATTENTION IS PLACED UPON THE CRUCIAL DETAILS RATHER THAN THE AUXILIARY DETAILS. In truth, when you go to apply the moves in a match situation you will be under severe stress, and in any stressful situation, our cognitive abilities are greatly diminished. In a scenario where you can only recall a few details, ranking those details from most important to least important is the single best way to increase your effectiveness. Focus upon one crucial detail will do more for your performance of a given move in a tough match than ten trifling details. So when learning details, focus as much on the RANKING of the details as you do upon the ACCUMULATION of them. Making this a habit will enable you to make the most important adjustments quickly and under pressure - a skill you will need in a tight contest. Here I point out the most crucial elements of an ashi garami variation at a recent seminar so that beginners can make quicker progress towards development in this aspect of the game.

Big Tom DeBlass getting ready for action with the squad: This Saturday night in Bayville New Jersey at Fight2Win 43, my good friend and comrade Tom DeBlass will take on the great Joao Assis of Brazil - former ADCC world gold and silver medalist. These two titans have battled previously to a draw and both are looking to show how improvements in their game will make a difference on Saturday. Mr DeBlass is a student of one of my most important mentors, my senpai, Ricardo Almeida and a very well known and respected member of the BJJ community. In preparation for this bout he came in weekly to train squad style and impressed everyone with his drive and commitment. Hats off to Fight2Win for continuing to put on great shows with impressive matchups. They do a great job of building grass roots support through local athletes, along with big name main events. They are continuing to grow and develop whilst offering developing athletes a great venue to showcase their skills. This will be a ten minute submission only match, but if it should go the distance, a judgment will be made on the basis of submission aggression and positional control - skills that both athletes excel in. Looking forward to a fire cracker when these two meet - big men, big skill sets, big following, all going down at the big show!

Details vs direction: When instruction is offered in jiu jitsu, the two general types are first, those that offer a general sense of purpose or direction. This is essential for giving the student the big picture of what he or she is trying to achieve. Second, there is instruction in the small technical details that make it possible for the athlete to perform the actions that enable us to fulfill that sense of direction. Deficiencies in either of these two areas will create problems. A sense of direction is worthless if you can't perform the tasks that get you moving in that direction; and endless details can create a myopic student who can pontificate at length on a given area of skill, but who can't place it in a context that lets him improvise and quickly identify the key features of the scenarios s/he finds himself in. Somewhere in the middle is a satisfactory compromise between the two. It is usually different for different people and problem areas. One of the trickiest times to work this problem is in seminars when I visit schools. Often there is a considerable skill and knowledge discrepancy between the various attendees. I usually find I can make on the spot adjustments based upon how people manage the drills they over as to whether I can get more complex, or stay longer on foundational aspects of the game. The success of my students in certain aspects of jiu jitsu has created a widespread interest in our game and something of a cottage industry in study and emulation of our tactics and skills. As a result, I can often get more advanced in seminars nowadays than I could have several years ago. Here I am teaching a seminar in Pittsburgh @stoutpgh where the students did a fine job of moving through some complex material on ashi garami based leg locking. It is becoming quite clear that the overall knowledge and understanding of lower body submissions around the nation has increased quite dramatically from five years ago 😊😊I am happy that my students @garrytonon @eddie_wolverine @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyryanbjj and myself can help this trend. Already I am seeing some excellent leg locking students as I travel and teach. 😊

Taking on bigger opponents: Jiu jitsu is a difficult enough activity even when matched against someone our own size, but things get very interesting when we have to take in a skilled opponent in a weight category well above our own! This weekend squad apprentice, Ethan Crelinsten, took on 10th planet standout, Nathan Orchard in the Submission Series in Nova Scotia in an open weight event. Mr Orchard is a fine competitor who has an outstanding record in EBI competition and in other high profile events. Despite a sizable difference in weight, Mr Crelinsten was able to put considerable pressure with a mix of positional and submission attacks, getting past guard to mounted positions and several strong Kimura attempts, ultimately taking the back as the ten minute match came to close and finishing in a dominant position to take a one sided decision victory. I always feel it's a great experience periodically for athletes to fight up a weight division to really test their skills - there are some risks involved - injuries are more likely, but nothing else provides such a clear test as to the efficacy of your technique than seeing it work well on a skilled bigger stronger opponent.

Jake shields getting it done: This last weekend squad regular Jake Shields took on Danny Davis in an MMA fight in Professional Fighters League in Washington. With the primary interest this weekend on the big UFC event, it is easy to overlook Mr Shields fight - but remember, as the two UFC welterweights Tyron Woodley and Demian Maia fought for the coveted UFC world title, Jake Shields has beaten both men in UFC competition in the past. His career record is littered with victories over UFC champions. He out on a dominant performance, getting two 10-8 rounds with positional pressure that melts opponents. Great to see Mr Shields taking his skills from the gym to the cage again and taking another impressive victory.

An inspiring story: Last night was the first EBI event for women - a milestone for professional women's grappling. There were some outstanding athletes representing their various teams, including world champions. When the smoke cleared it was eighteen year old Erin Blanchfield who won the EBI belt. She is relatively unknown in grappling circles, I thought it would be a good idea to talk a little about her and her achievement, as I believe there is much to inspire and educate us all as we train and try to make progress. Ms Blanchfield trains at an RGA affiliate run by Karl Pravec @silverfoxbjj a black belt from my sensei, Renzo Gracie. She got her purple belt there around six months ago. When she heard about the female EBI event, she began coming into the city to train alongside the squad, doing the very same drills, conceptual training and sparring that our athletes do to prepare for these events. Now bear in mind, she lives one and half hours away from NYC and still came in all that way most days a week, in addition to her night training at Siver Fox academy - it shows the dedication this young woman approached this great test. She was a great student, very quiet and respectful. She would wordlessly perform all the drills and complete every training assignment. Within a short time she showed incredible improvement and was submitting partners that previously overwhelmed her. In her final week of training she submitted two partners I had never seen her submit before. On the big night she showed the same kind of quiet, determined, well directed and technically sound jiu jitsu that she showed us in the training room all summer and went on to go further than all the more highly ranked and more well known opponents to take the belt! She submitted two 10th Planet athletes who specialize in this kind of event, and beat in over time two other athletes to win. It is a great lesson in how a determined self starter with motivation and a plan can overcome the odds and get to their cherished goal. What a remarkable performance by Ms Blanchfield- not just on Sunday night, but all summer, as she quietly and professionally laid the groundwork for her success at the big show!

Making progress: This weekend, talented apprentice(kohai), Jason Rau competed in a local submission event, Rise Submission Invitational at 170 pounds with EBI rules. Mr Rau is a student of one of my mentors, Matt Serra. He came just a short time ago to begin training in our method and has made great progress. This weekend he won every match by heel hook submission to take first place and impress the crowd. He is a fine example of someone who already had a certain skill set, and adding to it in new directions to create positive change in his jiu jitsu. So often I hear people say that some part of jiu jitsu is not for them, or that they have their way of doing things and they are not interested in some other part. Mr Rau is a fine example of what is possible when you add new skills to an already developed game. It's never too late. Even if you never actually end up favoring those skills, you will at the very least have a much better idea of how to defend if someone should use them against you. In addition you will learn new ways of using and moving the body that will help you in other aspects of the sport. Here, Mr Rau begins a nice heel hook sequence out of his opponents offense, but a quick counterattack creates opportunities for his own offense through to the win.

New York always has a surprise in store: So here I am in a shockingly empty JFK departure lounge, doing some writing and reading and plotting to burn the three hour delay in my plane departure, when alongside me sits a fellow I have not seen in thirty years! And that was on TV! When I was in college in New Zealand, I was an avid weight lifter and many of my gym partners were part of the small Pro Wrestling circuit in New Zealand. They took their inspiration from American pro wrestling, especially the WWE (I believe it was WWF in those days) one of their favorites was a bad guy character called Virgil, who was the sinister accomplice of Ted Dibiase, the Million dollar man. Their schtick was money money money (you hear that Gordon Ryan?). Money rules all. Here I am sitting in JFK and out of nowhere Virgil sits next to me (I know, no one under the age of thirty five knows who he was but there have to be some old cronies out there that remember 😂😂😂). It turns out he is a huge UFC fan and loves Anderson Silva - I have to explain that I coached Chris Weidman to defeat Mr Silva - oops! He is a great character and apparently doing very well. It's making me think about the links between pro wrestling and MMA. Sometimes the link can be destructive, but sometimes it works well - look at Sakuraba. Chael Sonnen masterfully used pro wrestling antics to build a great career. Ha ha!! NYC is crazy - you never know who you will run into, even on a boring wait in an empty airport lounge! 😊😊

Travel: I am well known for my incompetence in many areas, none more so than travel. My poor students will attest to my miserable record of missed flights, missed connections, lost luggage - pretty much every error possible in an airport/plane. #airportloser Every time I head out to JFK airport, there is some freak car accident, thunderstorm, flash flood, anything that will prevent easy passage to the airport. #theghostofameliaearhearthauntsme Tonight I made my way to the airport - preparing for leg lock seminar in Pittsburgh tomorrow. I decide that this time it will be different - this time I will be in time. Of course Friday night in summer time NYC, everyone leaves for the Hamptons, so traffic out of the city is terrible. I wisely decided to leave early to beat traffic. As soon as I leave, I get a text that my flight has been delayed two hours. when we get to the highway, there is NO traffic at all. In twenty five years in NYC I have never seen this. When I get to JFK, the line at security is usually massive - tonight, barely a person there and I Get through in less than two minutes. Usually my metal hip replacement sets off the alarms and I have to get frisked and explain how someone my age has a metal hip - tonight they just waved me through. Just as I got through I get another text saying my flight is delayed another hour! Ha ha! The one time in my life I don't need to be on time and I get to JFK in record time! #godhatesme Hope I don't fall asleep in the seminar tomorrow! It's going to be a long night!! #airtravelismynemesis 😂😞😒looking for adventure in a very quiet and boring Friday night JFK 🤔

Grappling and geography: One of the great pleasures of spending a long time in the sport of grappling is the opportunity to see various styles of grappling from around the world. My sport is jiu jitsu, in particular the Brazilian style derived from the work of the Gracie family. Living in NYC and having students who compete globally, we often get a look at others styles Of grappling from around the world, and the what we see is often incredibly impressive. Whether it be Judo players from Japan and Korea, Sambo athletes from Russia, Senagalese wrestlers from Africa, Mongolian hybrid grapplers (somewhere between Judo and wrestling) and many others, they each carry a distinctive style has has tremendously impressive strong points, from which a jiu jitsu stylist can learn and improve. One geographical area in particular has long impressed me with its incredible depth of grappling talent, out of all proportion to its population numbers - the Caucasus regions. This area, separating Europe and Asia, running from Black Sea to Caspian Sea, encompassing whole countries, such as parts of Russia, Armenia, Georgia, Iran, along with republics/federal regions such as Dagestan, Ossetia, Chechnya and others, has produced an unbelievable number of world class wrestlers that have produced incredible results in Olympic and World championships competition. The sheer number of all time greats coming out of this area clearly points to the fact that whatever training systems these fellows have in operation, it is clearly one of the absolute highest quality. The wrestlers from these regions often appear to have a distinct style and approach and like jiu jitsu athletes, pride themselves on the refinement and quality of their technique above all else. I always get the feeling that if they put their attention to jiu jitsu, they would excel at it in a short time. The NYC area has a big Russian population and so often we get wrestlers from the Caucasus stop by and they always impress with their smooth and subtle style. Here, Rustam Chsiev, combining wrestling with submissions, impresses the crowd at an EBI event, where he got all the way to the finals against Gordon Ryan.

Spreading the word: I always love teaching some of the key elements of our approach to jiu jitsu in a new environment. It's a great chance for me to focus on the fundamental parts of our game that myself and my full time students tend to take for granted when we work with each other, but which are not obvious at all to the uninitiated. Any chance to re-visit the foundations of jiu jitsu, whether it be jiu jitsu in general, or our approach to it, is a healthy thing for a student. IN ANY GIVEN SKILL BASED ENTERPRISE, MASTERY OF THE FUNDAMENTALS WILL DETERMINE HOW FAR AND HOW FAST YOU PROGRESS THROUGH THE HIGHER LEVELS. This Saturday in Pittsburgh I shall get a chance to teach some of the core features of our leg locking game to a new group. Though I currently have some severe physical limitations, most of the essential features of my system can be demonstrated. Here, I work with GarryTonon @garrytonon and Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj in Singapore at Evolve gym, covering intricacies of grip and positioning to a curious audience - and a very stoic drill partner! (Uke)

People constantly warn against the dangers of over confidence; but in all honesty I tell you this - for every match lost by over confidence, a hundred are lost due to excessive timidity.

Two kinds of strength - two approaches to combat: This weekend welterweight champion Tyron Woodley takes on jiu jitsu master, Demian Maia in what will be a fascinating contrast not only in fighting style, but body type. It is rare these days to see such diametrically opposed approaches to fighting. Mr Woodley is one of the most explosive fighters ever seen in the octagon - just a single blow from his right hand is fully capable of ending a fight at any time in a match against anyone in the division. His body is perfectly disposed to create explosive power, and accordingly he has created a fighting style based around that. Mr Maia on the other hand, almost completely lacks explosive power, but excels in isometric tension and static strength. If he secures a controlling grip and position, he is capable of holding it indefinitely all the way through to a finish against anyone in the division. Their modus operandi is so different, yet equally deadly. One gets the impression that if either man can assert their mode of strength under their conditions, they shall win easily - but who will be able to do so? That's what makes this such a fascinating battle. Normally in modern MMA, the two athletes have fairly similar, well rounded skills, which usually results in very even matches - but here the contrast is so extreme it would seem whoever can get their strength in place first will win comfortably. Behind this fascinating match up there is a valuable lesson for us all - the correlation of fighting style with body type. Our body is the medium through which we must express our skills; as such it is critical that we choose wisely our techniques, strategy and style. The better our choices in this regard, the easier the task of maximizing our effectiveness in combat. It is wonderful to see even at this level, the many possible means to combat effectiveness offer such divergent approaches equal opportunity to championship glory. This match posits the critical questions we must always ask ourselves - WHAT ARE MY PERSONAL STRENGTHS AND WHAT AM I DOING TO MAXIMIZE THEIR VALUE IN TRAINING AND COMPETITION?

Reunion: When Georges St- Pierre was getting ready to fight Jon Fitch, he kept telling me about this incredible Karate fighter, Steven "Wonderboy" Thompson @wonderboymma he had brought into the camp for sparring. He came back for the Carlos Condit camp and I was shocked at how effectively he used movement, distance and angle to set up effective strikes whilst avoiding counters. Later on, I brought him in to Chris Weidman's camp for Anderson Silva to prepare him for the striking pyrotechnics of the great Brazilian champion. The two worked so well together, they became great friends and training partners, swapping grappling and striking knowledge. Both went on to super stardom in MMA and many more accolades to be won in the future. It was a pleasure to catch up with him again Saturday night as we cornered Chris Weidman to a dramatic victory. Watching him illustrate evasive movement into strikes is one of the most impressive memories I have in coaching MMA. So often I hear people disparage certain martial arts as part of an MMA program - karate is a common target. I always laugh when I hear this - for I am quite certain that five minutes of sparring with Mr Thompson would drastically change these doubters opinions! In truth, all of the martial arts that have a sport component which necessitates live training/sparring with competition have valuable contributions to make to an MMA program. They each have areas of specialty that we can benefit from. It is up to us as individuals to find a balance between each of their offerings that works for us. Here we get a chance to catch up on old times after the show.

Perfect performance! The great Roger Gracie took on Marcus Almeida "buchecha" in a rematch today in what was essentially a battle for the title of greatest of all time. Their first bout had been a titanic struggle to a draw. Few were aware however, that Mr Gracie had fought in the immediate aftermath of a severe staph infection. This time he came in healthy and despite a long lay off from competition, put on a characteristic display of classical jiu jitsu perfection to shut down a very powerful and dangerous opponent, and, as he has done throughout his career, make it all look easy and simple. He went back to a theme exhibited so often in his matches, strong gripping sequences in the standing position to shut out his opponents standing attacks, then dragging his opponent to his guard and coming up from bottom to his opponents back in such a calm and relaxed manner that it always seems to make his opponents look like beginners - except that it is the second best jiu jitsu athlete in the world. From there, the usual inevitability of the finish and the seeming impossibility of escape for the opponent. Fittingly it was a last show for Mr Gracie. There is simply nothing more he can do in the sport, and, like all great performers, he saved the best until last 😊

What a night, what a fight!! Chris Weidman did exactly what he said he wanted to do - to show that the hallmark of champions is their capacity to deal with loss and adversity and come back stronger than before. He did it tonight against a very tough and dangerous Kelvin Gastulem who has been on a tremendous winning streak and who again proved dangerous with his powerful rear hand tonight at the closing stages of the first round. However, in front of his fervent home town supporters, there was no denying Mr Weidman tonight. He came back brilliantly with his own rear hand interspersed with takedowns and ground control. Ultimately he got the breakthrough with his tokui waza (favorite move) kata gatame - the head and arm strangle. This was a fitting end, it represented what this fight was all about - a return to his roots that made him a world champion. He came in tonight at the same weight he fought Anderson Silva, looking much better than recent fights where he sacrificed too much weight. It was a joy to be a part of his preparation again. I have not been involved in Mr Weidman's camps since his second fight with Anderson Silva so it was an amazing experience tonight to once again watch this amazing athlete thrill the crowd with his skill and heart. Heading from Long Island to Manhattan- tired but happy, ready for a day of teaching tomorrow 😊😊 Hope you all enjoyed the show as much as I did!

It begins again: Chris Weidman @chrisweidmanufc successfully weighs in today in hometown Long Island in preparation for his fight tomorrow against the formidable Kelvin Gastulem. It has been a joy seeing the old gang together again, Ray Longo and Matt Serra, along with the pride in Mr Weidmans heart in headlining a UFC in the town in which he grew up and to which he is fiercely attached. Also on the card is RGA standout @rafaelsaponatal in what should be a great New York night of MMA. Now a quiet night of rehydration, refueling and game planning and then action tomorrow night!

Another day, another room: I am a big believer in consistency in training. Most of your training should be in one room with a group of like minded people. Only in this way can a routine be established over time that can create skills that can produce great results. Nonetheless, any athlete must be able to perform anywhere and at any time. Thus it is good periodically to get out of your regular spot and train in a new place with new people. Very often a simple change in routine can get positive results. This becomes a necessity for professional athletes who must travel to compete. They must develop the adaptability to get a great workout with anyone in any room - that is a real skill in itself. Here, Garry Tonon trains in England at a Polaris event in a small town called Poole, where we showed up randomly last year and trained with some excited locals in their interestingly painted gym. The action must have been good because the entire room steamed up like an English mist!

Fighting for advantage: One of the central premises of jiu jitsu is this - ALWAYS GAIN SOME FORM OF PRIOR ADVANTAGE BEFORE COMMITTING TO AN ATTACK. The most widely understood form of advantage in jiu jitsu is positional advantage, but there are many other forms as well. Adherence to this fundamental principle is probably the single biggest and most important commitment the student can make. It is so easy to focus upon the moves that comprise the actual attack, and fail to pay attention to gaining the initial advantage that makes it possible against a knowledgeable and resisting opponent. The higher you go in the sport, the stronger your adherence to this essential axiom of the sport must become, for at the highest levels, EVERYONE KNOWS ALL THE MAJOR MOVES AND ALL THE MAJOR COUNTERS TO THEM - victory will go to the athlete who gains sufficient initial advantage that his his opponent cannot stop it, despite knowing what it is and how, in theory, to stop it. Here, Garry Tonon works hard to gain advantage in the standing position against the powerful Yuri Simoes in an open weight EBI event.

Seeing the old gang: It was my pleasure to trek out to Long Island NY to see Chris Weidman and Gian Valente prepare for their matches this weekend at his gym. Mr Weidman and Mr Valente worked out under the watchful eyes of Ray Longo and welterweight title challenger, Stephen Thompson. Coaching such a talented athlete will always be a highlight of my coaching career. When Mr Weidman opened his own gym his ability to come in to train in Manhattan was curtailed, but whenever he comes in it's a joy to watch his skills on the mat. He is looking very well prepared for what will be a very tough match indeed against the outstanding Kelvin Gastelum - the first time the UFC has ever been in Long Island. This is a great honor for Mr Weidman - I know he is intensely proud to headline a big show in his home town. Here he is relaxing after his last full power workout with Gian Valente, Ray Longo and Wonderboy Thompson , along with Wife Marivi and his charming children. It's impressive to watch the input of Mr Thompsons electrifying standing skills combined with the tactical sense of Mr Longo's direction. This will be a fascinating match up to be sure! Both fighters have evolved and come so far. I am heading out to Long Island now to run Mr Weidman through some grappling drills, an area he always excelled in 😊😊

One move - with many faces: One of the central demands jiu jitsu makes of us is to adapt the various techniques of the sport to the limitless and rapidly changing circumstances in which we may have to apply them. Accordingly, any given technique will often have many variations that allow it to cover a vast number of contingencies. This is why at the higher levels, I often am reluctant to say someone is doing something incorrectly (though I am usually not reluctant at all to say something is wrong at beginner levels 😜). Very often good athletes can discern a different means of performing a technique THAT STAYS TRUE TO THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF THAT TECHNIQUE (and thus remains effective), BUT INVOLVES SOME UNORTHODOX ELEMENTS THAT MAKE IT APPEAR "INCORRECT." This is a good thing, for it allows for adaptation to the actual circumstances, rather than an artificial adherence to correct form that may not apply in that particular circumstance. Here, standout apprentice (kohai) student, Oliver Taza, takes gold at the IBJJF New York open with a juji gatame arm lock from his opponents back, but changes into an unorthodox leg positioning to better cover the angle and positioning of his opponents body during the transition and subsequent defensive movements. Despite the cosmetic changes, THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF THE MOVE ARE RETAINED - AND THAT IS WHAT IS IMPORTANT FOR VICTORY.

Clash of Titans: Next week in Rio de Janeiro will be a super fight as big as any in the history of jiu jitsu - the two greatest heavy weights of all time will meet for a rematch. Roger Gracie will once again take on Marcus Almeida at Gracie Pro, run by the great Kyra Gracie, who has done an incredible job getting the best people together in competition in the birthplace of the sport. Last time these two titans met it was in a twenty minute submission only context - officially it was a draw, since neither could submit the other within the allotted time, but it was clear that Mr Almeida got closest with a beautifully executed juji gatame armlock that Mr Gracie, a veritable master of defense, had to use all his skills to extract himself from. However, Mr Gracie was recovering from a severe staph infection at the time, which clearly sapped his strength i the closing stages of the match - this time, both athletes appear to be one hundred percent healthy. It will be played as a standard IBJJF ten minute match -
an excellent format for the match - both athletes excel in both submissions and positional attacks, so they will get a positive result that won't leave any doubts at the conclusion. Mr Gracie will be cornered by my sensei, Renzo Gracie, who has a been a mentor for Roger throughout his professional career and who has assisted him to most of his greatest wins. Both men can legitimately claim to be the best of all time - to see a match were they get a chance to solidify that claim is a great day for not only the athletes, but the sport itself. Of course, I am biased in favor of Roger Gracie, he often comes to NYC to train with his cousins and sensei Renzo. I consider him the pinnacle of classical jiu jitsu- positional control through to submission and in addition, one of the great role models of the sport. However, there is no denying the achievements and skills of Mr Almeida, who has built up an incredible array of wins that absolutely rival the record of Mr Gracie, and all done at a young age. In addition, he will bring a weight, strength and overall athletic advantage to the match that will test Mr Gracie's world renown skills to the limit! What a match!!

Stage entrance: The last seconds before a match begins - here, Eddie Cummings gets ready for another test on the stage at an EBI event, flanked by Garry Tonon, Ottavia Busia and myself. At this point all the physical work has been done and the there is nothing more than some last second mental reflections before the action begins. This photo captures well the spirit of those tense moments prior to stage time - the camaraderie, the intensity, the feeling of the unknown, of self doubt mixed with the desire to show the world what you have trained so hard to do. Though the crowd and even the cornermen/women are there, this moment belongs to the athlete

Subjecting the student to stress: A well known image of teaching is that of the drill instructor. In every military of every nation their modus operandi is the same - to subject the recruits to severe pressure as they learn the skills and organizational structure necessary to secure peace and wage war. Have you ever wondered why they all teach the same way? And have done so in this manner since the earliest days of military history? In every other area of human teaching, there are many different theories and methods, but in all the militaries of the world throughout history - only one. The main reason I believe, is to prepare recruits for the most stress filled environment known to man - war. As the environment in which the student is expected to perform rises in stress level, THE MODE OF TEACHING MUST REFLECT THIS. Student must be subjected to an appropriate degree of stress in daily training to prepare them for whatever stress level they are expected to perform in. Now there is no scenario in which jiu jitsu comes even close to the stress of war, but high level combat sports can be a environment significantly tougher than most people are used to. When students have professional aspirations, I tend to be considerably more demanding, obnoxious, critical, confrontational and stress inducing than I would normally be. The rational is exactly the same as that of a drill sergeant. If a student is to survive and flourish in a harsh, competitive environment, he must learn in a harsh environment. Of course this must be kept within reason. Sometimes I see senseis engage in behavior that goes too far. As a general rule however, I do favor a mode of teaching for those with competitive aspirations (or even just a strong desire to get good at the sport) that surprises many visitors with its foul mouthed, hyper critical, intolerant ways. Of course this is not a good way to operate for an average class, but among the more seasoned students with a desire to excel in the hurly burly of competitive combat sports, a little vitriol thrown into the instruction helps create minds that deal better with stress than overly nurtured students.

Active observation: As training begins I always try to keep an eye on the room and look for any need for intervention (not interrupting the class, but usually afterwards or in subsequent classes). This is an opportunity for a coach to assess whether a given move or concept is working as intended for the students. In problematic cases the essential question is whether failure is due to inadequacies in the technique itself, or my presentation of it, or the students implementation of it. Usually it is a mix of the latter two, though sometimes the first is the culprit and changes must be made. The best way to appropriate blame is by observing how the class as a whole is handling the assignment. If there is universal failure, but the technique has been shown previously to be effective in competition, then the blame should be put on me as the coach. I need to do a better job of presenting the material. If some students are successful and others failing, it is probably a failure of student comprehension and extra time needs to be devoted to remove the confusion among those who are not performing adequately. If even the most talented students are struggling to apply it successfully despite having a clear understanding of what they are trying to achieve and how to do so, then we will break the technique down after class and see if modifications can be made to make it work, or abandon it. This constant assessment of performance and judgement of the root of FAILURE is key to forward progress, not just in jiu jitsu, but in all aspects of life. Often people shy away from addressing failure, but locating and addressing failure is probably the quickest route to improvement. The key is to see failure as an opportunity for advancement rather than an episode of embarrassment or shame. If we take the latter point of view, we all would have been shamed out of the sport as white belts! Here I check out the action in Singapore at a large seminar in Evolve jiu jitsu academy. This presents slightly different problems as the students are all strangers, but the general idea remains the same.

Creating a connection and changing a mindset: Normally when we think of instruction in jiu jitsu we think of our daily technical lessons that aim to improve the precision with which we apply technique. There is however, an entirely different kind of instruction that is of equally great importance (and in some ways even greater importance). I am talking about INSIGHT THAT CREATES IN THE STUDENT A NEW POINT OF VIEW THAT CHANGES THE DIRECTION OF THEIR STUDY AND GIVES THEIR TECHNIQUE A SENSE OF DIRECTION. Consider an example from my sensei, Renzo Gracie. When I was a white belt, I hated bottom position and always sought to fight on top. Mr Gracie had observed me in training and one day when we talked I expressed my preference for getting to mounted position and doing everything from there. Mr Gracie said to me, "John, you realize the guard is just the mounted position upside down," and walked away, leaving me fascinated and suddenly eager to try a position that I had totally avoided and which he wanted me to train. It was a simple, and in retrospect, not entirely true point - but it opened my mind to a new direction in training - and that is precisely what it was intended to do. Years later its effects can still be seen. A cornerstone of my coaching philosophy is that in grappling (not fighting) top and bottom are neutral with regards our ability to enter effectively into submissions. I never forgot the power of insight as a mode of instruction over and above technical lessons. Here I discuss approaches to sankaku, the triangle, with Nicky Ryan, a technique in which he excels. Over and above the mechanics of a given move, there must be a GUIDING PHILOSOPHY which gives the techniques direction and creates a genuine sense of self expression in the athlete

Levels of intensity: One of the best features of jiu jitsu as a martial arts is the degree to which it allows practitioners to adjust the intensity of the moves to the situation in which they find themselves. This allows for choice in our application of the art - it can range from very mild to very severe, depending upon the context. Probably the single best way to assess the skill level of a jiu jitsu player is to look at their ability to play with the full range of intensity, from low to high against high level opponents in competitive situations. When you see someone effortlessly controlling a fully resisting opponent, that is a very clear sign of technical excellence. Winning is one thing, but HOW you win is always the deeper story of your skill level. This weekend, up and coming apprentice (kohai) student, Stanley Rosa, showed his rapidly improving technique through superb control. Mr Rosa is a student of my great friend, Doug Pelinkovic at RGA Bronx @bxmartialarts and often trains with the squad and in addition, I teach there once a week. The Bronx bombers have been training hard. Mr Rosa traveled to Tulsa Oklahoma to compete in Sub Wars submission only event for one thousand six hundred shekels. Fighting through a round robin event, he defeated all opponents via submission. In the final he showed excellent control in the application of juji gatame- the arm bar - to win first place. Like all the best submission holds, juji has two aspects - the control/pin aspect and the breaking/submission aspect. THE BEST PEOPLE EXCEL AT BOTH AND UNDERSTAND THAT ANY DEFICIENCIES WITH ONE MAKE FAILURE WITH THE OTHER VERY LIKELY.

Traveling man: Part of the process of improvement is traveling to test your skills, just as a thousand years ago the shaolin monks had to leave the monastery upon graduation and walk the land with their skills, so too, the modern jiu jitsu player must travel to compete and deepen his learning and demonstrate his craft. Up and coming kohai (apprentice) student , Jason Rau, did exactly that this weekend, going all the way to Iowa for The Submission Spectrum event at 185 pounds (Mr Rau normally competes at 170). Mr Rau fought five times, winning all five by submission in regulation time, one by sankaku (triangle strangle) and four via his rapidly improving leg lock arsenal. Here he displays a nicely controlled entry into cross ashi garami from underneath his opponent into a fine heel hook variation victory on the way to first place and and a thousand shekels for the piggy bank

A great performance: Robert Whittaker, the New Zealand born/Australia based MMA fighter put in a tremendous performance against Cuban middle weight sensation, Yoel Romero to take a unanimous decision victory. The fight itself was a superb example of neutralizing a very dangerous opponents weapons and enduring injury and a strong starting adversary in order create what was essentially two fights in one evening - Romero took the first two rounds with his wrestling skills and explosive leg kicking. Then rounds three through five was a completely different fight, with Mr Whittaker taking the offensive on a fading opponent, shutting down the wrestling and imposing his own game to take three rounds in a row. This was testimony to the professionalism of Mr Whittaker and his team, made all the more impressive by the fact that it was all done while carrying an apparent injury from the beginning of the match. Mr Whittaker has now dispatched the two men most people considered the two best title contenders in the division in back to back fights in decisive fashion. Along the way he has shown he can beat the best strikers, wrestlers and jiu jitsu players in the UFC. However, this win was much more than just a standout fight performance. It teaches a far deeper lesson than this. The last decade has seen the rise of "super camps" in MMA. Most athletes, especially those in the top tier, are based in a few dominant camps - Top Team, Jacksons, AKA, Blackhouse, BlackZillians etc. These camps provide massive support and infrastructure for the athletes, training facilities, medical and financial support, media help etc etc. It is increasingly a corporate approach to training. What is remarkable about Mr Whittaker and his team is that they did it all on their own, in a nation far from the usual centers of MMA. It is an inspirational story of how dedicated, self starting, highly motivated individuals can out perform the big established brands with enough hard work and passion. What a great night for Mr Whittaker and his coaching staff, and for Australasian MMA and indeed, for anyone who believes in the power of a few good men with a goal, passion and a professional demeanor

Humor in unlikely situations: In combat sports sometimes the funniest things occur totally out of the blue and amongst all the anxieties, make for great memories. In the 1980's a campy martial arts movie, The Karate Kid was released. It featured a young man moving to a new town and getting bullied by a group of toughs from a the local karate school, the cobra kai's. The young hero learns karate and takes on the local thugs in a tournament where he defeats several of them on the way to the final. The evil sensei of the Cobra Kai dojo recognizes the threat of the newly trained hero and tells one of his athletes to perform an illegal sweeping technique to break the heroes leg. He uttered the now infamous command to "sweep the leg" which has now found its way into contemporary culture as something to say anytime you want to advocate underhanded or dirty tactics to gain victory. The hero, Daniel, somehow survives the pain of the illegal technique and gets to the final against the best of the cobra Kai students, whose name was Johnny. The evil sensei again encourages the use of attacks to the now damaged leg and says, "sweep the leg Johnny." Daniel again survives and goes in to win, earning the respect of his tormentors, a hot girl friend, some dope looking cars and a pat on the back from his sensei - everyone leaves happy. Some thirty years later, Georges St -Pierre was slated to fight what would become his last title defense at welterweight against the juggernaut KO specialist Johny Hendricks. The fight camp was a very tense affair and as the fight began, Mr St-Pierre hit an immediate takedown into guillotine and the crowd roared. Then the two circled and gauged each other, there was a strange quiet spell where you could clearly hear the fighters breathing, the opposite corners instructions etc. suddenly an audience member with a booming, stentorian voice shouted out, "SWEEP THE LEG JOHNY!!!" In the midst of all the action, I turned to Firas Zahabi and said, "Dude, that was pretty f**king funny," and we got back into the business of coaching. Who would ever guess that a cheesy line from a movie I saw as a teen would come back in such a way and at such a time! 😂😂

Double Impact: Here is a remarkable case of twin turbo action - two of my favorite black belts - The St-Leger twins, Garry @gstleger and Harry @harrystleger They are not just biological twins, they are both double blackbelts in Judo and BJJ. Both competed in the world championships in Judo for the United States and have incredible skills in the standing position; but when the action hits the floor, the BJJ kicks in - now THAT'S double impact! These two tatami monsters were a huge part of one of the very best fight camps I ever participated in, when Chris Weidman prepared to take on Anderson Silva and win the UFC middleweight title. Their tremendous clinch, fence wrestling and ground skills were invaluable. Now Harry is an assistant coach at my old comrade Greg Jackson's gym in New Mexico. Garry lives in NYC and often assists me in daily teaching when my current physical problems make certain moves impossible. I have always been a strong advocate of blending standing skills (tachi waza) with ground skills (ne waza). These two outstanding athletes are tremendous examples of this. Recently Harry returned to the big apple to share some mat time with the squad and his brother for double the fun! I always tell my students, jiu jitsu is ne waza focused, thus most of our training time is on the floor, but you should at least be competent in the standing position. Our watchword is "killers on the ground and competent on the feet." These two over achievers went further and are killers in both domains!

Immediacy of input: We get thousands of moves shown to us in the course of a given year in jiu jitsu. In a time where there are schools on every block, numerous champion authorities teaching online, and a veritable plethora of enthusiasts happy to share what they know to anyone with ears - the problem for the student is not access to information, but RETAINING information. I often find the best way to make information stick in a student is to teach it immediately after they are stumped by a given problem. Sometimes as we spar, we run into a problem and fail to overcome it. There is a feeling of frustration in that moment - if the lesson is quickly taught to them in that moment - an important point demonstrated- I find it tends to stick in the student's mind better than if I simply offer cold information unrelated to their sparring experience. There is something about immediate feedback to a frustrating problem that aids retention. This has to be used sparingly however; as general rule rule I don't like to interrupt live sparring (randori). I like to see students moving continuously through sparring time as they would in a match, but occasionally if I feel the situation warrants it, I will see a situation where the student can benefit from a quick insight in response to a problem and failure - I will make the point and then get them immediately back into sparring. Usually just a quick point can make a substantial difference in performance with regards that problem and, as I noted earlier, the immediacy of the point and it's psychological link to a moment of frustration, tends to make it more memorable to the student. Here I call out a few details of wristband elbow position to a frustrated Garry Tonon during a time he was working on guillotine attacks with mixed results - in time it became one of his best weapons.

Mixing sports: As much as I am an advocate of focused training, I am also a big believer in athletes participating in other sports outside of jiu jitsu and other combat sports. For example, sports that promote versatility and ease of movement, such as gymnastics, yoga, capoeira etc, can have great benefits for jiu jitsu practice. Strength sports such as Olympic and power lifting also have their own value, as do sports that develop overall fitness and coordination such as soccer and basketball (among many). This is particularly true for very young athletes. Over emphasis of just one sport often leads to muscular and postural imbalances that can cause problems in the future. Developing bodies do better, I believe, with a wide variety of sports challenges that work the full range of human movement/ability. There is always time for extreme specialization in the future. Here, eleven year old prodigy Mikey Wilson @funkygster works his jiu jitsu skills with Katya Leontyeva, with a focus on ude gatame arm locks and heel hooks for today, as part of his jiu jitsu program. Outside the jiu jitsu dojo, he also works equally hard on wrestling, capoeira, gymnastics and break dancing (in addition to his scholarly and artistic pursuits). This wide range of movement training, along with excellent mental focus, makes him unusually adept at picking up skills in jiu jitsu practice

Happy Fourth of July from the Squad! Our great country has its ideological roots in independence, liberty of thought, personal responsibility, all tempered by pragmatism. These are not only the building blocks that made America foremost among the nations, but also excellent virtues in each of us as citizens, human beings and interestingly, as jiu jitsu students. Wishing you all the best from NYC - train hard, have fun with friends and family, and ruminate upon the shared value of our virtues as citizens, individuals and jiu jitsu players - the wisdom of our founding fathers extends in all directions. 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Fixation: Probably one of the surest ways to hinder performance is to select a given move and push hard to complete it LONG AFTER THE OPPORTUNITY FOR IT HAS PASSED. So often in a sparring session or match we develop a tunnel vision that limits our outlook to an extent where it harms performance. A MAN WITH A THOUSAND TECHNIQUES CAN BE REDUCED TO A ONE TRICK PONY IF HE SEES ONLY POSSIBILITY IN FRONT OF HIM. One of the most valuable services a coach can provide is an extra set of eyes that widen the scope of an athletes vision and alert him to other choices that can open up the action and create forward direction. The odd thing is that tunnel vision arises from a desirable origin in athletes - focus. Athletes need focus to direct them to and through the application of a given technique. However, applied too long, the virtue of focus becomes the vice of tunnel vision, as the athlete stays with one move when probability of it succeeding has become unacceptably low. Here I am calling out options for Gordon Ryan on his way to a perfect victory at EBI 11 - that night he did not need it, he found by himself the perfect compromise between focus and adaptation - a hallmark of good jiu jitsu

You can't keep a good man down forever: It extremely pleasing to see Demian Maia get one of the most well deserved title shots in UFC history against juggernaut Tyron Woodley. Mr Maia had an unusually difficult path to welterweight contention, probably due to his Grappling based fighting style which clashes somewhat with the UFC brand image. Despite numerous setbacks and disappointments, Mr Maia never resorted to the usual antics used to jump ahead of the line. Instead he focused upon one thing - winning. Seven straight wins against the best people in the division, mostly by crushing submission. The UFC has been the only major MMA organization that made money and had longevity. They did that by cannily observing what makes people want to watch a pay per view. The answer for the vast majority of fans is simple - drama and violence. Fighters that offer those two will always generate sales. Mr Maia is remarkable because he deliberately eschews both. He prefer bloodless checkmate victories and speaks in the most respectful manner to friend and foe alike. I have had the honor of coaching two athletes in preparation for bouts against Mr Maia, Chris Weidman and Rory MacDonald. I found the experience, from observing his subtle skills and game planning/countering against it, pre and post fight encounters etc to be among the most interesting and rewarding of my coaching career. When in NYC training with his great friend, Marcelo Garcia, he will often stop by RGA to say hello to my dear Sensei, Renzo Gracie. You simply could not hope to meet a nicer person. I have always believed that every great mans life tells a story. The message of Mr Maia's journey is clear. STAY TRUE TO WHO YOU ARE AND ONE DAY YOU WILL NOT ONLY GET TO YOUR GOAL, BUT HAVE THE SATISFACTION OF KNOWING YOU GOT THERE ON YOUR OWN TERMS. DON'T CHANGE YOURSELF TO PLEASE THE FRIVOLOUS LIKES AND DISLIKES OF A CROWD WHOSE AFFECTIONS CHANGE WITH THE WIND. BETTER TO BE ADMIRED BY FEWER FOR WHAT YOU REALLY ARE THAN WATCHED BY MORE FOR PRETENDING TO BE WHAT THEY WANTED YOU TO BE. Best of luck to both these great athletes. Regardless of outcome, Mr Maia will always have my unstinting admiration.

Developing mental toughness - squad style - at the dinner table after training: Straight up savage, Nicky Ryan shows a stunned Keenan Cornelius how it's done after a fine sushi meal in LA 😂😂😂😂 Try THAT with your five guys burger Mr Tonon.... #mymouthhurtsbutnotasbadasyourkneefool

Getting used to it: As a general rule in day to day training, I prefer to see athletes working with training partners a tier below them in skill level. This allows them to focus more on technical development rather than physical exertion and pressure. However, it is very important that occasionally athletes get to work with people their own level or better, particularly when competition is approaching, so that they learn to operate under harsh physical duress and not panic and break when they encounter genuine physical pressure. Young Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj , enjoying his sixteenth birthday in LA, gets some fine training in with the great Keenan Cornelius @keenancornelius . It was a fine experience for the rapidly developing youngster to feel world class pressure from a different style than he is used to and one that he must learn to deal with as he enters top level competition in the future. Developing athletes must go through the trials of being the nail - so that one day they can emerge as the hammer.

Friends and rivals: The very nature of jiu jitsu leads to intensity in personal relationships. On the one hand, it is deeply competitive- even a friendly roll at the gym has a winner and a loser. In competition it is even more pronounced. There are many people vying for one first place. On the other hand, we are all in love with the same sport and have a camaraderie of shared vision and experience. This means that often we can be involved in tough competition with someone, but at the end of the day, we are all doing the same thing and part of a brotherhood. Gordon and Nicky Ryan are currently on a tour of California- teaching private classes and seminars and also visiting our good friend Shawn Williams @shawnwilliamsbjj academy. As part of their training, Gordon Ryan trained with two of his toughest former rivals, the great Keenan Cornelius @keenancornelius and world champion Lucas "Hulk" Barbosa @lucasbarbosajj. They all had a great time training -Gordon Ryan even trained in a Gi!! 😳😜🤗 Its always great to see friendship replace rivalry in time - even though in truth the sport requires both in order to operate. Don't forget to get an opportunity to train with the Ryan brothers if you want to see our approach to the sport from two of its best representatives @gordonlovesjiujitsu @nickyryanbjj I don't know how these two are going to deal with a return to sweltering, chaotic, crowded New York after their Californian sojourn 😜😜😜They are taking quite a liking to the West Coast and enjoying developing a student base there 😊😊

Ne waza, tachi waza and the uniqueness of BJJ: Of all the grappling arts, BJJ probably puts the least emphasis on takedown skill. This is reflected in the points system, where takedowns score only half as much as the favored pins and there is no penalty for simply sitting straight down into ground grappling (ne waza). This under emphasis of standing techniques (tachi waza) has been a constant source of criticism over the years. As a general rule I believe that standing techniques have been underdeveloped in BJJ and that this must be addressed at some point, either as individuals (by independently studying other grappling arts such as judo or wrestling) or as a community (by changing the way the art as a whole is practiced and taught). This however, is not the topic I wish to discuss here tonight. There is another topic that few have discussed which gets little attention in the BJJ/takedowns argument, but which is of the first importance in this debate. BJJ is a ne waza-centric art. Its primary emphasis is on control on the ground. Judo and wrestling are tachi-waza-centric. Their primary concern is on the takedown itself, with a strong reward system for amplitude and power on the takedown. This creates two very different concerns on the part of the person performing the takedown in each sport. In jiu jitsu, the primary interest in the takedown is in WHAT HAPPENS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE TAKEDOWN. It is no good if you perform a fine takedown/throw but finish in a stranglehold or bad position in the aftermath - the value of a takedown/throw can be completely negated by a bad outcome on the ground AFTER the throw is completed. In a grappling style where the primary emphasis is on the throw/takedown, the amplitude of the throw becomes the only concern with no regard for the aftermath once the two combatants hit the mat. My point is this - the issue of BJJ and takedowns is not only the issue of how to get people more proficient at them, but the secondary issue that is largely ignored- HOW ARE WE TO MODIFY THEM TO MAKE THEM APPROPRIATE FOR A NE WAZA-CENTRIC ART? This to me is the more interesting project and the one which will lead to future innovations in the sport

Reflections on my students - Chris Weidman: I have been blessed throughout my coaching career to have many outstanding students infused with talent, drive and a tremendous work ethic. One of my favorite memories will always be the incredible series of wins that took Chris Weidman from a talented newcomer in the UFC to a run of victories that made him a contender and then ultimately, UFC middleweight champion - by defeating the greatest Middleweight of all time, Anderson Silva - twice. One of my favorite memories of Mr Weidman occurred when he went to San Jose California to fight Mark Munoz as part of his campaign for a title shot. The match with Mr Munoz was in a minor UFC show midweek - UFC on Fuel TV on a Tuesday or Wednesday night. We arrived on Saturday to prepare. That Saturday night in Las Vegas, Anderson Silva had his second fight with Chael Sonnen - one of the biggest fights in UFC history. We wanted to watch the fight so we went to a local sports bar, but it was completely crowded and we could not get a seat. Mr Weidman, his faithful friend, Gian Villante and myself had to stand outside and watch through the windows. It was so crowded that people spilled outside. No one knew who Mr Weidman was. Finally one young man walked up and asked if Mr Weidman was a fighter. He replied, "yes - and I want to fight Anderson Silva and beat him," pointing at the screen. As he said those words, Mr Silva crushed Mr Sonnen with a knee strike and follow up. The young man said, "you don't want to fight that guy," and walked away. When I cast my mind back to that night, I am struck by how Mr Weidman was invisible to them - a nobody - even a fool to the one person who recognized him; but in his own mind he was full of resolve and confidence in his vision and dream. As we walked away from the crowd no one could guess that almost a year later that unrecognized nobody staring through the window and who could not even get a seat at the bar would defeat the idol that they had all come to see. NEVER LET THE CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES OF YOUR LIFE DISCOLOR OR MARR THE VISION YOU HAVE FOR YOURSELF IN THE FUTURE

Neiman Gracie wins again! RGA instructor and grappling/MMA standout, Neiman Gracie had the honor of fighting in Bellator NYC - only the second time an MMA show has been put in in Madison Square Garden. He won brilliantly in the second round via classic stranglehold from the back against a very tough David Marfone in an action packed event. It was wonderful to see such a result - the move most associated with the tradition of his family in MMA, yet embedded in a very modern and well rounded game. Mr Gracie has been trained almost from birth under his father, Marcio Stambowsky, himself one of only four blackbelts under the legendary Rolls Gracie. On addition, my sensei Renzo Gracie, his cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor and the RGA Muay Thai program directors, Joseph Sampieri and Jamie Crowder. Sensei Renzo Gracie was there to corner him to victory last night 😊He put all his skills together for a very fine victory indeed on an action packed event here in NYC. His unbeaten MMA record is testimony to his professionalism in preparation, hard work and ability to learn so well from his coaches 😊😊😊

Nice match! In an unexpected turn of events at a local Grappling show in New Jersey, United Grapplers Association, in what was supposed to be an eight man tournament, most entrants pulled out, young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years old, went in! He faced the great world champion, Paulo Miyao in a nice match, fought under ADCC rules. Mr Ryan was able to get to the legs for submission attempts, but could not establish the control necessary to make them effective. Mr Miyao did an excellent job of establishing positional control, using the threat of back attacks to pass Mr Ryan's legs and get to side and mount positions with a good controlling bodylock and score his points. The match ended in an uncontrolled ashi garami. A solid win for Mr Miyao and a great learning experience for the youngster. Mr Ryan did very well indeed, giving up a considerable amount of strength and size and a massive amount of experience - for a fifteen year to even survive against such a great champion is impressive, to get some attacks in and finish the match attacking to the last is deeply impressive. As this young man grows and matures it will be a privilege to watch he becomes capable of. Great to see famous champions such as Mr Miyao in local shows and showing their skills - a good day all round. 😊

Talented individuals versus a squad: So often in jiu jitsu we see the emergence of extremely talented individuals who for a time dominate their division. It is natural to ask how they came to acquire their world conquering skills and try to learn from them. As impressive as the emergence of great individuals may be, much more impressive is the emergence of a talented GROUP of individuals. Some people have such special characteristics that their success may be due to them as individuals rather than the program in which they developed. When you see a gym put out a team of talent, clearly something special is happening. The Gracie Barra headquarters in Rio of the early 1990's is a great example. So many fine athletes and instructors came out of that environment that it is very clear that the program was of the very first quality. Thus when I asses the health of a given training program, I do not do so on the basis of its best individual, but on the average level of its people, particularly the emerging kohai (junior) students. This is particularly true when I look at the skills emphasized by a given team. Sometimes an athlete will emerge from a given school with an outstanding technique, say a juji gatame armbar. If no one else in the gym has an impressive juji, one could surmise that the athlete learned it in an idiosyncratic fashion as an individual, rather than in a SYSTEMATIC fashion as a SQUAD. THE CLEAREST EVIDENCE OF A SYSTEMS BASED APPROACH TO LEARNING AND TEACHING IS REPLICATION - can many athletes across skill level, weight division, age, sex etc utilize the skills to attain victory. The emergence of a talented individual exhibiting skills can be explained by idiosyncratic elements, but not a group of people all exhibiting similar skills - in that case there is most like an effective system at work imbedded in a sound training program. When I construct and implement a training program this is always the sign that I look for. Here, squad kohai Danny Hernandez, a very talented athlete training under my very good friend and team mate Doug Pelinkovic, gets success with our leg lock system in competition, showing its effectiveness for so many team members.

Rite of passage: Nicky Ryan attained his first adult belt today. Though he is fifteen years old, his fast approaching birthday makes him eligible for an adult purple belt. Mr Ryan's ambitions include IBJJF sanctioned competition, both gi and no gi, so having a set belt rank will be important in the next few years to get him ready for ever greater challenges as he matures. His progress thus far has been extraordinary, but he has very high standards for himself and is looking to push much, much further. We are all very proud of his amazing work ethic and maturity. In attendance were his daily mentors, Garry Tonon and brother Gordon Ryan, along with our good friend and accomplice, Tom DeBlass, who has played such a fantastic role in Mr Tonon's and the Ryan Brothers development. Smiles all round as this wonderful young talent gets his well deserved reward 😊😊

California dreaming: Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu is going to California next week for a teaching post. He will be teaching privates and seminars. This is a great chance for our Californian fans to catch up with one of the very best practitioners and teachers off our approach to the sport. Mr Ryan is known primarily as an athlete, but his teaching skills are every bit as good as his competition skills and he does an incredibly good job of showing the moves and tactics he uses with so much success on the big stage. Mr Ryan is a very innovative athlete who constantly looks for more efficient ways to get work done. If you have ever wondered how he gets his moves to work so fluidly against high level opponents, check out his teaching schedule and perhaps he can demystify some elements of his game and make them part of yours. Mr Ryan is a big fan of Southern California and is always trying to get out there as often as possible. The squad always prefers to train people over time rather than "one off" sessions so that we can create progress over time. As often as Mr Ryan travels to California, perhaps you can forge a connection and make training with him a regular thing? Meanwhile the rest of the squad will remain in sweltering, sweaty, smelly Manhattan in preparation for upcoming matches 😒😒Here, Mr Ryan is coaching his younger brother Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj and clearly has done an outstanding job as evidenced by Nicky's recent successes

Mr Crelinsten shows his mettle: The main event this weekend at Global Grappling League this past weekend was Nicky Ryan vs Marvin Castelle - a match Mr Ryan won rather quickly by submission. The co-main event was equally decisive- Ethan Crelinsten, one of our Canadian contingent, took on 10th planet standout JM Holland, and locked in a tight juji gatame arm lock for his second submission win over Mr Holland in the last month. Interestingly, this coming weekend, Mr Crelinsten will have a match with the very same Marvin Castelle who headlined against Mr Ryan, only this time it will be in Florida and under a very different rule set that allows points for pushing an opponent out bounds and other unusual elements. Both athletes have an approach which focuses upon submissions rather than wrestling skills, so I suspect the rule set will not play into the match too much. Mr Crelinsten is keeping up an extremely high work rate in local competition and getting great results

The return of the Wolverine: We are very excited to see the return of Eddie Cummings to top level grappling competition in the near future with a tremendous match up at Grappling Industries NYC event August 19th in Manhattan against the great Paulo Miyao. The squad has faced the Miyao brothers before, When Garry Tonon took on Joao Miyao and took a hard contested win. In that encounter, however, the rule set was one unfamiliar to the Miyaos. This time it will be a rule set they know very well and have excelled in - ADCC rules. It is natural for most people to see this as a match of a positional master against a submission master. Whilst it is true that one tends to win more by position and the other by submission, both are extremely talented in both domains. Mr Cummings has guard retention skills that are second to none and is also a very fine guard passer. He has been training hard and pushing his skill set and looking for new directions in training and preparation - I am certain you will see a very well prepared Mr Cummings step on to the mat August 19th. Great to see two truly top level grapplers showcase their skills in NYC!

Nicky Ryan takes the win! Fifteen year old prodigy Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj took on 10th planet standout Marvin Castelle, a twenty five year old brown belt full time instructor at the main 10th planet school and won by submission in a no time limit match, using a heel hook variation for the win in around three and a half minutes. The match took place at Global Grappling League in upstate New York today. Mr Castelle had garnered something of a reputation as a leg lock expert, but Mr Ryan was not afraid to go in for his own leg lock to take the win - when you grow up in a training room with Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and brother Gordon Ryan, the threat from other leg lockers often feels anemic in comparison. Here he is proactively jumping into the legs to take a fine win and another great step forward toward his goals. What great maturity from such a young man to train, prepare and then headline as the main event on a stacked local grappling event card and take such a fine win!

Young guns: Tomorrow squad kohai (apprentices) will go out to compete at Global Grappling League. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan @nickyryanbjj will take on twenty five year old Marvin Castelle, an instructor at 10th Planet's main school. Ethan Crelinsten @ethancrelinsten will take on JM Holland another 10th Planet standout. In addition, other kohai will compete in what should be a great local tournament for the youngsters to get valuable experience and exposure on the growing submission only circuit. Seniors Garry Tonon @garrytonon and Gordon Ryan @gordonlovesjiujitsu will corner their understudies and give them the guidance that saw them through to so much success and which the youngsters strive to emulate. It's been a great week of training for the kohai and all are excited to put their skills to test on the stage. Wonderful to see them getting used to the idea of specialized preparation and planning to get to a goal and showing the discipline and fortitude to go in well prepared and ready for action.

Jiu jitsu as warfare on an individual scale: I am a proponent of what we might term the doctrine of scale - the idea that individual combat shares the same themes, concerns and lessons as massed combat, all the way up to wars between nations. As such, when people ask me what kind of people I study to improve my jiu jitsu, my response is often to go beyond the sources that most people go to, contemporary champions of the sport; and make forays into military theory and history. It is my belief that there is much to be learned from the many outstanding thinkers in this area that can provide insight into your development in jiu jitsu. There are a vast number of brilliant military theorists and practitioners starting long before Sun Tzu and going all the way through to the modern age figures such as John Boyd. Two military theorists who had a big effect on my approach to jiu jitsu were the Englishmen, J. F.C Fuller and BH Liddell Hart. From Fuller I learned to emphasize the great value of technical innovation in combat. From Liddell Hart I learned to emphasize indirect methods of attack above all others along with concentration of force being more important than overall force. Interestingly, Liddell Hart appears to have been familiar with the jiu jitsu/Judo notion of kuzushi (breaking an opponent's balance prior to attack) - he makes several references to it in his writing and considered it essential to successful attack. Whilst both men were brilliant in their domain, both had their flaws. Fuller appears to have leaned overtly towards Fascism in his political beliefs and got worse in this regard as he aged. In addition he seemed to have flirted with strange occultist beliefs throughout his life. Liddell Hart seems to have been involved in some degree of personal aggrandizement after WW2. Still, there is no denying their brilliance within their field and its potential value to a jiu jitsu student. In their military writings there are many gems- here is one from Liddell Hart. "Helplessness induces hopelessness, and history attests that loss of hope and not loss of lives is what decides the issue of war."

From chaos...order: Sometimes when you observe two people engaged in ground Grappling the whole enterprise just looks like a tangled mess with no direction. Unfortunately in many cases this perception is accurate. This usually occurs because neither person has a clear sense of WHERE THEY WANT TO GET TO and HOW THEY ARE GOING TO GET THERE. The first question should be easy enough to answer. Jiu jitsu clearly implores us to get to either a better position or into a submission hold or some combination of both. The real problem then, is how to get there from what is often a very confused beginning. Developing this two stage thinking - where do you want to be and how you will get there, is the key to developing a sense of constant purposeful movement that characterizes superior players. Looking at this photo it is difficult to believe that a few seconds after it was taken, Garry Tonon would emerge with a devastating heel hook variation and a fine submission victory from this awkward and seemingly unpromising situation at this metamoris event. Yet this is exactly what you must train yourself to do - to see possibilities where others don't, and then make a practical plan of how to get there faster than your opponent can conceive his own plans. This is where favorite moves (tokui-waza) can have a very beneficial effect. In a haze of confusion we will often find direction through our must trusted moves and get to a winning position.

When I first started coaching my primary interest was MMA. I prayed to the gods to send me great students. They sent me the incomparable Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman, who both rode thunder and lightning all the way to world championship immortality. When I switched my attention to grappling, again I prayed to the gods...I must have somehow angered or displeased them, because this time they sent me a bunch of dorks and nerds! What the hell is this?! Post training photo reveals the extent of geekiness in the squad! All appear to be utterly hopeless nerds who could not strangle a quadruple amputee! It amazes me that these dorks ever won a single match! The gods must truly hate me to send such a collection of slack-jawed simpletons for instruction in the kingly art #hopingforbetterlucknexttime

Jiu jitsu for a lifetime: So often I teach people for the purpose of short term gains in the sport - an upcoming match, a need to quickly master certain techniques to overcome a given opponent or area of weakness...however, the best way to approach the sport is always with the long term mindset of jiu jitsu as a lifetime activity. It is always a special thing to meet people who have been in the sport over the course of a long distinguished life. They carry insight and perspective that is always enlightening and instructive. I have found that often they can illuminate problems in contemporary jiu jitsu by offering a viewpoint that has passed out of current vogue. Today after the big Monday afternoon class at RGA, my beloved sensei, Renzo Gracie called the class in for a special moment - he awarded the coveted red and white belt to Marcio Stambowsky, a man who has lived and breathed jiu jitsu his whole life among the greatest men of the sport. He is one of only four men to receive his black belt from legendary Rolls Gracie. Even now he is a formidable presence on the mat with a beautiful game that represents many of the techniques and philosophy of his esteemed master and the other great masters of that era. His son, Neiman Gracie, teaches at RGA and fights in Bellator MMA league - father and son representing the classic and Neo schools of jiu jitsu. Joining us was Reyson Gracie, uncle of Renzo and Ruran, son of Renzo. What an incredible mix of youth and experience from the first family of jiu jitsu! Listening to the conversation and stories I learned about our sport than I did from most formal instruction! What a fine example from Mr Stambowsky for everyone today about how constant maintenance of our skills can make jiu jitsu effective over a lifetime and a formative influence on a new generation.

Team tightness: I have a strong preference for teams that work in unison on a daily basis, forging a room of people who share a vision and a program designed to take them towards it. As months become years and years become decades, this tightness creates a group of people who know their team mates better than they know themselves. Training becomes much smoother and more efficient. When I give directions to my students they can generally follow easily just because we spend so much time working together that the moves flow as easily as our conversation. When a stranger comes in to the group, it inevitably slows things down, as we have to explain the many little details and nuances that the regular students have long since absorbed into their thoughts and actions and perform unconsciously. Once the stranger is assimilated to some degree, things speed up again. Nowhere is this tightness of shared thoughts and actions more obvious and more useful than when cornering our athletes in competition. I can often convey large amounts of information in just a word or two that would be meaningless to a stranger, but to someone from our training room, may well be of great use at a critical moment. Having a specialized vocabulary for The many moves and skills we employ is a big help. It makes conveying information much faster and also makes it difficult for an opposing team to understand what we are trying to say. Here, Gordon Ryan is on his way to winning EBI 11 as Garry Tonon and myself observe and call out options that may be of some value should the pressure of the match cause him to overlook them. As we all train together and discuss our methodology together seven days a week, all the students can corner each other with ease.

On the road again part 2: Ethan Crelinsten shows fine composure and adaptability as he follows his opponents defensive movements and makes the necessary changes to get the submission victory in North Carolina at the Toro Cup during his super fight. He and Nicky Ryan will be teaching our approach to the sport at Elevate MMA at 11am tomorrow.

On the road again: Apprentice (kohai) jiu jitsu athletes Nicky Ryan and Ethan Crelinsten went on the road again - traveling down to North Carolina to enter the Toro cup against tough local competition -
Both emerged victorious via submission. Here, Mr Ryan works hard to secure the vital control of upper body grips whilst maintaining lower body control - never an easy thing against a determined opponent trying his best to break free from both. His composure and knowledge of what he has to do in order to get the job done shows as he takes his time and locks in another devastating hold for the win. Tomorrow the two kohai put their teaching prowess on display - They will cover the techniques and tactics that make victories like like this routine for them. Sunday at 11am at Elevate MMA academy in North Carolina Video by dirtywhitebelt

Catch! With most submission holds there is a significant gap between THE INITIAL APPLICATION of the hold, and the ACTUAL FINISH. Submissions, unlike strikes, do not do all their work in an instant. Once the set ups are complete, there is an initial hold AND THEN A CRITICAL PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENT IN WHICH THE MECHANICAL TIGHTNESS OF THE HOLD IS INCREASED OVER TIME UNTIL SUBMISSION OCCURS. This critical period of time is one of the most important in the sport and often distinguishes those who merely dabble in submissions from those who truly seek to master them. So much is going on. The athlete must have a clear goal that directs his movement against strong resistance to solidify and tighten the hold. S/he must also be capable of determining when the process cannot be sustained and switch to another submission or positional move. It all happens very quickly and under great physical pressure, so having the various directions that usually occur in response to a given submission attempt mapped out in advance is a big help. Here, teenage prodigy, Nicky Ryan snatches a quick entry into sankaku (triangle) from open guard. He immediately goes all out to follow the lines of his opponents resistance, shutting down as many as he can with mechanical tightness and tactical savvy (threatening other submissions etc). Focus upon this critical gap between initial application and finalization is a big feature of our training program.

Great students and a common factor: I was very fortunate to have many great students - it is valuable to ask if they had any common factors that aided their development. Georges St-Pierre, Chris Weidman, Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and the Ryan brothers (among many others) all made unusually rapid progress towards their goals. Each of those men mentioned have very different attributes and personalities, but they also had common factors which I believe made them extremely quick developers. One such quality that is rarely spoken of, but which I value greatly, WAS THEIR INCREDIBLE ABILITY TO SENSE THE POTENTIAL OF A GIVEN MOVE/CONCEPT WHEN THEY WERE INTRODUCED TO IT. This is extremely important in a sport where there are a vast number of moves, but limited time to learn and assimilate them. All of these athletes could see and/or feel a move and make a quick assessment of whether this move would work well for them in the rule set they were working within. This is not a common thing. When we first learn moves, typically our early attempts are not particularly impressive. It is thus easy to get disheartened and quit or move on to something else. However, if an athlete CAN SEE POTENTIAL he will PERSIST and put the time and effort into mastering that skill to a point where it becomes a weapon in his hands in competition. The other danger is that an athlete will persist with a move that has little potential for them and waste time over moths/years in a project that bears no fruit. Of course there are exceptions to this. Eddie Cummings famously hated outside ashi garami based leg lock attacks early in his development, but finally went on to make them one of his best weapons. Garry Tonon balked at the idea of investing time in developing a strong guillotine, but finally pushed through and developed devastating guillotine attacks. These cases were the exception however. Most of the time all these athletes had an uncanny ability to assess the potential of a given move and make quick assessments as to whether it was worth investing time in its development or not. This gave their training tremendous FOCUS and minimized time wastage due to pursuing fruitless endeavors.

Stylistic difference: Very often in training and competition you will face someone with a very different style from your own. It might be because they come from an entirely different grappling background, such as wrestling judo or sambo etc. or it might be because they had a coach with a very different jiu jitsu philosophy than yours. Whatever the reason, athletes need to keep a balance between their concern about WHAT THEIR OPPONENT IS GOING TO DO vs WHAT THEY WANT TO DO. I usually find that excessive worry about what the opponent will try to do is detrimental to performance. It is good to have a working knowledge of his game so that you don't get surprised, but your primary goal must always be to IMPOSE YOUR STRENGTHS RATHER THAN TRY ONLY TO NEGATE HIS. Here, Gordon Ryan takes on the very talented Russian wrestler, Rustam Chsiev, a man who has defeated many jiu jitsu champions with a fine blend of freestyle wrestling and grappling. In this match neither man could decisively assert their game on the other in regulation time - leaving it to a tense finish in overtime where Mr Ryan's submission skills won the day. Both Athletes did a good job of fighting to keep the game in their domain rather than get drawn into timidity through excessive concern about what the other fellow would do. It made for one of the most exciting EBI finals of them all and a great example to other athletes.

Maintaining a legacy: Young Rayron Gracie, just fifteen years old, son of legendary Ryan Gracie, competed in the IBJJF World Championships this weekend, winning his first world title at Ultra-heavy juvenile blue belt in an outstanding performance that promises much for the future. Mr Gracie moved to NYC to train with his Uncle Renzo Gracie and cousins, Igor, Rolles and Gregor Gracie and has made incredible progress. In addition to his rapidly growing technical skill, he is renown for having a heart as big as his body - this young man will be a giant when he grows up! Keep your eyes on this one - already a world champion and has his eyes set on many more titles! 😊😊😊

Kohai taking titles: This weekend was Sapateiro 9 - the 145 pound division. Two squad apprentices (kohai) were sent, Jonathan "JC" Calestine and Ethan Crelinsten. Both men submitted all their opponents in regulation time (EBI rules in effect) to the final. It was notable that along the way they defeated EBI veterans, JM Holland via heel hook and Mike Davila by toe hold and ADCC trials standout, Ian Murray via heel hook - showing how they are getting ever closer to the next level of competition at a very young age and with very short time in training. In the final the two team mates met each other. Every day in the gym they spar and it's always a very even match - so too in the final of sapateiro 9. However, this time JC was able to catch a powerful lock to the ankle and secure a great win. He walks away with another great win, two thousand shekels and the great satisfaction of a 100% submission in regulation record - very difficult to achieve at this level - but it is our goal every time our athletes step on to the mat. Photos by Guilliana Fonseca

Information wars: I always feel that in the history of human conflict, access to information and the ability to use it to advantage, has almost always been the deciding factor in victory or defeat. Most people always attribute victory to attributes like toughness, size, experience etc. yet history shows many examples of smaller nations that possessed information on some technical innovation along with the will to use it, defeating many larger nations. So too, in jiu jitsu. I put a premium on information/knowledge over all other factors. That is not to say the other factors are unimportant, just less so than information/knowledge. This shows when the squad goes to teach to fans of our approach. We work hard to convey information in ways that students can rapidly understand and assimilate into their own game. This often involves a tricky balancing act between painting a big picture to give students a general sense of direction; along with the fine details to enable them to realize that direction. Here I am going over some of the details of our ashi garami system in Singapore as people get a good look at how we transmit an unusual degree of force into our opponents knees and ankles. It's always easier to convince people when you have students using the exact same techniques to defeat world class opponents the night before! I also got a chance to enjoy Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan teaching their own variations of our approach to a fascinated crowd. Like all my students, they teach as well as they compete - only much more well mannered and spoken than me! 😜😜Of course there are many factors in your jiu jitsu development, but I have always found that making knowledge/information the bedrock upon which all the others rest leads to the most sustained long term progress in the sport.

The foundation of our approach to bottom position ground grappling - kuzushi: There are many ways to play effectively from underneath your opponent in grappling. Some play a game of reactive game of waiting, when their opponent makes some kind of tactical or technical error, they seize upon it and attack. Others play a game of immobilization, they wrap tightly around their opponent to hold him in place and gradually work their way into offense, variations of closed guard and rubber guard are good examples of this. Our approach is to actively seek to break our opponents balance. This action is traditionally referred to as kuzushi. Kano made it the foundation of his approach to standing grappling in Judo. We look to extend that into ground grappling from bottom position. Our primary focus is always TO GET OUR OPPONENT'S CENTER OF GRAVITY BEYOND HIS BASE OF SUPPORT. Once this is done, we work of his reaction to gain either positional advantage or go directly to submission attacks. Many outstanding jiu jitsu players have used this method with great success in all weight categories. Specialized guards have been created over the years to facilitate kuzushi. If you are to make it the basis of your game, then you must train diligently in the means of creating kuzushi on a resisting opponent and learn to tie these in with the attacks of the sport. This approach to the game breeds a fast attacking style that CREATES opportunities rather than waits for them. In addition it makes for a dynamic game rather than an immobilizing/stifling one. All the various approaches have their advocates and successes. In our experience we have found the kuzushi based method to be preferential given that we seek quick entries into our preferred submissions whenever possible. Here, Gordon Ryan does a fine job of elevating his opponent up where he will be forced to base out and leave extended limbs available for attack

Give - in order to take: A tactic that we often use in submission Grappling is that of "attack by concession" This involves conceding good position and allowing our opponent an apparent advantage. Normally I would frown upon such tactics - certainly this is not wise for a beginner to attempt, nor against someone you believe is easily capable of exploiting that positional advantage at your cost, nor in a real fight where striking is involved. However, if you have justifiable faith in your ability to generate effective movement even in bad position against your opponent, then temporarily giving up position can be a fine means of creating opportunities to attack. Very often opponents will take risks with limb extension in dominant positions that they would never take in neutral positions, as a result, when an escape is made, those extended limbs can are often very vulnerable for a brief period. In addition, this tactic can often be useful against a very cautious or timid opponent who is simply not engaging in neutral positions. The key of course is to first be strong at pin escapes and second, to be able to seamlessly tie together your escape skills with your submission skills. Here, Garry Tonon makes use of a method of escaping mount that all my athletes excel in, the "kipping escape." It is very different from conventional escapes from mount, but provides a superb platform to enter immediately into a wide array of submissions the moment you are free. Just half a second after this photo was taken, Mr Tonon was attacking his opponent's legs. I remember as this occurred the crowd murmured in concern as the opponent mounted, sensing impending doom, and were shocked to see effective offense come out of such a situation.

Old friends: An unexpected surprise in Singapore as I got to meet an old friend from some of Georges St-Pierre's fight camps, Kru Yod. The full story of our meeting is too long for an Instagram post, so I put it on my Facebook page - you are welcome to check it out there. Kru Yod is a very successful trainer at Evolve gym now. He was a big part of the preparation for Mr St-Pierre's bouts with Carlos Condit and Nick Diaz. It was great catching up with an old friend and seeing positive changes in his life. If you have time, see my Facebook page for details on the story of these remarkable Thai trainers.

Rear mount and classical jiu jitsu: In the classic point structure of BJJ, which was designed to illustrate to the student the positional philosophy that underlies the sport; there is no distinction between front mount and rear mount - they both score the maximum of four points. This is because the classical point system is designed to work with the notion of striking from dominant position in which case both front and rear mount are extremely effective. Even in sport jiu jitsu without striking, the lapels in the front of the jacket offer tremendous strangulation potential through jiu jime- the cross collar strangle - almost as good as rear strangleholds. In no gi submission Grappling however - where there is no striking and no lapels - I COUNSEL MY STUDENTS TO FAVOR THE REAR MOUNT OVER FRONT MOUNT WHENEVER THE OPPORTUNITY PRESENTS ITSELF. We put a very heavy emphasis on getting to the back, maintaining back position and finishing from the back - considerably more in fact,
Than front mount position. My students relentlessly hunt the back and put a disproportionate amount of time into developing their skills in this great attacking position. Here Ethan Crelinsten, apprentice squad member (kohai) enters the Ultimate Mat Warriors event, run by 10th Planet standout Boogie Man Martinez. Mr Crelinsten won gold, all four matches by submission to win himself two thousand shekels and gain more invaluable competition experience and help prepare to rise to the next level of competition. Here he shows his quick transitions to the back along with his finishing skills.

Touchdown in NYC: Just landed at JFK with the squad - in a cab and heading to RGA for Monday noon class. It's a grey old day here in the apple - great day to train early and leave time to reflect and thank those who served our mighty nation. Seventeen hour flight and Mr Tonon and Mr Ryan are ready to train - share in that championship attitude today. Let's rally the team and get some good preparation in for upcoming challenges at noon - see you there 😊😊

Pikachu checks in at the airport: We are waiting for our plane at Changi International Airport in Singapore - on to Dohai and then NYC. Out of nowhere Nicky Ryan reaches into his luggage and pulls out the weirdest outfit I have ever seen in my life - apparently it's called a "onesie" and he has the pikachu Pokémon variation. He put it on and sat next to a horrified squad! When I criticized in rather harsh language his choice in clothing he took an indignant air and launched into a passionate defense of onesies as a clothing option for men. Then he unleashed the line that floored us all - "actually I bought this for Gordon." It turns out both Ryan brothers are onesie fans!! No wonder they won't wear a gi! They are used to the snugly softness of their onesies!! Garry Tonon's face tells his side of the story. I am trying to pretend I don't know Mr Ryan and trying to change my ticket to another plane. I can't believe he got through security in this outfit - I guess they were just happy to see him leaving the country 😂😂😂

Enjoying the view in Singapore: Three hours before airport - squad heads to Marina Bay Sands hotel - 47th floor and a stellar view of Singapore with City on one side, water and the mighty port with thousands of ships from around the world making their stop on the other. An incredible place and a fascinating look into the heart of modern Asia. From the Far East, back soon to the West - we shall miss this place.

Fun day of seminar work here in Singapore at Evolve gym: The squad showed some of our leg lock concepts and tactics to a big crowd at Evolve gym. It was wonderful to watch Garry Tonon teach in a masterful manner his own approach to leg locking - an incredible reactive method that he used to defeat Shinya Aoki and numerous other champions. Young Nicky Ryan showed the link between leg and back systems that he and his brother exploit so well to gain victories in competition. The attendees put up with my foul language and horrendous sense of humor and learned very well the core principles of our ashi garami system. Looking forward to forging links to our friends here in Asia to show our approach to the sport. Now it's off to the airport to return to NYC and see my dear students in the blue basement where they have doubtless been enjoying the absence of my dark and horrid presence 😜😜Some Acai, some jiu jitsu discussion and then it's homeward bound! 😊😊

Reflections on the Singapore adventure: Garry Tonon won his super fight with Shinya Aoki with one of his trademark moves last night in front of a packed stadium and a very large TV audience. Going beyond that, there was much about the event that was gratifying to observe. First, it was wonderful to see a grappling match showcased on the main card of a big MMA event. It was great to see the crowd get excited to see two grapplers use their skills to put on an exciting match with a decisive finish that got as much audience reaction as the MMA fights. I TRULY BELIEVE THAT PROFESSIONAL GRAPPLING, TAUGHT AND PRACTICED THE RIGHT WAY, CAN BE EVERY BIT AS EXCITING AS AN MMA FIGHT AND DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE SKILLS THAT CAN BRING VICTORY IN MMA. I hope this is the first of many such combined MMA/grappling shows and that the divide between the sports can be narrowed. I hope that one day the athletes who represent our sport and who give so much in their pursuit of excellence can be rewarded with money and fame closer to that of their MMA brothers. I believe advances in this direction will be of great benefit to both sports. I hope that one day there can be professional grappling events on a scale not far below MMA events where athletes can showcase their skills in an exciting format that thrills crowds, advances their skill level, helps prepare them to transition more easily to MMA and compensates them for their commitment. Second, it was wonderful to see a resurgence in Asian MMA. Asia was one of the key birthplaces of our sport - there is a culture of respect here for the athletes and the skills they showcase that is unique and deeply admirable. We North Americans could learn much from them in this regard. It was great to see One FC put on a tremendous show that brought back memories of PRIDE and the glory days of Asian MMA - they just need more development time to grow and who knows how far they can go! Tomorrow we teach a big seminar here in Singapore where we will show some of the techniques Mr Tonon used to gain his victory to the local jiu jitsu athletes then back to NYC and the blue basement of learning to get ready for the next show!

One FC representing Asian MMA/grappling in style: Great to see a resurgence in Asian MMA with One FC putting on an outstanding production that rivals the biggest North American shows for production quality. Here Garry Tonon walks out into a dramatic entrance atmosphere to face rival Shinya Aoki. The sold out stadium created an electric atmosphere for a grappling match and bridged some of the divide between the two sports in a memorable and dramatic way

Victory in Singapore: Garry Tonon won his big match with the great Shinya Aoki tonight in a sold out Singapore indoor stadium broadcast to 118 nations. Mr Aoki showed both his MMA and Judo experience. He did a fine job controlling the initial action on the fence and even took Mr Tonon's back for a time, though did not threaten from there. A nice sasae footsweep saw him again take top position and use his height advantage to intelligently bodylock the hips for control. Using small movements of elbow and knees, Mr Tonon created space and inverted his body to enter his opponent's legs. From there it was an quick path to submission victory as Mr Tonon used his overwhelming advantage in this area to turn the direction of the match and get a decisive win. It's been a fascinating week of preparation and an introduction to the Asian MMA/grappling scene.

Getting ready for the show: The athletes go through rehearsals for tomorrow nights show - the audience introduction that is the tradition at most Asian shows. Production quality looks very good and the match ups are very interesting indeed. Asian cultures have a long and distinguished history of sport combat and it shows here - this should be a great show.

Three great forces at work: Morning workout in Singapore two days out from showtime. The forces of nature reveal themselves in a massive downpour and thunderstorm as the squad works out. I have always said - you don't understand real rainfall until you have been in Asia. It's a fine reminder that in an industry where we endlessly work towards ascendency among our our powers in physical power and strength, ultimately we are all equally weak in the face of the humbling powers of nature. The second great power is that of ROUTINE. As soon as we arrive in a new city or country we immediately establish a local routine around which we base our match preparation. It is our belief that ALL HUMAN GREATNESS TAKES BIRTH IN ROUTINES THAT ALLOW US TO DEVELOP THE SKILLS THAT WILL MAKE US STAND OUT AMONG OUR PEERS. Routines allow us to control a schedule and allocate the time required for skill development - it is those skills that will create greatness. FOR EVERY MOMENT OF EXCITEMENT IN YOUR CAREER YOU WILL NEED A HUNDRED HOURS OF ROUTINE TO PREPARE YOU TO SUCCEED IN THAT CRITICAL THRILLING MOMENT IF YOU ARE TO BEAT THE BEST. A third force at work here is narrative. Stuart Cooper, an Englishman deeply involved in the world of jiu jitsu, chronicles on film the work of outstanding jiu jitsu exponents. Here he films Garry Tonon's preparation at Evolve Gym and records his thoughts on this great match up with the outstanding Shinya Aoki. Such work is very important for the growth of jiu jitsu. Just as the memory of Achilles and Hector would have died if not for Homer, so the achievements and thoughts of jiu jitsu icons must be recorded if future generations are to be inspired and learn from their experience. Now it's on to medical check in and media time -
Then the routine kicks in again tonight for second workout.

Late night big city vibe - Asian style: Last workout of the day complete and late dinner at a Korean restaurant here in Singapore. Singapore hosts every Asian culture and what better Late night meal is there than Korean BBQ? 😜😊 A great night of training, plotting, game planning and general shenanigans for the squad as we investigate this fascinating city. Up early for first workout tomorrow and Mr Tonon goes through a long day of media obligations, weight/hydration checks (they do things a little differently here to ensure athletes do not lose vast amounts of weight prior to competition and thus compete much closer to their actual weight than they do back home), then second workout at night. We find a routine in a new environment as quickly as possible to become acclimated and efficient as strangers in a strange land can in the time available - part of putting on the best possible performance at show time

Match preparation: The squad checked in to Evolve gym Doby-ghaut an important transport center for Singapore. Second night time work gets the body cycles ready for night time match. Mr Tonon works with Nicky Ryan and Matthew Tesla as this fast paced city carries on through the night outside. There is a wonderful mix of modern city life infused with Eastern heritage that makes for a fascinating training environment and match venue. Now it's on to late dinner and bed in preparation for long day of media promotion and training tomorrow 😊😊

Singapore bound: At JFK with Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan - heading to Singapore for the match with the great champion Shinya Aoki- NYC training complete - final preparation in Singapore with our friends at Evolve Gym. Long journey ahead, but as always, the biggest challenges and greatest steps require us travel far, either in distance, time or effort, and usually all three. Looking forward to another great challenge for the squad and our approach to the sport and exciting projects ahead when we return to NYC! 😊😊

Extended families: One of the great things about jiu jitsu is the brotherhood created by shared teachers and students. One of my great mentors as a beginner in the sport was world champion, Matt Serra. His student, Jason Rau, trains a lot with the squad. He arrived with his teachers strong positional game and quickly began to pick up the submissions game training with us. Today he won The Grappling Industries Open weight event (Jason is a welterweight) all four matches by submission. Here he is submitting Todd Muckenheim in the final via heel hook variation. He does a great job of staying on the leg throughout determined resistance and getting his submission. It's a fine example of an athlete adding to an already strong game to push himself in new directions and get good results.

Counting down: Garry Tonon works through the final week of NYC preparation for his upcoming super fight with the great Shinya Aoki in Singapore on May 26. It will be a fifteen minute grappling match at an MMA event. Next week will be the final steps in contest preparation in Singapore. Mr Tonon had to make full use of his training experience as his main training partners were unavailable. Eddie Cummings had to go to Texas for a match that wound up getting cancelled. Gordon Ryan was badly injured in a freak weightlifting accident at the gym and most of the kohai are overseas. Learning to maximize the value of the partners you have around you is a big part of progress and preparation and Mr Tonon did a good job working through his drills and sparring without his usual partners and working the skills we believe will be important in this great match. Tomorrow will be last day in NYC and then the long journey to the heart of Asia for the big show!

Training vs fighting: A fundamental tenant of fighting is to avoid your opponent's strengths whilst imposing your own. Interestingly, in training I recommend that you often do the exact opposite. In fighting and competition (shiai) THE OBJECT IS VICTORY. In training, the object is SKILL DEVELOPMENT - DO NOT CONFUSE THEM. As such, one of the best ways to train is to identify the strengths of your various partners, AND REGULARLY EXPOSE YOURSELF TO THOSE STRENGTHS. This is a splendid way to build skills, particularly defensive skills. Here, Georges St-Pierre works with Nicky Ryan. Of course Mr St-Pierre could easily take Mr Ryan down and play a game of disengagement, but he recognizes that such a tactic would offer very little skill development. Instead, he opts to maximize training value by going against Mr Ryan's formidable leg locking and guard passing skills from bottom position. When students make a clear distinction between training and competition and the different priorities of the two, rapid skill acquisition is common. Failure to make the distinction usually leads to students who have a small skill set of favorite moves which does not grow over time. Training sessions tend to become very repetitive and dull. KEEP IN MIND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN TRAINING AND COMPETITION AND YOU WILL BE REWARDED WITH GROWTH OVER TIME, no matter how frustrating it may seem in the short term. Be mindful of one of the central paradoxes of jiu jitsu training - THE MORE VULNERABLE YOU MAKE YOURSELF IN THE TRAINING ROOM, THE LESS VULNERABLE YOU WILL BE IN COMPETITION.

Round 2: The squad always tries to keep a busy competition schedule against the best. We are excited to announce a greatly anticipated rematch between Marcelo Garcia/Team McGregor standout, Dillon Danis and Garry Tonon at Polaris Grappling on August 19 in London, England. Mr Danis and Mr Tonon famously met before at the world championships where Mr Tonon put on a fine display culminating in a powerful heel hook for the win. Much has changed since then. Working extensively in MMA circles has greatly improved Mr Danis' wrestling. His leg locks and strangles, particularly his guillotine, have also greatly improved. Perhaps most importantly, he has gone up to 200 pounds - Mr Tonon walks around at 170 and cannot try to gain weight as the world championships are soon after this event. Accordingly this match will have a very different background to their first encounter. Mr Danis recently lost a very close match in EBI overtime rules to Mr Tonon's team mate, Jake Shields, but even in defeat, he showed a great skill set and increased strength and athletic ability that will definitely play a role in this rematch. Once again, Mr Tonon will have to rely on his movement skills, technical precision and confidence to find victory against the bigger and stronger athlete. The squad always looks forward to our overseas adventures - hoping we can get more squad standouts on this London card and send a team to show our English/European followers our style and approach!

Jiu jitsu in Singapore: On May 26, Garry Tonon will take on Japanese MMA and Grappling icon, Shinya Aoki in a 15 minute submissions only match in a cage during an MMA event. This will doubtless be one of the most anticipated grappling bouts of the year as both men have a reputation for spectacular moves and the confidence to pull the trigger when they see opportunities. The next day Mr Tonon, Nicky Ryan and myself will teach a seminar at Evolve gym showcasing many of the techniques and tactics that have proven so successful for our athletes in competition. Martial arts have always had such a strong presence throughout Asia, so it is a great honor for the squad to travel deep into Asia and show some of our material. This week it will be a long one in the blue basement of learning at RGA as Mr Tonon goes through his final preparation, then it's on to Singapore - a long trip indeed, but the allure of a great opponent and a chance to teach in a new environment makes it all worthwhile. Looking forward to meeting friends in Singapore! 😊😊

A fine win for Jake Shields tonight against Marcelo Garcia/Team McGregor standout Dillon Danis at SUG 4 tonight. Mr Shields overcame the odds (at one point he was a 7-1 underdog) to take a tough victory in the EBI format overtime on fastest escape time. It is a testimony to Mr Shields tremendous work ethic that he can take on a star grappler much younger than himself in a format that he has little experience and take a victory. It was so impressive to watch over the last two months as Mr Shields came in twice a day every day to train with the squad, some of them half his age. Most athletes with Mr Shields experience and record begin to coast in training - he never did- every session was like a contest and he took on the difficult skills of EBI overtime, particularly escapes, and made tremendous progress, despite the fact that it was far removed from his normal game and skill set. What a fine example of a mature athlete staying focused, learning new skills, adapting over time and coming through for a tight, but well deserved victory. Stockton bitches!! 😊😊

No rest for the kohai: The quest to rise in skill and prominence is a constant one for the apprentices of the squad. Ethan Crelinsten, squad kohai standout who just won the ADCC trials, went right back into competition yesterday at the 16 man 155 pound EBI format Global Grappling League. With $1000 on the line, many very talented local grapplers got in on the action. Mr Crelinsten emerged victorious again - winning every match by submissions ranging over the whole body - armlocks, strangles and leg locks. Here we see him using elements of our back system to strangle talented EBI standout (and former team mate) Mike Davila and get to the final. In the final he went against talented Brazilian black belt, Alexander Da Silva, who had done very well to get to the final. There he prevailed with a well applied knee bar (hiza gatame). A happy Mr Crelinsten celebrates with team mates and a thousand shekels for the pot! This busy schedule of training and competition builds a reservoir of knowledge and experience that will prove invaluable later in the athletes career. Photo #outrunthereaper

Foreign operations: Kohai (apprentice) squad member, part of our formidable Canadian contingent (but with European ancestry) Oliver Taza, has an outstanding day in competition this weekend. He won the European trials for the ADCC world Grappling championships and has secured his ticket to Finland later in the year to battle the best grapplers on the planet. He fought four times, winning three via his tokui- waza (favorite technique) the inverted or inside heel hook. Along the way he defeated two black belts (Mr Taza is only a recent brown belt), both are former European champions. Here is some video footage taken from the final (sorry about the far away perspective- it's the best we have available) where Mr Taza combines Sumi gaeshi sacrifice throw with a nice step into cross ashi garami to secure his heel hook and the win. Great work by our two Canadian standouts Mr Taza and Mr Crelinsten to qualify for the world championships and represent their nation and our approach to the sport.

Ryan brothers dominate: Last at night at Fight2Win Pro 34, another great event for the promotion, the squad standout Ryan brothers took center stage and stole the show with two impressive victories. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan won his match with a well applied ashi garami to heel hook in less than 30 seconds. The promoters were puzzled as to what level of belt Nicky Ryan should fight at - he is too young to have an adult belt. I don't blame them for the confusion, I am his teacher and I don't know what belt to give him! In the end they went with purple belt and Nicky is now the fight to Win belt holder in his weight category. Big brother, Gordon Ryan was the main event where he took on the very talented and successful Eliot Kelly, multiple time world champion, ADCC trials champion and A man who has defeated some legends of the sport such as Xande Ribeiro. Mr Ryan however, was not to be denied. His confidence was very high coming off a very good training camp and he got his characteristic submission based game into operation. Mr Kelly showed some very skillful defenses, but the sustained pressure Mr Ryan can impose is very difficult to deal with and eventually the breakthrough came via a beautiful sankaku (triangle) combined with armbar (juju gatame). I am very happy Mr Ryan was able to show his sankaku skills. Both Ryan brothers excel in this technique - in fact they have invented their own unique versions of it that we named after them, but their success with leg locks and back attacks has overshadowed their incredible sankaku skills on the big stage. I believe this will change in the future- in the gym it is their main weapon - it's only a matter of time until this translates into competition (shiai). Mr Ryan expressed to me great admiration for his opponent, Mr Kelly, complimenting him on his defensive skills, wrestling skills and fighting spirit. Both men came out looking to win in an exciting fashion, which created a memorable match. A great night for the Ryan brothers whose diligent work, inventive approach to technique and growing confidence continue to impress me.

Colorful characters: This weekend , one of the most colorful characters in MMA history, Chael Sonnen, will return with his growing show, Submission Underground for the fourth time. It will be headlined by two of the most colorful and talented grapplers in the submission grappling circuit - Dillon Danis and Jake Shields. Mr Danis is a founding member of the. "Dream team" a very talented group of grapplers working out of NYC under the tutelage of the great Marcelo Garcia. He is often associated with another great martial artist, Connor McGregor, with whom he is an assistant coach. The squad has faced Mr Danis before - at the ADCC, Garry Tonon had a fine match with him. That day Mr Tonon prevailed with a very powerful heel hook variation, but since then, Mr Danis has greatly improved. He has had dominating victories over BJJ world champions, Jackson Sousa and AJ Agazarm. In those impressive victories he showed great progress on his wrestling and leg locking skills along with great confidence. He goes into the match a 7-1 favorite, understandable, given his recent form. However, his opponent, Jake Shields is exactly the kind of man who likes to prove Vegas oddsmakers wrong and has made a career doing it. He has trained very well with the squad. He came here with a fine positional game and has worked hard to improve his submissions skills. This should be a great match between two athletes who bring a larger than life aura with them, combined with the talent to back it up, along with the confidence and attitude to let it all shine on the big stage. Break out the popcorn and the Diet Coke, this one will be a fire cracker!

Old school and new school: It was a fun day training at RGA in NYC today. In the afternoon class, squad standouts Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon, Ethan Crelinsten and Jake Shields worked hard to prepare for upcoming matches (more on that soon 😊) Then afterwards, one of the original RGA senpai, Matt Serra came in to say hello, train and show some of the recent developments in his game. It was so much fun watching some of the evolving facets of my mentors game - some things remained, others were very new - as a total package - so impressive! I love to see development in both the sport overall and in individuals. I am lucky to have been surrounded by great people and involved in the sport long enough to witness both.

High altitude action this weekend: This Friday, May 12 in Colorado, the Ryan brothers step up to compete again at Fight2Win Pro 34 in super fight action. The format will be ten minutes of Action and a decision based on submission danger and positional control should it go the distance. Nicky Ryan will take on talented local purple belt Derek Alumbaugh and Gordon Ryan will headline against the extremely talented and tough Eliot Kelly. Mr Kelly has a long resume of high level success. He mixes wrestling and jiu jitsu into a winning blend that has seen him win at the highest levels in both gi and no gi competition. He is ADCC American trials winner from last year and has repeatedly won world championships in a range of belt and age categories, beating legends such as Xande Ribeiro along the way. He fights at super heavyweight - Mr Ryan's best weight is at welterweight, but he has worked hard to gain weight and has finally broken the 200 pounds barrier to try to narrow the size gap with some of his future rivals. Fight2Win continues to grow as a venue for developing athletes around the nation and combines fast pacing of matches throughout the event, good atmosphere, some all American razzle dazzle and high level super fights to create interest. Both Ryan brothers have trained very diligently indeed and are now working to adjust to rare mountain air of Denver. Should be a great show!

Weaving jiu jitsu into life brings life to your jiu jitsu: A theme I try hard to instill in my students is to take the lessons of jiu jitsu and apply them to other aspects of their lives. So much of our lives, in business, commerce, relationships, politics etc take the form of competitive and cooperative games - just like jiu jitsu. It is surprising how often insight drawn from jiu jitsu can illuminate other aspects of our lives (and vice versa). When this happens, jiu jitsu takes a much richer and deeper meaning for us. We see it no longer as a game or recreation, but as a way of thinking. I had the chance to express this theme in the popular TV show Billions, where one of the main protagonists uses themes learned in jiu jitsu to gain advantage in his battles against a foe. Most competition and cooperation follow the same basic structure, so we should not be surprised at overlap between jiu jitsu and other aspects of life. Often however, the themes are clearer in jiu jitsu and learned there first and applied to life later. Here, Paul Giamatti takes a Kimura from a position that people naive in ground grappling might consider inferior, but takes a win through tactics and technique - and sees a deeper lesson that will inspire and energize his character in more important ways...

Kohai making waves in Texas: It was another great weekend for the squad kohai (apprentices). Jonathan Calestine and Ethan Crelinsten entered the Onnit invitational 4 event in Texas yesterday and both submitted all their opponents, including EBI standouts Ricky Lule and Sheridan Moran, along with an IBJJF brown belt no gi world champion, mostly with variations of heel hooks and toe holds. Mr Calestine has been improving greatly of late, with the characteristic long training time and strict focus upon refinement of techniques and tactics that the squad expects. Both of our athletes went all the way to the final where finally the two team mates had to take each other on. In the gym they are very evenly matched. On this occasion Mr Calestine prevailed with riding time advantage on OT to take a narrow victory. The mantra of our kohai is always "onward and upward" - that's the spirit that takes us all from apprentice to master. Great to see these two outstanding young athletes taking that spirit and weaving it into the fabric of their lives and goals.

Teacher and student: My Sensei, Renzo Gracie, and student, Georges St-Pierre, enjoying a fun moment after a great Saturday afternoon class at RGA with the squad and Jake Shields getting ready for upcoming competition. Mr Gracie always lifts the atmosphere of the training room when he comes by to watch progress - so much experience, so many insights and such a personality to make them memorable to his students.

Excited to see Gordon Ryan back in action in two different capacities next week. He competes in the Fight2Win promotion (more on that soon) and then teaches a seminar at Musclepharm gym. The interplay between competing and coaching is a fascinating one in jiu jitsu. I am a believer in the idea that teaching always helps development of the teacher as much as the student. The level of my own game rose dramatically when I started teaching full time. Mr Ryan, like all my best students, is a very fine teacher. He has many improvements and advancements of the philosophy that our team utilizes. For our friends in Colorado- this is a great chance to learn from a passionate student of the game who has a great deal of truly interesting knowledge to offer that can kickstart a jump in your level and perhaps change the way you think about the sport. If you can get there - don't miss it! 😊😊

Spillover: I am a big believer in the notion of spillover, where changes in one area can create changes others. One of the biggest problems beginning students face is learning to overcome the natural instinct to wrestle mostly with their arms and shoulders and learn to wrestle predominantly with their legs and hips. One of the very best means of doing this is to strongly emphasize the use of sankaku (triangle) in their daily training. Learning sankaku requires them to use their legs with dexterity and precision. The attributes required for success with sankaku cross over into so many other skills in the sport that soon I notice increased use, effectiveness and confidence in the students with regards their leg work in the sport. As such I constantly work sankaku skills into their training at every opportunity, knowing that it will create growth in areas they had not associated with it. All my top students excel in sankaku - interestingly, our leg and back attacks have been so successful that few have seen how much we emphasize it, but that is bound to change in the future. Here, fifteen year old kohai (junior/apprentice) standout Nicky Ryan shows off his very impressive sankaku skills, a move that he strongly emphasizes and favors.

When the hard work is done: Nothing brings people together like shared adversity. Hard training and shared goals make some of the strongest friendships and make the punishing routine of championship training tolerable. If shared adversity is the best way to help build team unity, story telling after training is a close second! When you have a cast of characters like Jake Shields, Georges St-Pierre and the squad together - you know there will be no shortage of crazy stories to tell after class to bring a smile and laughter to everyone's face! The martial arts never had a shortage of crazy characters and events, so story time after training is always a highlight of the day. I always encourage this kind of thing - it's a great way to cement the camaraderie they will build a training program that forges elite athletes and forward progress for all. Training cannot be a joyless slogging match if it is to be sustained over time - there must be a release and sense of good times. Every gym has there their coaches and athletes who make training time intense and beneficial, but just as valuable are those characters who make it fun just to be there - I am lucky enough to be surrounded by people who are both!

The why versus the how: A big part of my teaching method is to seek as often as possible to explain the "why" of a given move over and above the "how." Usually jiu jitsu is taught in a framework of how to do things. That is fine and absolutely necessary. Without the knowledge of how to perform the various tasks of the sport, there can be no progress. However, I find students react well to being told in addition WHY we do things as we do. Doing so provides a CONTEXT and FRAMEWORK within which techniques can be ordered and understood. This makes it easier for students to recall the information later, and crucially, gives them a clear view of the big picture the instructor is trying to convey. Just a few words at the outset of a training session creates a context for the moves and techniques we will work on and creates a real sense of purpose for the entire training session. Remember moves have not only a TECHNICAL importance, but a TACTICAL importance also. This tactical value is best conveyed by explaining clearly WHY things are done as they are. Getting students to think this way creates students who can be creative and independent, rather than a group of people trained only to follow instructions and who will struggle to create their own game or improvise in sparring. Here, we briefly go over the rationale behind parts of our back defense system - then it's on to the heart of the workout - drilling and sparring!

The man in the mirror: Have you ever sparred with someone whose game was almost identical to your own? We spend so much time developing our own unique style of jiu jitsu - what happens when we run into someone whose game is almost a carbon copy of ours? It is actually a fantastic learning experience, albeit sometimes a frustrating one! It gives direct insight into the strengths and weakness of our own game, particularly in the area of our vulnerabilities to attack. In all my coaching experience I have never seen such closely matched grappling games as those between two former rivals, Georges St-Pierre and Jake Shields. Their styles are so closely matched that if they concealed their faces and wore identical clothing when they sparred, it would be a struggle to tell them apart! The whole thing looks like a computer chess program playing itself! For both athletes it represents much more than just a tough sparring session- it's a great way to look deeply at themselves and their game in the continual quest for improvement. Here both athletes relax after another tough session in preparation for their upcoming events

The many faces of jiu jitsu: Teaching the Monday afternoon class at RGA was an opportunity to reflect on the many faces of jiu jitsu. Georges St-Pierre came in for some hard training in preparation for his title challenge late this year against the great Micheal Bisping. Across from him was Jake Shields, getting ready for a grappling match under EBI rules against Dillon Danis at the SUG event in two weeks. With Mr St-Pierre was Garry Tonon, preparing for his bout with Shinya Aoki in Singapore in one month - a thirty minute sub only affair. Three different athletes preparing for three very different events/rule systems. Yet the fundamentals of jiu jitsu apply to all. I love to coach all the different faces of jiu jitsu and often find that improvement in one area has benefits in others. Here, Messrs Shields, Tonon and St-Pierre do positional work, guard passing and back control as they test their skills against each other in the gym, but always with their eyes on upcoming challenges on the big stage

Coping with loss: All competitive athletes reaching upwards will have to learn to deal with losing. It does not matter whether it's on the big stage, in the gym, at the onset of your program or at your peak - it happens to everyone - no exceptions. I am often asked by people how they should deal with loss. There are two main problems here. The first is important in the immediate aftermath of a loss. Here the main problem is EMOTIONAL - the problem is not why it happened, but THAT It happened. As time passes, the emotional phase gets replaced by the REFLECTIVE phase - the athlete begins to reflect upon WHY the loss happened. Then we must analyze ourselves deeply and distinguish between a faulty training program and a good training program that the athlete failed to adhere to. That is a big topic - too big for an Instagram post (even for me! 😉😜) With regards the emotional phase I always say the same thing "YOU FOUGHT BRAVELY AND WITH FINE TECHNIQUE, GIVING EVERYTHING YOU HAD, BOTH IN PREPARATION AND THE BOUT ITSELF. THERE IS NOTHING MORE YOU CAN ASK OF YOURSELF AS A MAN, NOR ANYTHING MORE THE AUDIENCE CAN ASK OF YOU AS AN ATHLETE- NOW, LET'S GO FORWARD TOGETHER.

Traveling with jiu jitsu: I always tell my students - when you learn jiu jitsu, you never walk alone , where you go, it goes with you. Kohai standout Matthew Tesla has a deep love of the Scandinavian countries and often travels there. This presents him opportunities to show our approach to the growing jiu jitsu community of these great nations. Recently Mr Tesla entered a local tournament in Sweden - The Nordic Open - featuring two divisions at 88kgs and 99kgs. He entered both despite being only 77 kgs himself. He won both divisions - eight matches in total, all via submission in the manner we prefer. Here is a fine standing entry to ashi garami followed by a nicely applied heel hook. Just as the martial arts monks of the old days walked the earth and took their skills with them to help those who needed it, so too, the modern jiu jitsu athlete must take his skills with him or her and help students wherever he visits if the sport is to grow and prosper.

The iron law of posture - FOR EVERY PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, THERE IS A POSTURE THAT MAXIMIZES YOUR ABILITY TO PERFORM THAT ACTIVITY WITH THE LEAST EFFORT AND MAXIMAL EFFICIENCY. In jiu jitsu and indeed, all efficient physical activity, EVERYTHING BEGINS WITH POSTURE. I assure you, ANY DEFICIENCIES IN POSTURE WILL COST YOU IN PHYSICAL EFFORT - as that cost increases, your performance will deteriorate through fatigue and the chances of your opponent successfully attacking will rise. If you are to make progress in the sport, you must make a deep study of the main scenarios you find yourself in and research the various postures that will form the foundation of success in those positions. The problem is that jiu jitsu is an extremely dynamic game - in just a short time there can be a vast number of different positions and scenarios and you must, if you are to maximize your performance, be able to switch seamlessly from one posture to another in response. THE INTERFACE BETWEEN POSTURE AND MOVEMENT PRESENTS A CHALLENGE IN LEARNING THAT WILL OUTLAST YOUR LIFETIME - it is oceanic in its scope and complexity - BUT IT IS THE ONE WHO NAVIGATES THESE DEEP WATERS BEST WHO WILL PREVAIL IN JIU JITSU. In the early stages of development in my students, I PUT FAR GREATER EMPHASIS ON POSTURAL INTEGRITY THAN INDIVIDUAL MOVES. A single move will always be of very finite value, but a posture-centric mindset will give birth to an infinity of well executed moves and create excellence far quicker than any given move. Here, ten year old Mikey Wilson and fifteen year old Nicky Ryan work their postural drills from seated butterfly guard, finding exactly how a given posture can improve or detract from their goals in that position - one in which they both already excel through this kind of training.

First - do no harm: Students of medicine are often instilled with modern versions of the Hippocratic oath, which state that the basis of medical treatment is to first, do no (additional) harm to the patient on top of what he or she is initially suffering from. The same idea, with a little modification, is critical to success in fighting and jiu jitsu. In all combat sports - first - DO NO HARM TO YOURSELF FROM WHICH YOU CANNOT RECOVER AND GO ON FIGHTING. Fatigue and injuries are all part of competition, but CATASTROPHIC injury is a whole different thing. In this case the fight is over and no recovery is possible. Most accidental catastrophic injuries are the result of an athlete trying to avoid an undesirable outcome to a scramble/takedown/throw where uncontrolled moving body weight is involved. I always urge students to take the safe route of falling to their backs in a safe fashion in these cases - even if it means taking a position of disadvantage for a time or conceding points (or in Judo and some forms of wrestling - the match). The risks are tough for athletes to weigh - they want to maximize their chance of victory and are natural risk takers and they know that most of the time, injury will not be the result. The problem is that when injuries DO occur under these circumstances, they are horrific and fight ending. I prefer a safety first approach where athletes always defer to safe falling and then working out of whatever position they find themselves on the ground rather than subject themselves to massive physical forces to avoid a fall. Here a famous clash between Shogun Rua and Mark Coleman shows what happens when immensely powerful athletes crash to the floor in extended positions. Mr Rua knew that falling underneath Mr Coleman was undesirable and took the (understandable) risk of posting out an arm to prevent the takedown. However, the power of Mr Coleman's takedown completely broke the extended arm and the fight was immediately over. Pandemonium broke out in the ensuing confusion, but the result was clear. The original philosophy of the fathers of Brazilian jiu jitsu was survival first - victory second. In cases like this, their wisdom is apparent.

Big ambitions start small: Very often I will be asked how athletes got to the high level of competition they currently work at. What many people are not aware of IS THE SMALL AND HUMBLE NATURE OF THE BEGINNINGS OF MOST GREAT ATHLETES. It is natural for them to make this mistake. Athletes are only noticed when they get to a certain level. All the myriad small, local trials and competitions they battled through to get to that level are unknown to the general public. This is the most natural and effective way for emerging athletes to work. START WITH SMALL, LOCAL CHALLENGES AND PROGRESSIVELY WORK YOUR WAY UP. So often I see talented athletes try to skip steps in the order of progression and end up with problems. People know the squad mostly through their success in high profile professional grappling events. Few are aware of just how many low level competitions against unknown locals they fought through prior to making it to the big stages. This was a very unglamorous but very necessary step in their road to success. The experience gained at the lower levels is of critical importance when fighting at the higher levels. So many times the squad would travel on their own dollar to obscure events in the tristate region to take on unknown opponents - all the while gaining competition experience and confidence that would one day provide the foundation to much greater goals. Many emerging athletes are in a rush to shorten this important start, or worse, bypass it altogether. Don't - do your time - gain your knowledge and experience and THEN move on. This is true also for non competitive jiu jitsu players. Make your goals in the gym PROGRESSIVE. Start with small goals and THOROUGHLY CONQUER THEM before moving on. In my experience, smooth progression in goals gains better long term results than giant leaps. Here a very young looking squad (I think Gordon Ryan is eighteen here) relaxes after matching victories in local tournament in New Jersey, one of a vast number that they entered around this time. It was at these local shows they laid the foundations of the game they took to the big stage

Kohai keep pushing forward: Kohai (junior) student, Oliver Taza had another outstanding performance at the Sapateiro Invitational event this weekend. He has four bouts - won all four by submission- including an impressive leg lock victory over EBI standout Josh Hayden. This was a real test test for Mr Taza, as he is a welterweight, but the event was for 195 pounders so he was a small competitor. This is exactly the kind of harsh tests the kohai must seek - it will give them the tough competition experience that is so valuable when fighting at the next level. "Onwards and upwards" is the ethos in which the kohai must imbue themselves - that is exactly what Mr Taza is doing and that is why future success will come to him.

Seminar - Squad style: Today I went to teach our approach to jiu jitsu at the dojo of my close friend and Renzo Gracie team mate, Magno Gama in Astoria, Queens, New York. Mr Gama is one of Mr Gracie's original NYC black belts. He comes from the famous classes of the 1990's and came up with me under Mr Gracie, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. He was one of my favorite training partners and experimenters in the early days of the development of my leg lock system. He runs a great dojo in Queens New York where he teaches his talented students with passion and skill. Today I was ably assisted by Mr Eddie Cummings who wowed the crowd with some beautiful movements into leg attacks and triangle (sankaku) attacks. Mr Gama is an inspiration to his students. He came to America as a young man, found jiu jitsu, learned from one of its greatest teachers, took the great risk of opening up his school in one of the most competitive cities in the world, and through his talent and knowledge, created a body of dedicated students who impressed me on the mat today with their capacity to learn new skills. It was wonderful to see Mr Cummings demonstrate his mastery of sankaku- so often people think he only does leg locks - yet I watch him train every day and his triangle attacks are as good as anyone I have seen. Often students tell me that they cannot do triangle attacks because their legs are too short. Whenever I hear this, I use Mr Cummings as an example of an athlete with shorter legs who excelled in its use. Congratulations to Mr Gama on his incredible success with his school and the example of following a dream and through planning, hard work and patience - making the dream a reality 😊

Orwell, war and jiu jitsu: The great English writer, George Orwell, once defined warfare (he fought in the Spanish Civil war) as ninety five percent complete mundane boredom and five percent pure terror and fear. Those extremes are equally represented in jiu jitsu - though with TENSION and RELAXATION replacing boredom and terror. In sparring and competition, the majority of any given match should be fought in a state of relative physical calm and relaxation so as to conserve energy and create efficient movement. However, when the opportunity presents itself for a major advance or total victory - there must be a flip of the switch and total physical commitment to the move with big power outlays as long as it takes to get the job done or there is a possibility of follow up attacks should it fail. If it does fail, the switch must be turned off and a return to relaxed state must be made. This constant interchange between long periods of relative relaxation and short periods of maximal effort is a big part of jiu jitsu mastery. Learning to balance them is a great factor in determining your efficiency. Learning the physical skills of the sport is one thing - but putting them in the context of efficient pacing and tension levels is quite another. Here, Garry Tonon is seen in a moment of maximum tension as he applies a match winning heel hook on Zack Maxwell at a Metamoris event. The power of isometric tension and bodily extension is clearly evident here.

Appearance and reality: One of the best aspects of a life in the martial arts is the characters who surround us. A notable feature of many of these characters is the degree to which they appear quite harmless to the average person, but are absolute killers in reality. Most people put a great value on appearance as the basis of fighting ability, but if our time on the mat teaches us one thing - it is that appearances can be very deceiving! Sometimes appearances ARE accurate. Ryan Gracie looked like he could defeat an entire football team singlehandedly and could. However, his brother Renzo, my sensei, looks like a friendly fellow of average build who most people would overlook as a threat prior to fighting - yet he was every bit as deadly. I always remember the story of my student Eddie Cummings first trip to tristar gym in Montreal. Mr Cummings had been winning many local tournaments and was now in demand for seminars. I encouraged him to go to tristar - home of Georges St-Pierre, where many MMA fighters work out. On the day of the seminar, Mr Cummings arrived and saw the promotional poster in the wall. It featured a photo of him ripping a mans leg off and his nickname "WOLVERINE SEMINAR" was used. Many people had come and now Mr Cummings went to the front desk and asked to go in to get changed into rashguard and shorts. The person behind the desk was used to MMA fighters with powerful physiques and Mohawks- he said "ok, it'll be $100 dollars to train, you can get changed inside." Mr Cummings, being a man of polite disposition replied, "Um...I am Eddie Cummings." "Like I said, it's a $100." "Ah...I'm the guy who is teaching the seminar." The man replied, "You're the wolverine?" To which a cringing Eddie Cummings has to reply "Yes - I am the wolverine." "Seriously." "Yes! I AM THE WOLVERINE!" There was a stunned silence, some skeptical looks and then Mr Cummings went out on to the mats and taught the class once again how appearances do not always give an accurate portrayal of combative ability 😊😊

Finding a match: One of the challenges in jiu jitsu is finding training partners with whom you have a good physical match and feel that you can move well together to learn and perfect the movement skills that will create progress in the sport. Imagine you entered a dojo where every single person was a massively muscular and strong three hundred and fifty pounds of athletic power . You are an average sized man. Learning would be a very difficult thing. In live sparring everyone would crush you and you would have a hard time practicing and perfecting the moves in such an environment- even avoiding injury would be a challenge. This is more or less the situation that most females and young pre-teens and teenagers often find themselves in. Their partners are so much bigger and stronger that they either don't apply strength at all out of politeness and concern (which makes for rather hollow training) or they go too rough and overwhelm the smaller student and crush their confidence, learning curve or body. One of the best matches to get around this problem which is particularly useful in a training room with low numbers of females, is to match young male pre-teens and teenagers with adult woman. This cuts the size and strength discrepancy considerably and makes for much more dynamic, realistic and challenging sparring for both parties. This method has often been used in Japan, where the female Olympic women's team often trains against a local boys high school team as preparation. Of course there are times when this is not necessary- some women have no problem whatsoever going with adult men in regular class and get their best results this way. Nonetheless, this matching of young, smaller males with adult females is often a useful training match to create good progress in many female athletes and young aspiring male athletes. It cures the common problem of size discrepancies creating sparring conditions that are either artificially soft or too rough and suppressive. Here, ten year old Mikey Wilson gets a great workout with Katya at RGA - both athletes get a good sense of unrestrained movement as they practice their strangling skills through a range of positions.

What a performance! There were quite a few outstanding performances among the many athletes at the recent west coast ADCC trials in California. One of the standouts was that of fifteen year old Nicky Ryan who competed brilliantly against very tough adult competition. Mr Ryan won every match he entered by submission except that against his team mate, Ethan Crelinsten, which he narrowly lost on points. Then he came back and win the last match for bronze medal by submission. It was not just the fact that he was submitting people - it was the manner in which he did it - excellent smooth entries, combination attacks into tight locks that showed early mastery of the game of control leading to submission. He he uses elements of our sankaku (triangle) system to get an impressive win. Sankaku is one of Mr Ryan's favorite finishes and you can see here he excels at it.

Champion attitude: It was a breakthrough weekend for Ethan Crelinsten, one of the squad's Canadian contingent - he won gold at the West Coast ADCC trials and a ticket to the World Championships later this year with a tremendous performance in what may have been the largest trials event in ADCC history. Winning is impressive in itself, but the nature of the victories made it a truly standout performance - he won every match by submission save for his bout with team mate Nicky Ryan. I always enjoy teaching our Canadian students. They make big sacrifices to travel so far to train with us. They remind me of my early coaching days when a young Georges St-Pierre would travel all the way to NYC to build his dream. The kind of dedication it takes was much in evidence today - Ethan Crelinsten came back to the gym for two hard grappling workouts just one day after winning the biggest event of His life. This is exactly the attitude I like to see. Most people are satisfied with any form of success and stop - champions see an initial success as a stepping stone to greater success in the future and immediately get back to work

Stepping up to the plate: There was a fascinating event yesterday at the ADCC west coast trials yesterday. Braulio Estima was scheduled to match the great Leandro Lo in a super fight of 20 minutes under ADCC rules. Mr Lo is arguably the number one jiu jitsu player in the world today, certainly top three. He is a five time world champion and has in the last twelve months won a huge array of medals and beaten a who's who of the jiu jitsu world. He is known for his extremely impressive guard passing skills and sweeps from bottom. In recent years he has, through an extraordinary strength and size building program, gone all the way up to heavyweight divisions and continues his gold medal success. Mr Estima injured himself during warm ups for the bout. The promoter looked for a last ditch replacement- Gordon Ryan has spent the day coaching and cornering the junior squad members - I had stayed on the East Coast to corner Eddie Cummings in Philadelphia on Friday. With only ten minutes preparation, Mr Ryan immediately took the match despite the size and strength disadvantage. The match was an interesting one. Mr Ryan had not prepared at all for ADCC rules so just went all out for attacks. Mr Lo was forced to play a defensive tactical game that saw him set an ADCC record for the most stalling penalties in a bout - four. He did secure two takedowns to go ahead on points. Mr Ryan made the tactical error of countering the takedowns with Submissions- if he had just fought the takedowns and ignored the submissions he may way have won on stalling penalties - but that is not our way. More importantly he showed he can go with the best people and have no fear on the ground - just needs more tactical awareness. This is amazing given that he has trained less than half the years of Mr Lo, is smaller and weaker, had zero preparation and is only twenty one years old. We are so proud of his progress and can't wait to begin training again for the next big event.

The kohai step up at American ADCC trials: An extremely impressive day for the squad kohai (juniors) at the west coast ADCC trials today. Our Canadian squad members had a very fine day indeed with Ethan Crelinsten winning gold at 66kg and a ticket to the world championships in Finland. Oliver Taza got to the semi finals. Nicky Ryan put in another incredible performance as this fifteen year old prodigy submitted his opponents all the way to semi finals where he lost narrowly on points to team mate Mr Crelinsten (who went on to get gold). He finished with a bronze medal - more importantly he finished with the realization that at such a young age he can easily mix it up with the adults at national level and get to the top 😊😊Matthew Tesla submitted his opponents before dropping a match on points to team mate Oliver Taza. We are so proud of these young men and their achievements and more importantly, the preparation and lifestyle they instill in themselves to make such achievements possible.

Winning vs winning with style: Winning is the fundamental goal of athletes in competition - nonetheless the squad has always been proud of not just winning, but winning in a particular way - hunting ruthlessly for the submission. Our athletes will either get it or die trying. Eddie Cummings came into challenge for the Fight to Win Pro 145 pound belt against title holder Samir Chantre. He constantly looked to engage but he and the audience were frustrated by a distinct lack of engagement from his opponent. That lead to an easy unanimous decision Win for Mr Cummings and the 145 pound belt - but still, for us and, I suspect, the audience, it had an unsatisfactory feeling to it. The great majority of the ten minute match was spent with Mr Cummings chasing his opponent to the boundary of the mat and trying to force any form of grappling engagement - but to no avail. In the end he won because he was the only one attempting to engage. The good news is that he has the belt and his jiu jitsu has risen in level after excellent preparation- unfortunately there were no real opportunities to show that tonight - but I am confident that with new belt and title in hand - he will soon get opportunities in the future 😊😊 Heading back to NYC from Philadelphia now. Happy to see Mr Cummings back on stage and winning new titles and looking forward to future matches that give greater opportunity to show our style to the audience.

The return of the wolverine: tomorrow night in Philadelphia, Eddie Cummings returns to center stage to take on three time world champion Samir Chantre - himself a master of leg locking via figure four toe hold, in what should be a great encounter. The rules of fight to Win events are a ten minute match without points, if it goes the distance, the athlete demonstrating greater submission potential (where submissions are understood as a viable threat that forces a serious defensive reaction) and/or positional control will take a decision victory. Mr Cummings has prepared very thoroughly as always and has many new elements to his game, many of which are his own invention and extremely impressive. Can't wait to see these two great champions clash!

Gordon Ryan will be teaching a seminar featuring techniques and strategies used by the squad and in addition, his own unique methods that he has independently created and which he uses with great effect both in the gym and in competition. I am very proud to see one of my students teaching at the new gym of my 1990's RGA team mate, Shawn Williams - what better way to launch the new school! Californians will get a chance to see Our approach to the sport that Mr Ryan has done so much to showcase.

Active patience vs passive patience: Beginning students are often told to be patient in the sport of jiu jitsu - it takes time to be successful. There is obviously a large measure of truth to this. Nonetheless, when I coach I emphasize the difference between what I term ACTIVE PATIENCE vs PASSIVE PATIENCE. It is absolutely true that the skills of any complex activity take time to develop. Skills are born in the same state we are - weak, vulnerable and unlikely to survive without nurture and outside help. In time they develop strength and maturity. Just as a weak and helpless baby can one day grow into an Achilles or Hector; so to, SKILLS THAT ARE WEAK, FEEBLE AND UNPROMISING TODAY, CAN, OVER TIME AND TRAINING, MATURE INTO UNSTOPPABLE TOKUI-WAZA (favorite moves) THAT CAN WIN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS. We must be careful however, to avoid thinking that since time is required to develop skill, then we should simply sit back and let time run and watch our skills accumulate. This PASSIVE approach to patience is the enemy of progress. It is essentially a form of lazy complacence where one assumes that by simply showing up and going through the same routines, progress will be made. Patience itself is not a virtue - ACTIVE PATIENCE - the notion of actively working towards well defined goals with a specific plan whilst recognizing that time will be required to get those goals, is the virtue athletes need. Active patience is the acceptance that skills take time to develop, combined with the recognition that those skills won't develop themselves. They will only grow through intelligent planning towards a specific goal. Garry Tonon is an excellent example. When he first began studying with me, he had no effective strangles from in front of his opponent. I immediately set him to work on developing a strong high elbow guillotine. For months he struggled. At the six month mark he despaired of ever having a strong guillotine. Then finally he started having breakthroughs in the gym against lower belts. Soon it became a trusted weapon. He used it brilliantly on the big stage against the much larger and stronger Kit Dale to win a match that gained him widespread attention

Fighting the big men: Some of the most impressive wins in the short history of the squad came in their many outings against bigger and stronger opponents in open weight divisions or super fights. There is no clearly sign of the worth of a training program in jiu jitsu than the production of athletes who can take on high level opponents who have a big size and strength advantage and consistently win. In my experience THE TWO BEST MEANS TO SUCCESSFULLY ATTACK BIGGER, STRONGER OPPONENTS IS TO ATTACK THE LEGS AND BACK. Whilst I encourage my students to train to attack the whole body, these stand out in my opinion as best in allowing a smaller athlete to take advantage of the innate weaknesses of the human body to a greater degree than any others. A very fine example of this attitude was on display when squad member, Garry Tonon took on heavyweight world champion Luiz Panza - a man known for impressive physical strength which, in conjunction with good technique, allows him to exert tremendous breaking pressure with Achilles lock variations. The clash took place under IBJJF rules at the no gi world championships, so heel hooks, one of our signature moves, were illegal. Mr Tonon immediately went into a battle for the feet, taking on Mr Panza at his speciality- the Achilles lock. A deadlock occurred, so Mr Tonon slipped behind his bigger opponent and took the back. Once there, he was able to take advantage of the fact that the human body is well adapted to deal with threats from the front, but much less so to deal with threats from the rear. Very quickly he was able to slip in a well applied stranglehold and take a fine victory. This was an important match for Mr Tonon's development. He had always been a good scrambler to the back, but learning to UNIFY weapons - leg attacks and back attacks - greatly increases their effectiveness. REMEMBER ALWAYS THAT THE HUMAN BODY IS FULL OF ASYMMETRIES - AS SUCH SOME AREAS WILL BE WEAKER OR MORE VULNERABLE THAN OTHERS. If you wish to defeat a stronger opponent, knowledge of these asymmetrical elements and how they relate to the techniques and tactics of the sport is the key to success.

Teaching here - Teaching there: Just wrapped up a weekend teaching to the fine folks of Sudbury, Canada along with my great friend and mentor, Ricardo Almeida. It was all organized by Renzo Gracie Ottawa stalwart, Pat Cooligan, who has done an incredible job of taking our Sensei's philosophy and techniques and introducing them across Ontario and beyond. Now I am racing through airports and back in NYC! A big week of training coming up starting first thing Monday morning as Eddie Cummings goes back on stage to take on three time world champion Samir Chantre next Saturday in Fight to Win Pro 31. Nicky Ryan goes west to California with teammates Matthew Tesla and Jason Rau, to attempt to become the youngest athlete ever (fifteen) to qualify for the world championships at the American ADCC trials. Then it's uptown to the Bronx academy to check out progress of the Bombers as they continue to impress me with their development. It's always a special feeling returning to NYC from travel - I have loved here 25 years and it's never lost it's charm, pace and excitement for me - but even that feeling pales compared with the excitement of returning to train the troops in the dojo as they work hard towards their dreams and aspirations.

Another bout - another belt: Gordon Ryan won the 205 pound division belt at Fight to Win 30 last night in a very tightly contested match against Lucas Barbosa last night New Jersey. It was not the decisive result that our team always strives for. Mr Barbosa fought with an intelligent tactical strategy of snatching at two submissions along with some late attempts to pass. Neither the pass or the submissions were close. Mr Ryan looked to engage from bottom. He came close to nice reversal from bottom. The judges appeared to conclude that this was the only move of the match that came close to completion and so scored it in Mr Ryan's favor. Any time a match is that close there will always be controversy as to the result- usually the opinions are split according to team affiliation, personal like or dislike or one's general beliefs about the nature of the sport. There are several things that I believe all side will agree on. First, the two athletes are very evenly matched. Second, the match would have been much more satisfying if it was twenty minutes long rather than ten. I know Mr Ryan would be very enthusiastic about a rematch. Perhaps it could be done as a first defense of the belt with 20 minutes duration. Or if The organization is reluctant to opt for a longer match, at another venue without a belt. I felt that perhaps sacrificing just one of the many preliminary matches to create a longer main event would be a good idea. Well done to both athletes for a tight match. As always we are very proud of Mr Ryan's performance and his preparation. Here, Mr Ryan warms up for the event with Garry Tonon and Tom Deblass. Now the squad will prepare for ADCC trials in California and fight to win 31 featuring Eddie Cummings vs the great Shamir Chantre next weekend in Philadelphia.

Meeting up with Senpai: When I was a beginner student under my Sensei Renzo Gracie, our senpai (big brothers) where Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All three were world champions in their respective areas. All three were highly successful in jiu jitsu and MMA. All three were amazing teachers who inspired us every day we trained. Here I am in Sudbury, Canada teaching next to Mr Almeida at the NOMAD martial arts convention. It is magical to see the same looks of wonder on the faces of the students here as we had in NYC all those years ago 😊😊Here is he teaching a superb class on the essential principles of guard passing. I never forgot the power of role models like Mr Almeida in the classroom to bring out the best in the class overall. That is why I try so hard to create a group of outstanding students who I know will create a level of excitement and interest that will make the level of the ENTIRE ROOM rise.

Gordon Ryan back in action tomorrow night: Tomorrow night at Fight To Win Pro 30, Gordon Ryan will battle the brilliant and physically very powerful Brazilian grappler, Lucas "Hulk" Barbosa in New Jersey in a ten minute bout without points - if it goes the distance a decision will be rendered based upon submissions and positional control. Mr Ryan has been training exceedingly well. This matchup of two great grapplers should be thrilling!

Exciting days ahead: Great week of training with the squad. Gordon Ryan has been peaking well for his superfight against world no gi champion Lucas "Hulk"Barbosa this Saturday night in New Jersey at Fight to Win pro 30. Once again Mr Ryan, a welterweight, will test himself against the big men at light heavy weight. Then April 15 in Philadelphia, the return of Eddie Cummings on his bout against three time world champion Shamir Chantre at Fight to Win Pro 31. I really believe Mr Cummings game has attained a new level of development and I am very excited to see him competing again. Across country in California, fifteen year old Nicky Ryan will battle at the American ADCC trials in an attempt to become the youngest person ever to qualify for the world championships. With him will be outstanding kohai student, Matthew Tesla as he attempts to qualify for ADCC at 170 pounds. Behind it all is Garry Tonon, working hard in preparation for his grappling superfight against Shinya Aoki in what will be one of the highest paid, most watched and most anticipated grappling matches in history going down in Singapore on May 26. All great events, all great goals for the squad but as always we are all mindful of the fact that these lofty goals are only attainable by the most mundane means - hard, intelligently directed training in the dojo. The greatest goals are aspired to from the humblest and most everyday beginnings

Overcoming limitations: With some recent problems with my left knee, even demonstrating jiu jitsu is problematic for me now. Last night I taught a seminar at the dojo of my good friend and teammate, Carl Massaro. Through the capable help of our mutual student, Frank Rosenthal, we were able to give a good representation of our squads ashi garami game. It was very pleasing to see the room quickly pick up the main concepts and techniques and begin applying them. It gives me confidence that whatever happens in the future, I can still be of use to my beloved students and the sport. It amazed me to see relative beginners to the leg locking game quickly slipping into position and applying the locks correctly despite my current inability to show them physically myself. Thanks to Carl Massaro and his students for a lovely night of training and learning in New Jersey 😊😊

Reflections on my students - Gordon Ryan - stages of skepticism and learning: In the early days of the squad, Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon would come in every day to train and compete almost every weekend. Mr Tonon told me about a talented teenage student he had named Gordon Ryan. He said he would try to bring Mr Ryan in to begin training with us. Sure enough, a few days later, a tall young man, jumped out on to the mats in the morning class and introduced himself. Mr Tonon immediately announced to myself and Mr Cummings, whilst we were going over some ashi garami movements, that Mr Ryan was deeply skeptical about the value of leg locks and fully believed all leg locks were a useless waste of time and simply did not work on him. Mr Ryan smiled confidently and announced he had never been leg locked by anyone and did not consider them a threat. Of course when drilling was over, a rather offended Mr Cummings immediately went to spar with Mr Ryan and proceeded to leg lock him from one side of the academy to the other! At the end of the class, a rather chastened Mr Ryan agreed that leg locks did indeed work and he would begin studying them immediately. Over the next few months he had great success at entering into leg locks, but struggled to actually finish them. As time passed, a new form of skepticism emerged in Mr Ryan - he came to believe that leg locks worked for other people, but not for him! I immediately showed him some variations in grip that greatly tightened his locks and immediately he started getting good results. A few days later, Mr Cummings returned from a short journey and asked to roll with Mr Ryan. In a stunning reversal, Mr Ryan successfully applied two beautiful heel hooks in one round of sparring- shocking both Mr Cummings and himself. For the first time he came to believe not only that heel hooks work, but that they could work for him against the best in the business. In my experience, THE STRONGEST BELIEFS WE HOLD ARE THOSE WHERE WE BEGAN WITH TOTAL SKEPTICISM BUT WERE PROVEN WRONG IN SOME MEMORABLE AND TANGIBLE WAY UNTIL WE BECAME BELIEVERS DESPITE OURSELVES . THOSE are the beliefs we will rely upon in the stress and fear of competition

Details vs General movement: Very often I get students come to me asking for details of a given move - the more details I give, the happier they get. This is a natural and good thing. However, I strongly believe that fixation on details can have detrimental effects in some instances. The moves of jiu jitsu are not all the same in overall character. Some of the moves are very STATIC in nature i.e. There is relatively little movement. For example, rear mount is a relatively static position, most of the control and finishes from here are small movements. In cases of static positions, details are paramount and very useful. Other moves/scenarios are much more DYNAMIC with large and fast movements. For example, a drop seoi nage throw. In the case of very dynamic movements, details are still very important, BUT THE STUDENT MUST FIRST LEARN THE GENERAL DYNAMIC MOVEMENT BEFORE THE DETAILS IF HE OR SHE IS TO BE ABLE TO USE IT EFFECTIVELY AGAINST RESISTANCE - THE DETAILS WILL COME LATER. Wherever the overall quality of the movement is just as important as the details for success- BEGIN WITH THE OVERALL MOVEMENT AS IT WILL BE USED IN SPARRING AND COMPETITION- you can always go back to details later. If you begin the details, students will have a lot of theoretical knowledge but lack the movement skills to actually apply it. Here I am coaching ten year old squad prodigy Mikey Wilson details of our back attack system. Due to the fact that this is mostly a static position, the emphasis is on small details of placement and positioning and tactics.

Interpretations: Here is an old photograph probably taken around 2000 at Renzo Gracie's old academy. It is a good representation of one of the central features of jiu jitsu - multiplicity of views. Mr Gracie, myself and three of his most distinguished black belts, Matt Serra, Shawn Williams and Robert Constance are watching action unfold in front of us. There are five pairs of eyes watching one event. You can be quite sure that each of us is seeing a very different picture from the man next to him. Sensei is probably seeing an incredibly quick and efficient entry into an arm in guillotine, Mr Serra is probably scheming a way to clear the arm and take a high elbow guillotine. Mr Williams is probably looking an a means of sitting back to closed guard and trapping an arm in a way that sets up many of his favorite attacks and Mr Constance is probably seeing the opportunity for a turn over into a pulverizing pin. I am probably looking for an entrance to either legs or back. One event - five interpretations. All of them were very effective. Everyone agrees that there are many incorrect ways to move and act in jiu jitsu - BUT DO NOT EXTRAPOLATE FROM THIS THAT THERE IS ONLY ONE RIGHT WAY. On the contrary, for almost any given scenario in the sport, there are a multitude of effective methods. Which one you choose is largely determined by your personality and body type, though sometimes your teaching history can be a factor also. One of the great privileges of training under Mr Gracie was the freedom he gave us in choosing our styles - that is why you see so much variation among his students. Use effectiveness in sparring and competition as your primary guide. As you grow in experience you will be able to feel and ultimately just look at a move and make good assessments as to its mechanical and tactical value. Until then, if it works well in sparring against good people, that's a solid sign that you are on the right track. Variation is a leading source of progress in jiu jitsu. Sometimes it may lead you temporarily astray, but don't worry, recovery is simple and progress will begin anew.

Morning class: Nothing wakes a person up faster than a man highly skilled in the arts of strangulation and joint breaking doing his best to do exactly that to you. The troops at RGA NYC go at it in sparring rounds (randori) while the rest of the big apple slowly wakes up outside. Georges St-Pierre works elements of back attack and ashi garami systems with Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon in some hard fought rounds as the action unfolds across the room. The unifying factor across the room - performance improvement in the kingly art. Some are professional athletes with specific upcoming goals, others are amateurs with a more general goal of skill enhancement- but the path forward is the same for both - increasing knowledge and embedding that knowledge in a set of physical skills that can bring you closer to those goals.

Three the hard way: The full squad is back in action in truly great competition action against three of the best grapplers in the world in the near future. Gordon Ryan starts it off with a very tough match up against IBJJF no gi world champion Lucas "Hulk" Barbosa for the 205 pound title at Fight to Win Pro 30 in New Jersey on April 8th. Mr Ryan's last matches were at his actual weight - 170 pounds welterweight, but he wants to test himself as he so often does, against the big men at light heavyweight. Mr Barbossa recently won gold at Five Grappling Super League, surpassing great world champions like Leandro Lo and Tarsis Humpreys with a mix of great technique and crushing physical power that showed why even the strongest men in the sport call him "hulk." Then Eddie Cummings returns to action in a truly fascinating battle against one of the best leg lockers in IBJJF competition - three time world no gi champion, Samir Chantre, a brilliant tactician on the mats in Philadelphia on April 15. After this Garry Tonon will take on the great MMA grappler Shinya Aoki at ONE Championship: Dynasty of Heroes in Singapore on May 26. Mr Aoki is a truly brilliant grappler with an amazing competition record in MMA He is a master of entering submissions from standing, often with spectacular flying variations. This will be a great match between two of the most dynamic grapplers on the planet. I am always excited to see my students compete, but now more so than ever. The reason is because all three senpai (senior students) are really starting to develop their own unique technical innovations that go beyond my teachings and into an independent and very exciting repertoire of moves and tactics that is thrilling for me as a coach to observe. I am certain 2017 will be a year where these young men rise to a new level of development. Though my body is currently having some issue and problems, my mind has never been so excited by these technical developments that these three outstanding technicians of the science of control and submission are developing. I have been watching in the gym - soon the world will watch on stage against three truly impressive opponents!

Varying intensity: Sometimes people hear about the frequency with which my students train and ask how they are not over trained to the point of injury and breakdown. The reason is because we know how to vary the intensity of workouts according to the context in which the workout is performed. If every workout is at maximum intensity, the injury and burn out rate would be unacceptably high. Intensity must be varied as part of a program leading to a specific goal, rather than as a constant hammering towards a general idea of getting better at jiu jitsu. Typically, if there is going to be a very tough morning workout, it will be followed by a relatively soft evening workout. This ability to SEE TODAYS WORKOUT IN THE CONTEXT OF A WEEKS WORK TOWARDS A GIVEN GOAL AND SCALE IT UP OR DOWN DEPENDING ON THAT CONTEXT IS A HUGE PART OF DEVELOPING THE LONGEVITY NEEDED TO MASTER THE COMPLEX SKILLS OF THE SPORT OVER TIME. Last night was a perfect example. I went to Long Island to join Chris Weidman and his two primary trainers, Ray Longo and Matt Serra for some fine tuning of grapple boxing skills (the interface of striking and grappling skills on the ground in MMA) in preparation for Mr Weidman's bout against the very tough and talented Gegard Mousasi at UFC 210. Mr Weidman had already had a very tough sparring workout earlier in the day and has only a week left in another very tough training camp. Thus the second workout consisted of light technical and tactical drills - perfect for a second workout that will improve performance without causing physical problems for the athlete. It was a pleasure to see once again the incredible grace and power of this great middleweight as he whipped through the drills with the same vigor and skill I saw so many times in his lead up to winning the middleweight title. I demand that my athletes workout every day - but I do not demand they workout HARD every day. Learning to pace your workouts over time, scaling back when necessary, is the key to long term development that can garner great results over time.

Reflections on my students - The master of distance - Georges St-Pierre: More than any other athlete I worked with, Georges St-Pierre was a master of the subtleties of controlling and exploiting the distance between himself and his opponent. This mastery of distance management is an absolutely critical part of MMA. In the vast majority of professional fights, more time is spent in this part of the game than any other. When people talk about the development of Mr St-Pierre's game, they often make reference to his many coaches and the influence these people had on him. Interestingly, the whole skill of distance control and covering distance to the takedown, WAS A SKILL THAT MR ST-PIERRE MOSTLY TAUGHT HIMSELF. As a teenager under the sometimes unorthodox tutelage of Kristof Midoux, Mr St-Pierre was constantly put in sparring situations where he had to box his way to a takedown on much older, more experienced opponents. As time passed, trial and error, experimentation and eclecticism in drawing in disparate skills from various combat arts produced an uncanny ability to strike into takedowns. Sometimes during fight camp after dinner or during some free time Mr St-Pierre will ask me to take a fighting stance and he will practice his repertoire of feints, deceptions and misdirections that enable him to get to his opponents legs for the takedown. I have done this with him for well over a decade. Yet to this day, he invariably misdirects me and easily gets to my legs - leaving me feeling like a fool as once again I am deceived by the same tricks 😂😂 Thus was born this great athletes best weapon - he had many influences - but his primary weapon, the one which more than any other was the source of his success, was his own invention. It was a peculiar blend of his early days in sport karate, his wrestling training, fencing tactics and most of all, his adaptation to the demands of takedown sparring in his early years. Here he works with MMA standout David Branch on the theory of distance, both men are about to return to the UFC later in the year where once again they will be able to show the importance of this critical skill

Every major move has its own character: All the major moves of the sport of jiu jitsu have their own unique character - their good points and bad points - which are a reflection of their mechanical features. As students, it is exceedingly important we try to increase the depth of our understanding of the character of all the moves we intend to make a big part of our game so that we apply them in the appropriate context. When we look at Kimura (ude garami), we see it is among the most complex and interesting of the major moves of the sport. Like many of the main submission holds, it can function as both a means of submission and a means of control through grip. It often functions in jiu jitsu in much the same way as the knight functions in a chessboard - a means of unorthodox entry into tight situations that resist normal methods and which can open up many other attacks from other pieces. Here, Shy Ace, among the best of my students in the specialized use of our Kimura system, uses a fine rolling entry to open up a defensive opponent and bring his submission game into operation.

Reflections on my students - the birth of the wolverine: Most great deeds have inauspicious beginnings. When Eddie Cummings first entered my morning class I saw him as a squirmy fellow armed with nothing more than a mediocre high elbow guillotine. One morning I came in and my regular Uke (demonstration partner) was absent. I chose Mr Cummings as a replacement and he proved very good. Afterwards he asked intelligent questions and we talked. I learned he was a graduate student in physics - a problem solver. As weeks and months passed I noted how he never missed classes and was rapidly learning. He expressed interest in more leg lock material. I started showing him more details of my approach to lower body submissions. Then he and Ottavia Bourdain decided to take leg lock study to a new level and do private classes every day - almost always in leg locks. An interesting part of this period is that Mr Cummings was initially VERY set against the outside ashi garami position that is one of the signature moves of our leg lock system and for which he would become famous! He thought it was totally wrong headed and would never work! I still tease him about that to this day! 😂😂 In time I managed to convince him of it effectiveness and he made incredible progress in application skills and theoretical understanding. As he began competing he quickly accumulated a vast number of submission wins, usually via leg lock. His defining moment in those early days however, a series of matches never recorded. Mr Cummings was invited by a friend of a friend to compete is an underground open weight grappling event in the basement of a gym somewhere in Brooklyn where he was obviously the smallest competitor. That night he fought around twelve men, winning everything by submission - fighting on a tiny mat on a grimy concrete floor in front of a crowd of maniacs gambling on the outcomes. As the smallest and nerdiest competitor, everyone bet against him. When he won, he was offered the princely sum of twenty rumpled one dollar bills! When people today see Mr Cummings win big events like EBI and take $20,000, they don't realize that it all began with crazy bouts for less than $2 a match

It all begins in the training room: The squad was thrilled to watch team mate Garry Tonon put on another match-of-the-year-candidate performance last night in Oklahoma- but each member has their own upcoming goals - so after a brief discussion, it was noses to the grindstone and hard training time. A specialized triangle (sankaku) session followed by some very tough sparring. Eddie Cummings, Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan, Matthew Tesla, Frankie Rosenthal, Ottavia Bourdain and Jake Shields show the wear of a hard session with top competitors while I sit there and pretend I was part of it 😂😂 I am always fascinated by the contrast between the the big shows and the humble and tough conditions that make success in the big shows possible. The big shows may be the FACE of the sport - BUT THE TRAINING ROOM IS THE SOUL OF THE SPORT. In thousands of small, obscure gyms across the globe are tens of thousands of dreams and ambitions - from those origins a few will emerge with the skills and attributes to make their dreams become real.

Flawless Victory: Garry Tonon defeated the outstanding grappler Justin Rader in Oklahoma last night in a thrilling display of brilliant attacks versus resolute defense. Mr Tonon had trained extremely well prior to the belt and went in with great confidence- as always he showed every bit of it onstage on a match filled with spectacular movement all pushing in the direction of submission. Ultimately it went to a decision as a stranglehold was being applied with seconds left on the clock. There was never any doubt which way the decision would go and Mr Tonon had successfully defended his welterweight no gi belt. Fight to Win put on another fine event and the squad is proud to help out with a display of jiu jitsu that was both crowd pleasing, yet a fine display of the a full range of the techniques of our sport applied at a very high level against one of its toughest competitors. For those in Oklahoma- don't forget that Mr Tonon will be teaching a seminar showcasing many of the very techniques he wowed the crowd with last night! 12pm at Oklahoma Martial arts - check his Instagram for details! He is as good a teacher as he is a competitor and his show at the seminar will be every bit as good as the show he put on last night 😊😊 The whole squad now has amazing bouts coming up in the near future - details coming out soon! 😉😜We are all looking forward to Mr Tonon's return as he, Gordon Ryan and Eddie Cummings, along with all the kohai, resume training for big upcoming events that will require them to push to a new level of development 😊😊

Back in the saddle: Propped up by some cortisone I came back to limited teaching duties today. It was great to see youngest squad member Mikey Wilson back on the mats. He and Nicky Ryan worked on elements of our back attack system, an area that Mr Ryan excels in. Joining us was the formidable Jake Shields, who continues to impress us with his development here with the squad. I got a chance to teach our approach and philosophy of back control and attack, and also display my superior taste in walking canes 😜😉There is more to my style than just rash guards! It felt great to teach even if recent problems with my body made the physical side of teaching impossible today - there is so much about our game that is mental/philosophical that I felt that some valuable input could be made regardless. There was much excited talk after training about Garry Tonon's match tonight at Fight to Win in Oklahoma tonight. Mr Tonon has trained extremely well and is excited to put our approach to the game to another test against the very talented and tough Justin Rader. Keep your eyes on that show - it should be a fine one indeed!

Entering into the unknown: Those moments when an athlete faces an opponent for the first time are always an entrance into the unknown. There is a danger in this. We all fear the unknown and our imagination can work upon us in ways that make it all terrifying. It is natural to wonder if the opponent has skills, techniques, knowledge, strength or tactics that we don't. That fear can have disastrous effects on performance. As fear increases, we become increasingly conservative in our choice of technique to use. We limit ourselves to only our must trusted techniques and hesitate when opportunity arises. Learning to deal with and overcome this fear of the unknown is what separates the great performers in the gym from the great performers on the stage. Interestingly the presence or lack of presence of fear is not an indicator of whether the athlete will perform on the stage. I have seen athletes who felt no fear perform poorly and others who are terrified every time they fight perform brilliantly. Each must find their own way around those moments of entering the unknown. I have my own opinions about this problem and often use them with my athletes. It is far too long for an Instagram post - but one day I hope to write or speak about it, for in all honesty, it is the last critical obstacle that the athlete must learn to master if he or she is to maximize their performance in competition

Defending what's yours: Garry Tonon defeated the very tough Dustin Akbari to win the Fight To Win welterweight belt. Now he must defend it against three time world championship ADCC veteran Justin Rader. Mr Rader has built a fine grappling career around excellent wrestling, superb Submission defense, a very nasty guillotine and great tactical sense. Mr Tonon will have to travel to Mr Rader's home territory in Oklahoma City to defend his title. Friday night the two American standouts will clash in a ten minute submission only match. Should it go the distance, a decision based on control and submission attempts will be made. Mr Tonon has trained with his usual enthusiasm and completeness. Recent improvements in his positional game, particularly in the subtleties of limb positioning, are something I look forward to seeing in his upcoming matches. Looking forward to overseeing these last few days of training and then the big show Friday night. Fight to Win continues to impress with great shows and excellent match ups - this match between two great American welterweights in the American heartland should be a real show! Fight to Win 28

Reflections on my Sensei - The little things reveal the big things: Often I am asked to tell stories about the many adventures of my sensei, Renzo Gracie. He has an action packed life that could easily make a top rated reality show. Yet when people ask me to tell a story that illustrates his character, I tell a story that has very little drama and action, yet says much about his character and his philosophy. Back in the mid 1990's, Mr Gracie and I had finished a late training session prior to an upcoming professional fight in Japan. We were in his car looking for a place to eat. A few days prior I had read in the newspapers about a spate of of murders of NYC taxi drivers. In response, the taxi union had installed a special orange light on the back of NYC cabs which they could discreetly turn on if they felt threatened in order to alert policemen driving past them. As Renzo drove, I saw a cab in front of us with the panic light activated. I told Renzo what I had read - before I could even finish, he gunned the engine and in a flash raced ahead of the cab and turned in front of it to stop it at the curb like some crazy cop show episode. Before I could even get out of the car, Mr Gracie was at the drivers window. I got to the rear door on the other side and opened it. Inside was a terrified driver and in the back seat, an extremely good looking and glamorous woman in a very short skirt - they thought we were thugs rather than rescuing heroes! Very quickly it became apparent there was no danger either to anyone or from anyone and the driver had simply accidentally turned on the device. The four of us laughed and bade each other well and we got back in the car and drove off. Years later I reminded Renzo of the incident - he did not even remember it - there was so little action it did not even register in his memory among all the drama he has been a part of. Yet to me it illustrates much. Mr Gracie always told me, MARTIAL ARTS WERE NOT CREATED TO MAKE THE STRONG STRONGER, BUT TO GIVE THE WEAK A HELPING HAND IN A PREDATORY AND UNKIND WORLD. Many people speak this message, but I was always very proud to know my sensei LIVED it.

Upcoming action: Gordon Ryan, having just won EBI 11, will soon be back in action. At EBI 11 he fought at his actual weight - 170 pounds. Normally he cannot compete at that weight, as team mate Garry Tonon usually competes there. As he result, most of his competition outings have been well above his real weight. Once again he will face a bigger and stronger foe in the form of Lucas "Hulk" Barbossa, an outstanding competitor from team Atos, who has won world championships in both gi and no gi competition. Mr Barbossa has recently been competing at light heavyweight- taking the five grappling championship title over other jiu jitsu standouts like Leandro Lo and Tarsis Humphreys to show he is competing at the very highest levels. It will be a short match of eight minutes of submission only followed by a judges decision based on submission attempts and control. Mr Ryan is training diligently as always and constantly experimenting and refining his techniques- he will need to if he is to prevail against such a powerful and talented foe. Great to see Fight to Win grappling organization putting on such great shows and high level match ups.

Making a statement: It's one thing to win a tournament- it's quite another to predetermine HOW you will win the tournament. Two days before EBI 11, Gordon Ryan told me he would not use any joint lock submissions, but instead, limit himself to strangleholds with the arms (no sankaku/triangles using the legs) as the means of victory. Oftentimes people complain that our squad only wins via leg lock because we have an advantage in that department and that we are thus a team of "one trick ponies." In fact, anyone familiar with my teachings will know I actually have a preference for strangleholds over all forms of joint lock, including leg locks. A huge part of our training is spent in refining our back and front headlock systems to get into strangleholds, yet most commentators only speak of our leg locks. I was initially worried about this limitation- in general I prefer to use HANDICAPPING - the practice of limiting your submissions to a few chosen ones and not allowing yourself any others as a method of TRAINING rather than something to do in competition. Mr Ryan, however, had trained very diligently and his strangles were very sharp indeed so I felt confident he could get his plan to work. Handicapping is one of our most commonly used training methodologies, it was odd, but extremely impressive to watch it being used in high level competition. Here, Gary Tonon and I call out the sequences of our back attack system to Mr Ryan in the finals as he closes in on the stranglehold- but there is no need - he knows them so well it is like clockwork as opponents are progressively tied up and rendered defensively ineffective.

Keeping it fun: often people seem to assume that a gym putting out champions is probably a stern and strict environment where people follow very formal behavioral rules. In fact I prefer an environment where the training is heavy, but the atmosphere is light. I find the room has better training longevity when people ENJOY the atmosphere rather than ENDURE it. As such, visitors are often surprised when they hear us calling out off color jokes and insults to each other as training begins. When training is over, it's story and stand up routine time. Humor is the means by which students bond and get through tough tests and the inevitable disappointments of a highly competitive and difficult game where many play, but only one can win. Here, Georges St-Pierre takes some serious abuse from myself and Garry Tonon, I'm going to guess it has something to do with his choice of workout apparel 😂😜😖In which case it is well deserved 😂😂😂Finding that balance between work and play is important for the health of any training program.

Mr Tonon goes forth: Squad standout Garry Tonon will be teaching a big no gi seminar in Oklahoma on 03/25/17 at Oklahoma Martial Martial Arts Academy. Mr Tonon comes across as playful, but when it's time to teach, he is dead serious about getting performance increases. He has a superb knowledge of technique and tactics and the ability to pass that on to others while creating a warm and fun atmosphere as he does it. Of all my students, Mr Tonon is foremost in exploiting and controlling the interface between standing grappling (tachi-waza) and ground Grappling (ne waza) - a critical part of our coaching program. In addition,
He is the best at creating scrambles and controlling their direction towards our favorite finishes. Often people talk to me about Mr Tonon and describe him as a intuitive grappler who just has an innate ability to get to winning positions - they are invariably shocked when they see him teach and see that there is a highly practiced method to what he does and that others can be taught to do it as well. If you are in Oklahoma and have a chance to get to the seminar - do it! You will learn the precise methodology of one of best grapplers on the planet. Mr Tonon is an extremely innovative student who constantly adjusts and improves upon the material I show him to arrive at a fascinating game that is very much his own. As with all my senior students, I often feel I learn as much from him as he does from me. If you want to see some of the most innovative and cutting edge grappling technique - get to Mr Tonon's seminar. 😊😊

Perspective from the past: In mid October 1812, Napoleon Bonaparte began his retreat from Moscow in an unusually severe Russian winter. For three months his men endured freezing, deathly temperatures, constant attack, starvation and disorientation all whilst dressed in summer clothing. When his men finally made it back to friendly territory four fifths of them were dead or missing. Whenever I wonder if snow or cold should interrupt training, I think of their story and realize that nothing in our soft comfortable lives will ever approach what they went through and that the things we complain about or use as excuses seem feeble indeed from this perspective. Whether it be Napoleon's retreat, Washington at Valley Forge, the Soviet army in the Battle of Moscow or any other of the myriad examples of humans prevailing in conditions so harsh that one can only feel shame for complaining about our minor problems, this historical perspective keeps us honest in an age where so many look for the weakest excuse to avoid work or training. History teaches us very clearly that we can endure far more we usually tolerate. Snow in NYC? Three champions had no difficulty in getting to the gym to hone their skills. Georges St-Pierre, Jake Shields and Matthew Tesla relax after a session working back attack sequences. Snow day for most? Not for champions...

My sensei, Renzo Gracie, always taught me to look for ways to apply the lessons of jiu jitsu to other aspects of our lives. This is why I constantly teach jiu jitsu as problem solving activity. Life itself is mostly a tale of our attempts to solve the myriad problems that life throws at us minute by minute, hour by hour and year by year. So many of the tactical themes of our sport apply to situations outside the dojo. I wanted to convey this theme to a larger audience and the writers of the popular TV show "Billions" did a fine job of working it into season 2 of the show. Here, Paul Giamatti gains insight from technique and tactics in ways that his character can use in his great struggles against his rival. I am sure all of you have had similar experiences of jiu jitsu influencing your thoughts and actions far from the tatame.

Two sides of my students: Most of you know my students through their efforts in competition (shiai). There is however, a whole other side to them that you may not be aware of - their ability to teach to others what they do in competition. I have always believed that the ability to teach the sport well often has a beneficial effect upon your own performance. This is not always the case, I have known some outstanding competitors who were not gifted teachers and vice versa, but as a general rule there is a lot of truth in it. I find that clarity and succinctness of expression in the technical and tactical elements of the game helps not only our ability to get others to understand what we do, BUT OURSELVES AS WELL. As such, our own internal dialogue when we try to overcome and solve problems is quicker and more efficient. In addition to performance enhancement, getting my students into teaching the sport lets them see beyond mere competition and into the deeper social aspects of jiu jitsu, particularly the theme of mutual benefit that Jigoro Kano made the foundation of his approach to grappling. I often involve my senior students in the teaching process. Many times I ask them to teach a move back to me that I had shown them previously. Other times I make them demonstrate a move to the class while I assist. When my body has physical issues and I cannot physically demonstrate a move, I will have them demonstrate whilst I narrate the salient features. As a result, all of my senior students (Senpai) are excellent teachers. Some of my favorite times to watch them teach is immediately after a big competition where they have employed some aspect of our game, and then watch them teach it to a group at a seminar shortly afterwards. Invariably the audience is shocked at the level of detail involved and their ability to explain those details in ways that increase performance. Here Gordon Ryan shows details of our back attack system at Shawn Williams academy in LA, just a week after EBI 11 where he used it so successfully to take gold.

Party at Renzo's!! My beloved sensei and world's coolest human, Renzo Gracie is celebrating his 20th birthday tonight 😉😜 at his beautiful home in NJ! The whole crew is here and it's wonderful to see so many old friends and laugh about old times and plot new plans 😜😊 Nights like these remind me of the profound impact my sensei had on so many lives and the value of jiu jitsu outside the dojo. Of course like a bunch of degenerates we are watching the UFC and enjoying old school legend Vitor Belfort mixing it up with new generation athletes - kind of like the party at Renzo's 😊😊enjoying a wonderful party for a wonderful man and his many wondrous achievements 😊😊

The squad dominates in Florida: The two squad members who went to Sapeteiro 7 grappling tournament at 175 pounds beat everyone to both get to the finals where they had to face each other! Matthew Tesla, who has only started competing recently won the event with another outstanding performance. Jason Rau defeated everyone to make his own way to the final on the opposite bracket. In the final Mr Tesla gained victory over his team mate via heel hook variation. The two squad athletes used a combination of leg attack, back attack and front headlock systems to quickly accrue submission wins over their respective opponents under EBI style rules. Probably the most significant match of the day was between EBI 11 standout semi finalist Craig Jones and Mr Tesla. Mr Tesla's victory clearly shows he is operating at a high level and will look to make appearances at other professional shows. Sapeteiro continues to provide an excellent venue for athletes developing their submission skills and building their resume. Kohai students Mr Tesla and Mr Rau have worked very hard to increase their prowess and it is wonderful to see the fruits of their labor on the stage.

Reflections on combat jiu jitsu: EBI 11 featured a show within a show - a combat jiu jitsu format fought in between the regular event bouts. It allowed palm strikes and slaps on the ground in addition to the usual full array of submission attacks. Could this be a viable format for future shows? Let's begin the discussion by pointing out exactly what CJJ was intended to do, since there seems to be some confusion here. It was NOT intended to answer the question as to whether jiu jitsu works in a fight. MMA has already answered this question and answered it much better than any CJJ tournament ever will. What it WAS designed to do was to create grappling matches where athletes could not stall excessively and clam up to avoid the submissions game or make use of contrived positions in ground grappling that have no relevance to real fighting. The idea was to use the Palm strikes and slaps to open opponents up and create movement that would promote the use of submissions. This is a fine goal. We have only one four man tournament as evidence - not enough for a definite opinion, but enough for some initial thoughts. First, the format was fun and popular. The in house crowd liked it and I think it's fair to say the average fan can understand and appreciate a simple slap to the face much more readily than an intricate hand fighting sequence to a stranglehold. One the other hand I have some reservations. The slaps did NOT create more submission attempts or more movement than the regular rule set, indeed, the slaps could be used as a substitute for real action (submission) rather than as a catalyst to it. The highest submission rate of the night by far was Gordon Ryan in the regular event who didn't need slaps to create movement and submission opportunities- just good technique and a mindset that orients him in that direction. My main concern is that elite grappling athletes will stay away from ebi if it becomes a CJJ format. I can't imagine any bjj world champions entering a CJJ competition, yet ebi needs them if it is to be taken seriously as a promotion. As such I believe the best use of CJJ is as a fun and entertaining "show within a show" not a main event @flograppling

"Hi John, how is Gordon doing?" "Very well, Mom - in the finals, won everything so far by strangulation in regulation time." "Very nice, whose next?" "Vagner Rocha Mom." "Oh yes - he's tough. How is the match going?" "Very well, Mom - he's got Vagner's back already." "Ok, tell him to trap the defensive arm with a cross grip on the opposite side he fell towards." "Yes Mom." "Now, tell him to to get the index knuckle of the strangle hand to the point of Vagner's chin and work from there." "Yes Mom." What happened? What's that noise?" "Gordon just won, the crowd roared and Gordon screamed "Porra!" very loudly." "Alright, very good, well, don't forget to work your ashi drills before you go to sleep, clean the floor, brush your teeth and get a good nights sleep." "Yes Mom." 😂😂😜😂😂 @allinphoto

The value of rematches: One of the best indicators of the effectiveness of a given training program comes from rematches. They provide invaluable information because comparisons in performance can be made relative to an opponent - the comparisons are not always perfect, as other factors might influence the respective outcomes, but they are far better than most methods of assessing progress. For these reasons I always pay particular attention to rematches. I was always very proud of the fact that Georges St-Pierre never lost a rematch in his career - that was a good indicator of a training program that constantly took him forward in performance levels. A fascinating rematch occurred at EBI 11 when Gordon Ryan took on the very tough and capable Vagner Rocha. The two had fought to a long draw around six months ago. Mr Ryan had done most of the attacking but was unable to finish his many attacks. In response we worked a lot on using leg attacks to create reversals into top position. Mr Ryan is extremely adept at creating top pressure combined with finely measured leg pummeling to free his legs and work to superior positions- the one he favors most is the back. This time he was not to be denied. Using some of the more basic elements of our back attack system he broke through and got the stranglehold that eluded him previously. This was a good sign of his continuing progress and that constant additions and refinements of tactics and techniques can make what seemed impossible yesterday, relatively simple today. @allinphoto @banevis

Squad style seminar in LA - Featuring Gordon Ryan: Fresh off his third EBI title this weekend, Gordon Ryan will be teaching a seminar this Saturday at my good friend and team mate, Shawn Williams dojo this Saturday March 11. I am very excited about this - it's a great opportunity for our Californian fans to see up close some NYC style jiu jitsu. Of all my students, Mr Ryan has the deepest knowledge of my back attack system. A common misunderstanding of our system is that it is merely a refinement of already existing systems. Mr Ryan will have no problems dispelling that misunderstanding with his deep knowledge of this critical aspect of our game. Mr Ryan, like all my senior students is very innovative and independent. He has developed many additional additional elements, not only of back attacks, but throughout his game, that go beyond my teachings and are his own invention - many of them are incredibly effective. One of my proudest days as a coach occurred when Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon taught some moves at a charity seminar in front of myself and My sensei, Renzo Gracie. Mr Gracie turned to me and said admiringly , "these guys teach like college professors." Mr Ryan excels (like all my students) in leg attacks, kimura, front headlock, triangle(sankaku) and armbar (Juji gatame). Whatever he chooses to teach, I promise you, you will learn and profit from. Hoping our Californian fans enjoy the seminar as much as the ebi show! You won't find a better teacher or a better host school in which to learn. 😊😊 @banevis @jeffreyschu

Two teams - a word of thanks: Squad Senpai Gordon Ryan put on a superb show Sunday night, showcasing his strangulation skills. It was a fine reflection of his individual progress and his team work with other squad members in preparation for the event. Such stand out performances are great for the sport. They inspire young developing athletes and give them a strong technical role model to follow. It is easy to focus all the attention on the athlete and his support team. There was however, a second team at the event on Sunday night, a team that does not get the spotlight, but whose work is every bit as important as the stars onstage - the EBI production team. These dedicated men and women operate in the background and always do their best to create a smooth running and efficient operation. Believe me, it's not easy. There are so many intangibles at a live sports event that it always seems miraculous to me that they get it done as well as they do. Were it not for the great work done by these people in building the infrastructure for the show and running it under the pressure of live performance - NONE OF OUR HARD WORK, TRAINING INNOVATIONS, PHILOSOPHY AND SKILLS WOULD EVER SEE THE LIGHT OF DAY AND WOULD REMAIN UNKNOWN IN A BASEMENT IN NYC. On behalf of the squad, to the entire ebi production staff, from team leaders Eddie Bravo and Victor Davila, all the way through the many hard working individuals carrying out crucial but thankless tasks that make it all happen - thank you 😊😊Thanks for a well run, innovative show that has let Grappling athletes have an exciting and well run event that can allow them to showcase the art we all love and put so much time into.

LA to NYC: There is always a surreal feeling about going from LA to coach an EBI show Sunday night, then red eye home to New York City to teach at Renzo Gracie Academy Monday morning and then on to The Bronx to teach at night. It's a marathon, but an instructive one. It shows very clearly the two faces of our sport. The core of it will always be the private face of the sport - the unheralded grind in the basement where the skills and attributes necessary for success are forged. The public face is that of competition (shiai), where those hard won skills and attributes can be rewarded with accolades and recognition attained. The glamor is in that public face, but the heart and soul of the sport is in the private face - that's why even though it's tiring, I love that red eye flight home to see the crew and get ready for the next challenge. Back to the hustle and bustle of freezing cold NYC, subway uptown, then on to the Bronx to work on those skills and attributes 😊😊 @allinphoto @jeffreyschu photos

Gordon Ryan wins EBI 11: Gordon Ryan won every match by submission tonight in LA to take his third EBI title - his first at his actual body weight of 170 pounds. He focused almost entirely on strangleholds, utilizing some of the more basic elements our back attack system and front headlock system to win the maximum possible prize money of twenty thousand dollars. It was his best training camp in a long time - no longer plagued by a lower abdominal problem that had made the previous few camps very tough, he took out a very tough Vagner Rocha with a superbly applied stranglehold in the finals. Team mate Oliver Taza braves a severe knee injury suffered in his last week of training and lost a close match in overtime via riding time, but impressed me with his heart and composure under very tough circumstances- he will rest and then come back to show off his skills in the future. Thanks again to the staff of EBI who always do such a fine job of putting on an exciting production. Mr Eddie Bravo, Viktor Davila and his crew did it again - filling a new venue and creating a really exciting event and atmosphere. There was a very exciting debut for the combat jiu jitsu tonight - i will discuss that soon. Thank you all for your support from the squad! Hope you enjoyed the show! 😊😊🍾🍾😊😊@jeffreyschu

My original competing Grappling student, Eddie Cummings, will be teaching a seminar at Musclepharm headquarters in Denver Colorado. Mr Cummings has spent the most time of all my competing students in private classes with me. He has an unparalleled knowledge of my leg lock system. Unfortunately his incredible success with leg locks in top level level competition has blinded most people to his skills in upper body submissions. In this sense he is something of a victim of his own success! He also has a very strong positional game with excellent guard retention and passing skills. Mr Cummings, like all my best students, is an extremely inventive fellow who has gone beyond my teachings and has many very effective variations of his favorite skills and positions that are uniquely his own. On top of all this, his background in academia makes him a truly fine teacher - he can really take his knowledge and make it accessible to you. If you can make it to Denver Colorado, take the time to learn from this man - you will get a deep insight into the squads philosophy, tactics and methods. New York City style in Denver - you will love it! 😊😊

All done: Both Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza weighed in successfully at 169 pounds - now some down time and final preparation for the big show tonight. This will be the first LA ebi show not run at the traditional LA venue, the orpheum theater. Instead it will be at the Florentine Gardens - looking forward to a new venue and another chance for the squad to showcase skills and a philosophy @jeffreyschu

The Squad rolls deep in LA: On the way to EBI weigh ins - everyone on weight and walking tall. Nicky and Gordon Ryan testing out the Rolls Royce Silver Phantom coup - back seat big enough for some ashi garami drills I am sure 😊😊

It's a dogs life: Tough day of training at the mansion for our two bull dog buddies who appear to be very unimpressed by our ashi garami drills. After a grueling day of chilling at the pool, feasting on some A grade steak and testing out the new bed with a series of power naps, the bull dogs collapse in exhaustion. It's not easy being top dog in Beverly Hills 😂😂

The squad gets a last workout in prior to EBI 11: The squad always loves to head down to teammate Shawn Williams' dojo in Korea Town LA whenever preparing for competition out west. We went over some extensive sweeping drills from bottom position into submission. Now it's time to watch what happens at UFC 209 to see the future direction of the welterweight division and then last minute ebi 11 preparation- mostly weight cutting.

Rolling to the gym - Beverley Hills style: Staying at friends house in Beverly Hills gives the squad some uncharacteristic luxury prior to training at Shawn Williams academy later today. Young Nicky Ryan looks like he's taken a shine to those cars! I bravely battled the ferocious guard dogs before stepping into the Rolls Royce to go practice ashi garami, front head lock, Kimura, Juji gatame and sankaku drills with the squad 😊😊 I'm used to the squalor of the NYC subway as the means to getting to a gym - a blue dungeon in NYC - this Californian sunshine and extravagance takes some getting used to! 😜😜😂😂

On the road again: Back at JFK airport - bound for LA and EBI 11. Looking forward to meeting up with the squad out West and getting to the big show. Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza have trained extremely well and are looking to showcase their skills squad style on stage. Plane is boarding - time to go 😊😊

Rising to the top: As a coach I always love to watch the most essential dynamic of a healthy training room - the work done by junior students (kohai) to rise to senior status (Senpai). Watching the growth of the juniors is always uplifting to me as a coach and is the best feedback I get as to the relative health of the training program I run. A notable addition to the ranks of the kohai is a young student of my great friend and teammate Matt Serra, Jason Rau. He came to us with a strong positional game and has taken to our methods very well indeed. Keep your eye on the progress of this talented young man. Next week he will compete in a tournament that has helped launch so many of our kohai to the next level - Sapeteiro 7. It will feature a sixteen man tournament featuring many outstanding grapplers, some of whom are in this weekends EBI event. It will be at a weight of 175 pounds and the athletes will duke it out for two thousand shekels in what should be a thrilling experience for the competitors and the fans. I'm looking forward to a display of skills from Mr Rau blending old school positional skill with squad style submission work 😊😊Working out with him are fellow kohai Matthew Tesla and Frankie Rosenthal along with MMA legend Jake Shields - here they work their armlock Juji gatame drills before getting into sparring

Fireworks: There is no bigger show than the UFC and this weekends UFC looks like it will be a great event. Two of my favorite divisions, welterweight and lightweight will get some much needed clarity and closure after recent disorder. The majority draw in the first match between Tyron Woodley and Steven Thompson prevented Demian Maia from getting his much deserved title shot, but hopefully now we shall get a positive result and the welterweight division can move forward. Georges St-Pierre always told me Mr Thompson was the best standing striker he ever saw or worked with, but Mr Woodley did extremely well with him in the standing position in the first fight. Both men can hit well from extreme distances, covering vast amounts of ground to land blows - one with crushing one punch KO power, the other with stunning accuracy and timing. The bout I am most interested in is at light weight. I have always been extremely impressed by Khabib Nurmamogedov. His takedown and ground control skills are of the highest level. Several people I know in the industry whose word I trust have told me numerous stories of Mr Nurmamogedov dominating very highly ranked athletes in weight divisions above his own. He has a smothering control that makes his opponents look powerless in comparison. On the other hand, his opponent, Tony Ferguson has a fascinating style based around scrambles and devastating attacks as he directs those scrambles in ways that few opponents can keep up with. One fighter is a master of control - the other is a master of chaos- this is going to be very interesting indeed!

The Return: UFC President Mr Dana White publicly announced today what has been negotiated back and forth over the last few months between his company and Georges St-Pierre - a return to the octagon that would involve something new and extraordinarily challenging. That new challenge will be a rise in weight class against the new middleweight champion, Micheal Bisping. Mr Bisping won a sensational match via knockout over Luke Rockhold to add to a hard fought win over the greatest middleweight of all time, Anderson Silva and a subsequent win over middleweight legend Dan Henderson. Mr Bisping started his career as a light heavyweight, but dropped down to become a huge middle weight. In contrast, Mr St-Pierre is by contemporary standards an average size welterweight with a walk around weight of 192 pounds his entire career. Interestingly his win over Dan Henderson made Mr Bisping the athlete with the most wins in UFC history - overtaking Mr St-Pierre in this distinction (though Mr St-Pierre has far fewer losses). Going up weight divisions is always a tricky affair as the danger of injury in training with bigger partners goes up and the penalty for making mistakes in a match is higher, but Mr St-Pierre is determined to push forward into the challenge and take this new phase of his career in this interesting new direction. He has been doing well in his grappling training and is still in great shape despite three years away from professional fighting- two great champions, both beginning their careers at roughly the same time, both outspoken proponents of better testing for PED's in MMA, both holding at some time the record for wins in the octagon, one much bigger than the other - this should be interesting! 😊😊

Tough day at the office: With EBI 11 coming up this Sunday, training has been going at a high gear these last few weeks. Today Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza locked horns with the outstanding Jake Shields and Mathew Tesla among others to test in live sparring the techniques and strategies the squad develops for the big shows. The competitors list for EBI 11 welterweight event is very impressive indeed - getting ready for the intensity of top level grappling whilst maintaining athlete safety in the final days is always a delicate balancing act. Professionalism and prioritizing the show over the gym is the key to getting it right.

Recently I was asked to appear in a scene in the TV show "Billions." The scene required us to show a beginner in jiu jitsu in a first introductory lesson. The writers asked me if there was a move that represented well the general nature of the sport to a wide audience, most of whom know nothing about it. My answer was a confident "yes" - Juji jime- the cross collar strangle performed from the mounted position. My reasoning was this - the classical approach to jiu jitsu involves taking an opponent to the floor where he is more easily controlled, then working past his legs, through a hierarchy of pins culminating in the mount or rear mount. From there, applying a submission hold to end the fight. I chose Juji jime because beginning jiu jitsu should always be in a gi, both for practical and cultural /historical reasons, and of course Juji jime requires a jacket. Moreover, strangleholds represent the notion of a bloodless and relatively painless victory - one of the key features of jiu jitsu. Even a naive viewer would be able to recognize the value of the mounted position, the effectiveness of a stranglehold and the virtue of victory without the need for bludgeoning a foe to bloody defeat. On a deeper level - to those who DO study the art, I chose Juji jime because it represents something very different - the notion of PROGRESSIVE BASICS. Juji jime was taught to us all in our very first beginner classes - yet we will all be using it until our last days in the sport - refining it, perfecting it, learning all of its subtleties and nuances. THE BEST TECHNIQUES IN OUR SPORT TAKE A FEW MOMENTS TO LEARN, BUT A LIFETIME TO PERFECT. This notion of path from beginner to expert is perfectly represented by Juji jime from mount - the tokui waza (favorite technique) of the great Roger Gracie. In his hands it was anything but a beginners move - it was an unstoppable engine of destruction that he used repeatedly at world championship level and taught the jiu jitsu world the value of building upon the beginners foundation in the sport and over time, making it the most advanced move of them all.

Teammates and Countrymen: It was a fine weekend for the Canadian section of the squad! Kohai teammates Oliver Taza and Ethan Crelinsten have been doing what all kohai (junior students) must seek to do - build up their skills to a point where they become Senpai (seniors). Mr Crelinsten has been training and competing brilliantly at local level as part of his climb to the top. He is developing well along the lines we exhibit - to demonstrate control leading to submission across the entire body, with equal facility from top or bottom position. Today he was able to win every match in regulation time by submission at the Radius Invitational in Connecticut. Normally Mr Crelinsten competes at 135 pounds - but today he entered at 155 to test his mettle against bigger and stronger opponents. He took on and defeated local standouts Ian Murray, Zach Masslany and Jon Battle to win the eight man tournament and take home one thousand shekels! He did it by working utilizing advanced elements of our back attack system that he has been working very hard upon and developing impressive prowess. It is always great to see the marriage of ambition and work ethic and tinder it rewarded with success. Well done to our Canadian athletes who travel so far to work on the skills that take them ever closer to their goals.

Building to a peak: A critical part of contest success is the notion of progression to a peak performance on given date of competition. This of course, is the basis behind the idea of a camp in preparation for a bout. Often a very valuable part of this notion of peaking is the use of preparatory bouts before the main event to help prepare you for what you consider may be problematic elements in the main upcoming event. Outstanding kohai student Oliver Taza is making his EBI debut on March 5th. As one of the smaller welterweights he wanted to prepare himself for the physical intensity of top level grappling - a part of the game that often surprises debutants. Accordingly he entered a superfight this weekend against bigger and stronger UFC Middle weight Caio Magalhaes (if Mr Taza did MMA it would be at lightweight). Mr Magalhaes is a blackbelt in jiu jitsu from the great Nova Uniao team and grappling was his MMA foundation. In a very tough physical match, fought inside a cage, Mr Taza worked his way to an excellent submission win via heel hook variation after twelve minutes of hard fought action. An excellent result in itself - but all the more so as preparation for the main event and the physicality to be expected there.

EBI 11 camp runs into an unexpected problem...

One selfie - four UFC fighters: UFC standout Rafael "Sapo" Natal takes the selfie of the year at the afternoon class as the squad prepares for upcoming events. Mr Natal is joined by UFC brothers past and present, Jake Shields, who has just moved to NYC to train full time with the squad, David Branch, two division WSOF champion who has just signed with the UFC and begins his run to to the top at 185 pounds , and squad OG, Georges St-Pierre, on the comeback trail. Great afternoon of training in the blue basement - so much ambition, so much potential. These are men who know that ambition, passion, drive, discipline guided by a sensible plan, can create greatness in the gym and build the confidence to take it from the gym to the world stage and do something truly great. Where else can you find a random scene like this on an average Thursday afternoon? #onlyatrenzos 😊😜😊

Drilling for perfection: An interesting feature of our sport is that when moves are performed well, there is a feeling of "fitting in correctly" that is unmistakable. Even relatively inexperienced students can feel a well performed move locking into place. So too, imperfections are obvious to perceive as your partner can wriggle free easily by exploiting whatever mechanical imperfections you have made. When drilling, STUDENTS MUST BE MINDFUL OF ACTIVELY SEEKING TO FIND THAT PERFECT "FIT IN" WHERE THE GEOMETRY OF THEIR BODY FITS EFFECTIVELY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF THEIR WORKOUT PARTNERS BODY IN A WAY THAT CREATES THE TIGHTNESS OF FIT THAT ENSURES SUCCESS. That is why I don't have my students drill for numbers of repetitions or for time. When numbers or time are the goal they will focus on that rather than on mechanical form. When I see mechanical form is at a satisfactory level - I move them on to something else - I am not guided by time or numbers. Here Georges St-Pierre works on his front triangle (omote sankaku) on a standing opponent - a situation that requires particularly close attention to correct mechanical form if it is to succeed

Loneliness in a crowded room: Gordon Ryan and Oliver Taza take some time out to reflect on what they must get done in an early morning training session for EBI 11 - The first EBI of 2017, the first EBI for Mr Taza, the first welterweight EBI for Mr Ryan and the first time two squad members have allowed to compete in the same EBI event since EBI 6. The juxtaposition between jiu jitsu as a sport trained as a team, but fought as individuals, is a strong one. These two battle every day, as do all members of the squad - keeping a spirit of camaraderie and mutual benefit is the key to preventing it becoming a free for all with team cohesion falling to a degree where the entire training program degenerates. Each athlete has different skills and attributes - I coach a very recognizable general approach to the game, but I also recognize the importance of self expression and individuality if an athlete is to maximize his potential. In a room where everyone follows and believes the same general philosophy, it is crucial to keep that sense of how you are going to do things your way and find a balance between shared beliefs and individuality. Hence I like to see my athletes in those lonely moments of self reflection before and after training. Those quiet moments have a way of leading to the buzz and roar of the crowd at showtime

"You think he's gonna get that ashi garami?"
"Nope - not even close."
😊😂😜🤣😊
Another day of skill development, joined by one of the most skillful of them all - creating some memorable coaching moments. My favorite? Mr St-Pierre watching Garry Tonon miss an inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami and telling him, "I am not impressed by your performance. " 😂😂😜😜😂😂

Three the hard way: If you are to accomplish anything great in life, be prepared to work hard over time with a sound plan. Outstanding kohai students Oliver Taza and Stanley Rosa both have ambitions. Mr Taza will compete soon in the upcoming welterweight EBI alongside Gordon Ryan. Every Monday he trains three classes with me (in addition to the rest of the week). The first two at RGA in midtown Manhattan and the last at night all the way up in the Bronx at my student and friend, Doug Pelinkovic's Dojo. Up at 6am for the first class and getting home at 11pm to get ready for the next day's training. Many people have ambition, but only a few have the discipline, patience and work ethic to make those ambitions reality. It helps a lot to have equally ambitious and hard working partners. Here Mr Taza works with one of his best training partners, Stanley Rosa, as I push them through front headlock drills and then into sparring. I always like to see dojo friendships build between like minded athletes - the road to the top is a long one - but easier when walked in good company.

Theory and practice: As a general rule I like to start my athletes training sessions with a clear sense of what we are trying to accomplish - What are the skills we are trying to develop and how they are important to our approach to the game? Only then do we get into the physical practice. I generally find the athletes do a much better job of practicing a given move if they have a clear understanding of how that move relates to their overall game and the mechanical features that make it work. As we go to drill a given move I will first outline the main points I want them to emphasize as they work, common errors to avoid and the context in which to apply such a move relative to our game as a whole. In this way you can avoid aimless drilling sessions where the move is done for repetitions and the emphasis degenerates into filling quota numbers rather than mechanical understanding. The former merely fills time, only the latter improves performance. Here I work exactly this kind of practice session with young athlete Mikey Wilson. Though only ten years of age, he carries himself with adult maturity so I teach him as an adult. He works our back attack system with fifteen year old Nicky Ryan, who excels in this position. By the time the session finishes he has far more than a set of repetitions- he has a solid theoretical understanding of the position and the physical skills to implement that knowledge and teach it to others.

Comeback: Founding member of the squad, Georges St-Pierre will be returning to UFC competition. Mr St-Pierre has always privately expressed interest in a return to professional fighting to his coaches. His original reason for retirement was most due to the virtually uncontrolled use of PEDs in MMA competition. The UFC has, through its partnership with USADA, made considerable progress in this area. While not perfect, the situation is definitely better than three years ago. After some hiccups in negotiating a return, a deal has been signed and Mr St-Pierre will begin moving forward towards competition. Returning to top level competition is never an easy thing in any sport. as the old saying goes, time is a cruel thief who robs us of our former selves. The skills of MMA are highly perishable and getting them back after three years of inactivity and two major knee operations is a difficult task indeed - made more so by the speed at which the sport itself changes and evolves. However, if there is one person to do it, it is Mr St-Pierre. He will take on the challenge with his usual drive and perfectionism. It is not yet settled who his first opponent shall be, nor the time it shall be fought, but as soon as Mr St-Pierre is ready, training and preparation will begin in earnest. It will be interesting watching the younger squad members work in grappling with Mr St-Pierre, and then Mr St-Pierre with them in MMA. I am sure there will be some memorable training sessions!

New look, old lesson: The Renzo Gracie Academy has a new look with some very nice mural photo displays of Sensei Gracie up on display! Here we are clowning about in front of a large rendition of my favorite photo of Sensei 😊😊taken in the aftermath of his submission win over the great Pat Militich, one of five UFC champions he defeated in the course of his career. Interestingly, Sensei used his tokui-Waze (favorite move) - the arm in guillotine strangle to win that night. In training for the match he badly damaged a nerve in the shoulder and neck on his strong side and so could not perform his favorite move. Mid match he maneuvered his body to the other side and performed the guillotine on his weak side. Such was the depth of his technical knowledge of the technique, he was able to secure and finish the move even without the physicality he normally was able to apply to it. This kind of physical adaptability through knowledge is critical in a sport where circumstances often demand that we work outside our comfort zones. If you only have a PHYSICAL understanding of a given move, you will find it difficult to coach yourself through its application on your weaker side in an emergency. All those years of teaching the mechanical aspects of the guillotine came through that night as Mr Gracie patiently worked his way through the move and gained one of his greatest victories.

Smooth Operator: The most important gauge of how well you are progressing in jiu jitsu will always be your performance in sparring and contests against a wide range of opponents. Some athletes can have a rough and tumble style and be very effective with it. There is a lot to be said however, for a smooth, aesthetically pleasing style (provided it is effective of course). Indeed, I would go further and say that aesthetics can be linked to performance. Smoothness is suggestive of EFFICIENCY- which is a huge factor in performance. I always encourage my athletes to work with aesthetics in mind. I find that pride in the aesthetics of their work creates a mindset where they constantly look for efficiency in movement - a mindset that will greatly benefit their long term development in the sport. Here, outstanding kohai student, Oliver Taza shows fine form with a very efficient drop into ashi garami followed by heel hook variation. His relaxed demeanor makes for a smooth entry into the move that does not convey his intentions to his opponent in this very short match at a recent local grappling event. Mr Taza is preparing for his EBI debut in less than a month and used this contest as part of his preparation for the big show.

A different kind of show: Normally when the squad talks about an upcoming show, they are talking about a grappling or MMA event. Recently however, I had the opportunity to work on a very different kind of show - the popular TV show "Billions" Season 2 starting up this week, will feature jiu jitsu and hopefully expose our beloved sport to a very different audience. The cast and crew of the show were extremely professional and enthusiastic and did a fine job of bringing jiu jitsu related themes into the show. Writer and producer David Levien in particular used his jiu jitsu training to great effect to create realistic scenes that carry a message and influence the action. Star Paul Giamatti greatly impressed me by training for his scenes and going through considerable discomfort to master some moves and do an amazing job of portraying the trials and experiences of a beginner in our sport. He was a genuinely nice fascinating person - deeply cerebral and wide ranging in his interests and knowledge. Here he talks me through the basics of acting while I talk him through the basics of strangulation- a fair swap 😉😜 As the squad always says - hope you enjoy the show!!

Senpai returns to inspire the room: Its always a pleasure to see old friends return to the training room. They bring knowledge and experience and something more - the ability to inspire via example. None more so than the most senior (Senpai) student of them all - Georges St-Pierre. Mr St-Pierre came in to train the morning class - the class he used to come to years ago in preparation for his first world title run. Today he drilled and mixed with a new generation of athletes in a different sport - submission grappling - but the presence of a man who reached so far and who wants to reach further still adds an electricity to the training room that always warms my cold heart. That path from the gym to the big stage is one that every professional athlete must trod. None spent more time on that trail than Mr St-Pierre and none went further. What a great example to the kohai (juniors) as they make their own way towards their respective goals.

Back in Black: Nicky Ryan had a great weekend - winning first place honors in the Global Grappling League submission only event in Ithaca NY yesterday. Mr Ryan traveled upstate with Team mate Oliver Taza. Mr Ryan competed in the eight man elimination 145 pound division. He won his first two matches with a stranglehold and Achilles lock before taking on the very talented Junny Ocasio, fighting out of Unity gym in NYC. Mr Ryan won a thrilling decision in overtime on riding time advantage to take first place. As always it's a pleasure to see the kohai (junior students) going out and performing so well in local tournaments as they make the improvements to get to their goals. Mr Ryan has been training very well and continues to amaze me with his development for such a young man - just fifteen and competing in adult divisions and doing so well. 😊😊

Jiu jitsu and human spirit: Some of the best experiences I have had through jiu jitsu have nothing to do with competition or titles, but instead work at the level of social work and human advancement. A dear student of mine, Claude Levy, often travels to Africa for work and family. When a true jiu jitsu student travels, jiu jitsu travels with him! Mr Levy often teaches friends and impromptu classes with locals in the kingly art. The amazing thing about jiu jitsu is that as soon as people feel it, they immediately take note of its value - even if they have no prior experience. Getting jiu jitsu out into the world is always a good thing. Who knows - a spark can light a fire and a fire can become a blaze and a blaze become an inferno. Who is to say where the next great champion will come from? Is it not possible that casual exposure to a new art could not set in motion events that could create something truly significant? That is why I love to see students carry jiu jitsu wherever they go. Mr Levy teaches to games keepers who often use grappling technique to restrain poachers who threaten endangered African wildlife - a cause that is particularly dear to my heart. Every serious jiu jitsu student has a teacher inside of them somewhere - the learning experience is so intense that we love to reenact it as teacher. Whilst competition may be the means of gaining distinction in jiu jitsu - There will always be more pleasure in jiu jitsu as a means of bringing people together than any competition.

Anticipation: The higher you go in the sport, the more you will seek to NARROW YOUR OPPONENTS OPTIONS INTO A FEW EASILY ANTICIPATED OPTIONS THAT YOU CAN NULLIFY BEFORE THEY CAN BE EMPLOYED. This is the path of the jiu jitsu expert. At the onset of a match, things can go in any direction. Your task is take events in a direction you desire and to gradually limit your opponents options until the only option left is to tap in defeat or face the consequences. Thus GAINING THE INITIATIVE AND THEN FROM THERE, PROGRESSIVELY LIMITING YOUR OPPONENTS CHOICES UNTIL HE HAS NO CHOICE is the mark of superior jiu jitsu. Nowhere is this methodology more clearly seen than in the case of submission holds. For any given submission hold, there are a few main avenues of escape. It is never enough to merely apply the hold on a skilled opponent - YOU MUST GO THE EXTRA DISTANCE AND APPLY THE HOLD IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU BLOCK THE ANTICIPATED COUNTERS BEFORE THEY OCCUR. You must study the counters to your favorite submissions and look for ways to stop those common counters whilst still applying the original hold. Here, Garry Tonon locks on a tight triangle stranglehold (sankaku jime) and immediately goes the extra distance to nullify the standard counters to triangles. This power of anticipation is made possible by imposing your moves and thus limiting your opponents options for movement. This cycle of imposition and anticipation is at the heart of good jiu jitsu.

Beginners class: Usually I teach the advanced classes at RGA in NYC. Sometimes however, I get asked to substitute in a beginners class when another instructor is sick or out of town. I always jump on the opportunity when it arises. There is something magical about a beginners class. It immediately returns you to the most important aspects of the sport and brings back the feelings of wonder you had when you first began in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. When teaching advanced students, my main focus is to get them TO IMPOSE THEIR GAME UPON THEIR OPPONENT. Beginners however, lack the skills to do this, and so here my main focus will always be PREVENTING AN OPPONENT FROM IMPOSING HIS GAME UPON YOU. Interestingly, the lessons of the beginner class have primacy - for in all truth, YOU WILL NEVER IMPOSE YOUR GAME UPON ANYONE IF YOU CANNOT FIRST PREVENT THEM FROM IMPOSING THEIR GAME UPON YOU. Those early days in the sport, as frustrating as they often are, we we get pinned and controlled and have no idea how to get out, are the essential part of a journey that perhaps one day will see you able to impose your will upon whoever is in front of you.

Little school - big dreams: Bronx NYC: So often people tell me they need to get to a bigger and better school to realize their dreams. Or they see some new equipment, different gi's, mats, exercise equipment etc etc. In fact the single most important factor in determining how far you go in jiu jitsu or any other endeavor is PASSION. Only if you are sufficiently passionate about what you do will you put in the requisite training time, research, auxiliary work, and overcome the inevitable disappointments and heartbreak needed to excel. No amount of fancy exercise equipment, world class instruction and training partners will ever make up for a lack of underlying passion. Passion is the soil in which the other elements needed for progress towards your goals are nourished, take root and grow towards the sky. I am often astounded by the high level of visitors to RGA in NYC who train in small local gyms and yet display skills out of proportion to their pedigree. Their passion for the sport made them take the extra steps and despite seeming disadvantages, they made great progress. Always remember that my teacher Renzo Gracie spent more than half of his time in the USA teaching out of rented kung fu studios, racquet ball courts, drug rehab buildings, exercise gyms and any other place that would have us, before he settled into our current location. IN THAT TIME HE PRODUCED THREE JIU JITSU/GRAPPLING WORLD CHAMPIONS AND NUMEROUS HIGH LEVEL BLACKBELTS WHILST FIGHTING PROFESSIONALLY AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS. In all honesty I tell you - WHAT LIES INSIDE THE DOOR OF WHATEVER GYM YOU TRAIN IN IS NOT NEARLY AS IMPORTANT AS THE ATTITUDE INSIDE YOU THAT YOU BRING TO THAT DOOR AND ENTER WITH. Every Monday night I love to go up to the Bronx to see my dear friend, Doug Pelinkovic and help teach at his local school. The Bronx has a very different vibe from Manhattan where I work and live. In that small gym there is passion and dreams. Sometimes my students from Manhattan come up to get a third workout in for the day - here kohai standouts Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza share the mats with Stanley Rosa and the Bronx crew to work on the skills that can elevate them closer to their goals.

Kohai on the march: Matthew Tesla, kohai (junior) brown belt squad member, continues to make his push towards senior status. Yesterday at Grappling Industries NYC event he entered the open weight division featuring 25 athletes up to blackbelt, despite weighing only 175 pounds. He won 4 of his 5 matches via submission to win gold and an all expenses paid trip to Grappling Industries 2018 World Championships event in California 😊Mr Tesla has been working very diligently in the gym on his skills. This has created a newfound confidence that was apparent in his strong run to the medal podium. Here he latches on to the leg of his black belt opponent with a fine ashi garami and controls the action from entry to finish. So often students ask me about developing confidence. I always say that confidence follows naturally from ability. If you develop the skills - confidence will follow. Some will get that confidence earlier, some later, but if the ability is there, one day it will come, and when it does, great things happen.

Tapping - part 2: Garry Tonon got caught in a very nice triangle one week ago by a very talented athlete (Antonio Carlos Jr) and fought hard to get out but tapped when he could not. Mr Carlos Jr was caught in a triangle variation the week before by Gordon Ryan and tapped. A week after that Mr Tonon was ready to fight again and this time win. You can see that in a world of high volume matches, professionals will tap so that they can continue with their careers uninterrupted and go on to success just a short time later. If you fight at a high level, you will get caught, no matter how good you are. Better to tap and resume training immediately so that you can avoid the errors that got you in trouble and move on to a higher level of performance. Of course there can be factors that change this and make you very reluctant to tap, but in standard grappling competition this is the sensible approach and the one I always encourage my athletes to take. Here Garry Tonon enjoys the fruits of victory, a week after a loss, an hour after a win, ready to enjoy himself that night and train hard the next day in preparation for another bout in a few weeks. 😊😜🤕😉😃#cash/chicks/championships

Tapping - Part 1: The decision to tap out due to strangle or joint lock is a deeply personal one. I always encourage my athletes to tap immediately to avoid injury. My reasoning is that if you have been put in a finishing position the mistakes have already been made, once you believe those mistakes cannot be undone - tap - as this allows you to immediately begin training so that those mistakes can be avoided in a rematch. When the athlete refuses to tap to a joint lock there will be a considerable period of time where training is impossible and there may be damage that never fully recovers - both of which will make the rematch more difficult. I understand that in MMA things can be different as there is a generally higher intensity level and athletes fight much less often. In grappling, athletes can compete every week for months in some cases. Getting badly injured can cause considerable interruption to the athletes yearly competition schedule, so I think it's generally the smart option to tap as soon as damage becomes probable. Sometimes there are other factors, prize money, prestige, honor or animosity that can make an athlete refuse to tap. A good example occurred when AJ Agazarm refused to tap to a very tight knee bar attempt from Garry Tonon last night. The variation employed by Mr Tonon is particularly strong and the effects of it, and Mr Agazarm's decision not to tap, can be readily seen in the immediate aftermath. There is much to commend in bravery and a spirit of resistance, but this must also be balanced with a sense of professionalism in a sport where the athlete may have to perform many times a year and train year round. Hats off to both men for a fine and dramatic show of technique against mental toughness.

A win for the G in a Gi: Last night in California, Garry Tonon defeated AJ Agazarm in a hastily arranged match after both competitors had their initial opponents pull out at the last minute. The match was notable for being in a gi - Mr Agazarm insisted on this knowing that Mr Tonon has not trained in one for years and that it would prevent him using one of his favorite weapons - the heel hook. In the end it made no difference- Mr Tonon took the fight to Mr Agazarm utilizing other elements of his submission arsenal, especially his kimura and knee bar, to put Mr Agazarm under extreme pressure and win a unanimous decision victory. The two have a history and do not enjoy each other's company, so the match had an intensity that the crowd enjoyed. As he does so often, Mr Tonon took on a challenge at an apparent disadvantage and prevailed in an entertaining and memorable way - showing that technical sophistication and entertainment don't have to be opposites. Well done to Fight2Win for their production and getting the most out of a show beset by last minute withdrawals. I wonder if wearing the gi again made Mr Tonon a little nostalgic...

Changes: It's been a strange week or two for the squad. At the Sapeteiro 6 event won by Gordon Ryan we had at least four of the main competitors pull out on short notice. Then the next week at SUG 3 Garry Tonon was offered three different opponents in a week due to pull outs, Gordon Ryan was offered two. Now this week at Fight2Win again there are numerous pull outs. Gabriel Arges, the very talented world champion has had to pull out of a much anticipated match with Garry Tonon due to late training injury. Gordon Ryan had defeated Mr Arges via heel hook in the past, but Mr Arges has won many matches over opponents of the highest level since then - it would have been a great match. Jeff Monson had to pull out of his match with ADCC gold and silver medalist Joao Assis. For a moment it appeared that Gordon Ryan would come in on 24 hours notice to take on Mr Assis in what would have been a fascinating battle, but Mr Assis declined, understandably citing a need for additional training time to face Mr Ryan. Then Bill Cooper pulled out of his match with AJ Agazarm. In the end we are left with a rather strange match up - Garry Tonon vs AJ Agazarm IN A GI!! 😜😂 This should be interesting. Mr Agazarm has spent a significant amount of time training with our team, but that was always no gi. Mr Tonon never had a problem with him in that context, but Mr Tonon has not trained seriously in a gi in a very long time. Add to this that Mr Agazarm has a rather low opinion of Mr Tonon's skills, whilst Mr Tonon has an even lower opinion of Mr Agazarms skills and will be cornered by our dear friend Jake Shields, who has an even lower opinion of both Mr Agazarms skills and character and cheered on by Mr Ryan who has the lowest opinion of Mr Agazarm of them all 😂😂😂 This one may turn into a dog fight! Mostly we like matches that appeal to us because of technical and tactical elements on display encased in the sportsmanship of jiu jitsu - every now and then we just like to see two people that don't like each other go at it 😜😜 - I have a feeling this match will be the latter type 😂😂 I can't wait to see if Garry remembers how to tie a belt properly 😉😜

Degree of difficulty: Simply winning is not the goal of great grapplers. If victory is all you seek, just fight weak opponents. In this way you will always be victorious - AND NO ONE WILL CARE. The real goal is winning against great opponents. That is what gets people's attention. We are judged not just by winning, but by the degree of difficulty associated with winning. No grappling athlete does more to find challenging matches than Garry Tonon. Due to the fact that so few athletes his own size will match him, he almost always has to fight extremely talented opponents many weight classes above him. This Friday on California at Fight to Win Pro is no exception. Mr Tonon will take on the extremely talented Gabriel Arges, world champion in both gi and no gi jiu jitsu. Mr Arges has an extremely impressive game, including some of the best leg locking skills in IBJJF competition. He has submitted current ADCC world champion Claudio Calasans with a superb knee bar at the world championships. He normally competes at 194 pounds - so as always it seems, he will have a considerable weight advantage over Mr Tonon, whose normal weight category is 155, along with a significant height advantage. Due to the fact that he fought just last week in Portland, Mr Tonon could not return to NYC to train in preparation for this match, but has been preparing with friends in California. The format of the match is an interesting one - ten minutes of sub only followed by referees decision based upon submission attempts and positional control. I will fly out to California tomorrow to corner him. It is great to see the many grappling shows getting stronger. The west coast is definitely leading the way here with several strong organizations, each offering different and very interesting formats for the athletes to showcase their skills.

Variation: A common strand of thinking that I observe in coaches and athletes is the idea that there is a correct way of performing a given move and any deviation from that is a step in the wrong direction. This kind of sentiment works well in a beginners class where you are trying to give students a firm foundation upon which to take their first steps, but as you progress higher in the sport, there comes a realization that there is almost always more than one correct way of performing that move. Much more important than the move itself is the set of MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES that underly the move. BEGINNERS TRY TO STAY TRUE TO THE MOVE AS IT WAS SHOWN TO THEM, BUT EXPERTS TRY TO STAY TRUE TO THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES BEHIND THE MOVE AND WORK FROM THERE. This allows them considerable leeway in their actual performance of any given move so that fascinating variations and improvisations can occur, but which still work in accordance with the essential mechanical foundations upon which the move is based. This sometimes has amusing consequences - you will see a beginner claiming a world champion is performing a move incorrectly because he is using a variation different from the one he was shown, but in truth, that champion is operating in accordance with the same over arching principles. Here kohai brown belt student, Stanley Rosa, an outstanding young instructor of Bronx Martial Art academy under my good friend Doug Pelinkovic, performs a fascinating variation of kimura into a powerful submission win over outstanding Pedro Sauer black belt David Porter at a recent grappling show. Unorthodox leg and hip positioning does not prevent him staying true to the critical features of a strong kimura attack as you can see from the impressive power he generates in very little time.

Reflections on my sensei: Innovation in jiu jitsu: My sensei, Renzo Gracie had a very broad repertoire of technique and always sought to add new moves to his arsenal. Like all jiu jitsu players however, he had his tokui-waza (favorite moves) that he would call upon in critical situations. There is no question that the move he is best known for is his arm in guillotine. It allowed him to prevail in two of the most defining moments of his career - against the much larger Sanae Kikuta in a 52 minute battle in Japan, and against the great Pat Militich. When I consider my sensei's version of the versatile guillotine strangle, I am always deeply impressed by its mechanical perfection and the smoothness and subtlety of his set ups. I believe the development of Mr Gracie's arm in guillotine can teach us much about the nature of innovation in an art where almost everything has been done by people before us. When Mr Gracie arrived in the US in 1995, he rarely used any form of guillotine and certainly did not have any arm in guillotine - so clearly it was not something he learned in Brazil with the rest of his jiu jitsu. Nor was he the first person to employ the arm in guillotine - the first time I saw it done was by Oleg Taktarov in UFC 6 in his first match with Steve Beneteau, and I am sure there are probably examples before that which I am not aware of. Nonetheless, in the mid 1990's, the arm in guillotine was rarely seen and certainly not a standard technique in the sport. As his professional career developed and more of his training time was spent in no gi training, Mr Gracie played with many ways to grip opponents in ways that allowed submissions and sweeps from bottom position. One of his favorites became the front headlock position. As he played with it he had some initial success from that position and thus began his investigation into the arm in guillotine. As months became years he built a game around the position, entries, control and finishes, that covered every possible reaction an opponent could make. MOST INNOVATION IN JIU JITSU IS NOT BEING THE FIRST, BUT IN ADVANCING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE IN WAYS THAT IMPROVE PERFORMANCE

Nice work Mr Sonnen: Chael Sonnen is doing a good job with his fledgling grappling show and tonight put on an entertaining show that featured some very nice grappling action showcasing the area between MMA and grappling using EBI rules format to create fast paced matches with plenty of action. Squad members Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan were there. Mr Ryan took on Kentucky leg locking specialist Joe Baize. He told me prior to the match he would limit himself to guillotines and juji/sankaku (armbar/triangle) finishes. That is a very challenging way to enter a match - but he did it with a nicely applied juji out of sankaku control. Mr Tonon fought a tough match against his much larger opponent, Antonio Carlos Jr. All credit to Mr Carlos Jr. He hit a splendid flying sankaku and finished it in excellent fashion to win a fine victory. Sometimes fighting at the highest levels can be a topsy turvy experience - just last week, Gordon Ryan defeated Mr Carlos Jr via sankaku (a different variation) at Sapeteiro 6. When very talented athletes fight, just one little error or miscalculation can determine the result and so there can be total shifts in victories and losses within a week, as happened here - that's what makes the sport so interesting! Now the squad must go into training for more matches next weekend in California 😊😊

Walking the walk: Our team often talks about taking on bigger, stronger opponents to prove the efficacy of our methods. No one does this better than Garry Tonon. His opponent, IBJJF world champion and UFC standout, Antonio Carlos Jr, a man who has defeated Bernardo Faria, Leandro Lo and Romulo Barral on multiple occasions, including by submission, weighed in for tonight's event in Portland Mat 230 pounds. Garry Tonon weighed in heavier than usual - 170 pounds. This will be the biggest weight difference he has had to contend with since he fought Buchecha in ADCC when he had just been awarded his black belt. Adding to the difficulty is a big height advantage to Mr Carlos Jr. People can say whatever they want about Mr Tonon, but they can never criticize his willingness to back up his words with action and showcase the art against bigger opponents. In this last week he was matched against three men for tonight's event - Hector Lombard, Chael Sonnon and Mr Carlos Jr - each one far bigger and stronger and than him and each one bigger than the one before him. The first two had to pull out, leaving the biggest and best qualified. No one his own size would accept the match, but Mr Tonon as always accepted whoever he was offered. He and Gordon Ryan have trained very well - now it's on to the stage - this time a cage - and under the lights

To the winner go the spoils: Kohai student Jonathan "JC" Calestine put on his best competition display yet today, winning the 145 pound division of The Finishers Tournament 3 - a popular local event. It included outstanding local grapplers such as JM Holland, Mike Davila and John Battle, but JC was able to get past them all to win the first place honors. JC has always looked good in the gym - Eddie Cummings often insists that I match him with JC as often as possible when he is preparing for big events as he believes JC is the most difficult among the Kohai to finish. Today he was able to let his gym skills shine on the stage and gain victory - with many more to follow I am sure. Great work JC and great work by the shows organizers for drawing such strong local talent into an event that provides ideal training for those looking to gain the kind of experience they will need to rise to the top.

There's no business like show business: Tomorrow night in Portland Oregon, MMA's greatest showman, Chael Sonnen will run the show at Submission Underground - but the squad will look to be the ones putting on the show 😜 Garry Tonon takes on Brazilian jiu jitsu and MMA standout, Antonio Carlos Jr - a powerful athlete far bigger and stronger than himself who has beaten some of the biggest names in IBJJf competition and who brings a very exciting set of submission skills. Gordon Ryan takes on Kentucky Leg lock specialist Joe Baize, who had a sterling performance at EBI 8. Rules will be standard EBI, but with a shortened time limit of only eight minutes. It will be interesting to see how this affects the work rate and pacing of the matches. Mr Sonnen is doing a fine job of integrating the area between MMA and grappling in his shows and has a natural sense of how to get people's attention in ways that will grow the sport. Our team is interested to see how the use of a cage will affect the matches. This is the first time the squad has had to grapple in a cage. Both our opponents have extensive MMA experience and thus expertise in cage work - that will definitely makes things interesting. A core element of our style is that great jiu jitsu must have an aesthetic element to it in addition to its effectiveness. Our team loves to put on a show. Of course the result will always be paramount, but we train to create a dynamic game that always pushes towards submission - this makes the squad natural showmen. In amateur sports the only thing of value is the result - this gives it an admirable purity. The idea of a professional sport - a sport that people see as ENTERTAINMENT, a medium of entertainment that people pay to watch, requires that the athlete do more than win - he must win a fashion that MAKES PEOPLE WANT TO WATCH. This is a difficult requirement, but one which every professional athlete must work on. Each must find their own way. Ours will always be based around dynamic movement leading to control and the ruthless pursuit of submission above all.

It appears that Jeff Monson has pulled out of the submission underground event and will no longer be facing Gordon Ryan in what would have been a fascinating battle of experience, size, strength and submission defense vs agility and submission offense. The organizers of Submission Underground have substituted leg locking specialist Joe Baize as substitute. Mr Baize competed at EBI 8 which Mr Ryan won - but they never met as they were on opposite sides of the brackets. I remember Mr Baize putting on a very good performance. He was probably the smallest man in the tournament yet won his first match well by submission (leg lock) and did very well against the much larger and stronger Felipe Fogolin, almost catching his legs on multiple occasions before getting tired and caught in a stranglehold. Nonetheless I was impressed by his skills, calmness under pressure and willingness to mix it up with bigger athletes. The nature of the match now is very different - it will be a match centered around submission skills - where leg submissions are the specialty of both athletes. Both men know what it takes to get to the legs and finish on the legs. It's been a frustrating week for the squad running through multiple opponents pulling out of match ups at the last minute - we are proud of our record of professionalism of showing up come what may. Now it seems we have two dangerous opponents who play the submission game very well and are ready to play ball Sunday night in Portland.

Seminal moments: I am a huge believer in the notion of SEMINAL MOMENTS in the development of athletes and even recreational jiu jitsu players. These are critical episodes where a student has built up physical skills over time and then in one opportunity, SUDDENLY AND DRAMATICALLY MANIFESTS THOSE SKILLS IN A MEMORABLE AND DYNAMIC FASHION. These moments are huge for your development. They represent the interface between physical skills and mental attributes such as confidence. Once such an episode occurs, you will believe in your ability to replicate this skill and jump to a new level of performance - but UNTIL such a moment, something inside you will always hold you back a little when the opportunity comes. These moments need not be public - in fact they most often occur in the gym, seen by no one except you and your training partner - but their effect can be dramatic. These seminal moments cannot be forced. You must work to create the base level of skill that makes them possible - but only some subliminal flash inside of you can make them happen. Where in the past you hesitated, one day something inside clicks and you let all your guns fire - and then you will never look back. As a coach I can help build up the skills to make it possible, but only you can snatch that moment and make it yours. This is why these seminal moments are so important to your development. They represent your independence from a teacher. They are a coming of age in some aspect of the sport. At the recent Sapeteiro 6 event, kohai student Matthew Tesla had such a moment. Taking on 10th Planet icon black belt Boogyman Martinez, the recent brown belt, who has always shown immense promise in the gym, but who always held back in competition, suddenly had his moment. No second guessing, no hesitation, no doubts - just the mindless realization that he could do this on his terms in his way - fire! Look for these seminal moments in your training - you can't force them, but you can put yourself in a position where if the opportunity is there, you can take it when ready - treasure and relish those moments - they are yours and yours alone.

Smaller man vs bigger man part 2: This weekend squad Senpai (senior students) Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon will take on much bigger opponents. Mr Ryan will take on the hulking two time world champion and five time world medalist Jeff Monson. Initially Mr Tonon was to face off against the very powerful Hector Lombard, but Mr Lombard had to pull out due to a scheduling conflict. Then Mr Chael Sonnen showed his usual fearlessness and stepped in on short notice - but had to pull out when Bellator fight company expressed disapproval of the bout. Mr Sonnen did a fine job of finding a new opponent. UFC standout Antonio Carlos Jr. will face Mr Tonon. Mr Carlos Jr has a very impressive background in jiu jitsu - he was a double world champion at brown belt and since then has recorded multiple victories over jiu jitsu icons such as Leandro Lo, Romulo Barral, and Bernardo Faria. He represented great teams in both jiu jitsu and MMA- Checkmat and ATT. Clearly his skills are of the highest level to defeat such great opponents. He is a real physical specimen - well over two hundred very athletic pounds and tall. This should afford him a big physical advantage in both regulation time and overtime. As always, the squad will have to rely on skill and tactics to prevail. Unfortunately the matches are very short - just eight minutes - so there is no way to use time as a weapon to tire the bigger opponents in this tournament. However, both Mr Tonon and Mr Ryan have trained extremely well in preparation despite some physical problems and they are eager to put on a show against these very talented strongmen they face in this new competition venue. Submission underground is doing a fine job of working the interface between grappling and MMA and brings the showmanship of Mr Chael Sonnen along with the rule system of Mr Eddie Bravo to create an exciting venue for athletes from both sports to showcase their skills.

Smaller man vs bigger man part 1: This weekend at Submission underground grappling event run by former UFC superstar Chael Sonnen, Gordon Ryan will take on one of the most decorated ADDC world championship veterans of all time in an EBI style format. Jeff Monson is a two time ADCC gold medalist, two time silver medalist and one time bronze medalist. He has defeated many jiu jitsu icons in ADCC competition with a unique blend of wrestling, counter jiu jitsu and raw physical strength that is extremely difficult to overcome. Mr Ryan is coming off a fine victory this weekend in Florida at Sapeteiro 6 and is already back in the gym preparing for this titanic match up. He will have only eight minutes of regulation time to try to break though against his much larger and stronger rival who has survived the submission arsenals of past jiu jitsu greats for much longer periods and emerged victorious. This will be a fascinating match of a young master of submission offense and a vastly bigger and more experienced master of submission defense under very tight time constraint. Mr Ryan has been battling through a mysterious lower abdominal and hip pain for months now, but has shown real dedication and truly admiral fortitude in training and continuing to grow and develop throughout this adversity. This fascinating match up will provide a truly stern test of his contest preparation.

Shiai Intensity: Most athletes feel a very different intensity level when they enter competition (shiai) in comparison with daily sparring in the gym. This is perfectly natural and in some cases it has benefits. As a general rule however, I seek to reduce the overall difference between competition intensity and gym intensity as much as possible. I like to see athletes compete in a relaxed demeanor rather than an extremely intense one (there are exceptions obviously) so that the bridge between the gym and the stage is a narrow one to cross. Developing this relaxed shiai demeanor takes time - but when it comes, I find the common problem of lowered performance on stage is greatly reduced. There is however, one area of the sport where this general approach does not apply - the use of finishing holds/submissions. These must be applied with greater intensity in shiai than in the gym due to much greater levels of resistance found in competition than usual circumstances. This does not mean recklessness or unsporting behavior - it simply means that submissions have to be locked tighter than usual and with greater focus and power along with a stronger drive to completion than would be appropriate in a gym setting among friends and teammates. There simply has to be a stronger threat of potential damage if the opponent is to tap in submission - if that potential is not there,
competitive opponents will simply not surrender. Dealing with these two aspects of intensity, lowering overall shiai intensity closer to gym levels; whilst at the same time raising submission intensity levels is a big part of contest preparation for our athletes. Here kohai brown belt Matthew Tesla shows great competition submission intensity as he finishes one of 10th planets best black belts, Boogyman Martinez via heel hook during an outstanding run to the final of Sapeteiro 6 grappling invitational this weekend. His reconciliation of overall intensity levels and submission intensity levels was very impressive for a developing student.

The kohai shine in Texas: Fast rising squad kohai (little brothers) Ethan Crelinsten and Oliver Taza took center stage at the Texas Jiu Jitsu Kumite professional grappling tournament yesterday. Both won their respective weight divisions all by submission under EBI rules. Both hail from Canada but train with the squad and have done a fine job of absorbing our methods and philosophy. They have a special place in my heart as they make the same trip from Montreal to train with us in NYC that Georges St-Pierre Made as a young man to become champion - I believe they will do likewise one day in grappling. They spend at least two weeks of every month in NYC and make real sacrifices to get to their goals. Mr Crelinsten has made astonishing progress in technical depth and his repertoire of submissions is already impressive. Mr Taza brings a quiet intensity to both training and competition and has an artistry to his dangerous submission game that is a pleasure to behold. Keep your eye on these youngsters - they have the ambition and the work ethic to go all the way to the top. 😊😊 Good to see them displaying their medals and counting their shekels as reward for their hard work! A fantastic first day for the squad in 2017 with Gordon Ryan winning Sapeteiro 6, Mathew Tesla taking second in a brilliant debut performance, Shy Ace winning his superfight at the same event by submission, Mr Taza and Mr Crelinsten wining In Texas and other kohai putting on great performances at the same event. Renzo and I are so proud of you and all the students at RGA who help you prepare 😊😊

Strong start: The squad entered the professional grappling competition circuit in fine form today. Gordon Ryan won the Sapitiero 6 Grappling Invitational and took $10,000 first prize. Up and coming kohai student Matthew Tesla put on a great display in his first big competition, submitting everyone on his side of the bracket including 10th planet stand out Boogyman Martinez to get to the finals against team mate Mr Ryan. Mr Tesla used his superb ashi garami based leg locking skills to finish everyone he faced - Mr Ryan used exclusively upper body attacks to showcase his submission versatility and take the big prize. We have other kohai students competing in Texas - will update as facts come in. I am especially proud of this result as it represents a real breakthrough for Mr Tesla to get into top level pro sub grappling and shine. Mr Ryan has battled heroically through a mystery illness that has plagued him for months and showed incredible discipline to train through it and prevail. Great to see a strong start to 2017 - big plans, big ambitions and the discipline to make them real.

Those who give, shall receive: Very often I see students fight for every inch of ground in a match. The moment contact is made there is a furious fight for grips and every part of the match is tightly contested. Often this is a sound approach - but it is important to understand that it is not the only way to engage your opponent. Too often this approach leads to a result where the two athletes never get to finishing positions because they never get past the battle for initial grips and positions. Very often you will get better results by giving something to your opponent. The key is TO CONTROL HOW MUCH YOU GIVE AND THE AFTERMATH. If you give an opening to a talented opponent without a plan, he will quickly take advantage and score on you. However, if you do so with a sound plan and the skills to enact it, your opponent will often be caught as he moves into what he perceived as an advantage. So for example, you can let an elbow drift surreptitiously away from your torso to draw your opponent into an underhook, all the while waiting for this occur so that your pre-planned attack off the overhook can come into play. Jiu jitsu is absolutely full of possibilities for this kind of approach. We all have a good idea of what is desirable for both athletes as we spar, so often the act of giving will provide the perfect set up on an over extended opponent as the trap is sprung. This approach requires subterfuge and subtlety along with the skills to recover if your gambit fails and to score if it succeeds - all this is good for your development. Ultimately our sport REQUIRES FREE MOVEMENT AND EXTENSION OF THE LIMBS IF FINISHES ARE TO OCCUR. If neither player will engage past initial grips this is unlikely to occur - hence the occasional need to offer INCENTIVES TO MOVEMENT AND EXTENSION THAT CAN CREATE THE CONDITIONS NEEDED FOR VICTORY. Here Garry Tonon offers both partial back exposure and a partial ashi garami entanglement as a means of getting into his opponents hips and legs and into a potentially winning position with the least effort and energy expenditure.

Last day of training: This weekend will see the sixth installment of the growing Sapateiro Invitational grappling event. They use a slightly modified EBI format to put on excellent submission only events. Sapateiro 6 is notable for the incredible amount of talent they have brought in - there are three EBI finalists, an ADCC champion, several ADCC competitors- it is probably fair to say it has a more stacked field than any single EBI event! Gordon Ryan has battled through a mystery illness this camp that has still not been resolved after nearly four months, but has trained without fail with the resolve and discipline of a true stoic. He will take with him his understudy, Matthew Tesla. Mr Tesla has been training at a very high level and gave a very strong performance at the recent ADCC trials. This will be his first big show - the first of many I am sure - for he has a wealth of talent to show off. Building athletes to a peak is always an exciting process - thanks goes to the organizers of Sapeteiro 6 for creating a venue and a thrilling line up for these talented athletes to showcase their individual skills and the appeal of the sport in general. 😊😊

Students and teachers: Some of my happiest coaching memories come from watching my students teach. I have always been insistent on the idea that my students have a deep understanding of the underlying principles and concepts that underly our approach to the game and that they be capable of explaining them well to others. As a result, my students can in almost every case, do a fine job of teaching our methods and philosophy to students of all levels and backgrounds. In particular Eddie Cummings, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan have a complete and deep knowledge of my approach to jiu jitsu. Indeed, I would go further and say that these three have developed an independence and originality of thought that has taken them beyond my teachings and into their own distinctive style. I have taught seminars with all three and am constantly amazed by the maturity and depths of their views and their skill at conveying it to others. All three take immense pride in their knowledge and constantly work to refine and improve it. It is no exaggeration to say they are light years ahead of where I was after a similar time spent in training. This bodes well for the future as they have so much more time to develop their skills and knowledge. All three teach seminars between competitions. I can attest to how much learning material they offer when they teach. This weekend in Florida, Mr Ryan will be teaching elements of our style - if you have the chance to go - don't miss it! Mr Cummings and Mr Tonon are also often available and can be reached easily through social media to arrange seminars etc so that you can learn more about their method and philosophy. Competition makes our sport thrilling in the present, but only teaching creates the framework for the health and growth of the sport into the future.

Ambition and patience: There are two great mental attributes that I see in most great jiu jitsu students, and indeed, in almost every enterprise that humans engage in (obviously there are many others, but I want to focus on these two today as they form a relation that is critical to our long term success or failure). These are AMBITION and PATIENCE. In order to achieve anything of consequence in the world, a person must have ambition, for it is ambition that provides the inner drive that initiates our physical actions over time. Seen in this light, ambition appears to be a fine thing - there is however, a problem. In our attempts to fulfill our ambition we constantly run into road blocks. Competition with other people who have similar ambitions, the sheer difficulty of the tasks we need to complete to realize those ambitions - factors like these lead to frustration as we so often fail in our ambitions. It is exactly then that we must make use of a second, complimentary mental attribute - patience. Patience is the recognition that achievement and the skills that bring achievement take time to develop. AMBITION STARTS EVERY ENTERPRISE - BUT ONLY ITS INTERACTION WITH PATIENCE SUSTAINS EVERY ENTERPRISE AND TAKES IT THROUGH TO COMPLETION. It is critical to understand that one without the other is of little value. Powerful ambition quickly leads to frustration and disappointment when it runs into the reality of competition. We see this all the time with the high attrition rate in jiu jitsu. Too much patience creates overly contented people with little drive who are happy enough with what they already and who don't push hard enough to create the changes need to improve in the time available. We see this all the time in jiu jitsu with people who train for long stretches of time but who make little technical progress. Somewhere in the middle is the solution. Where that point in the middle is, will depend upon your goals, your life situation, what you believe personal happiness to consist of etc. but find it you must if you are to gain the longevity and drive in a sport that requires both for excellence.

There's no place like Renzo's: Monday afternoon Martin Luthor King day in NYC. The squad is preparing for upcoming events. Submission Underground Event - run by MMA legend Chael Sonnen will feature Garry Tonon against MMA super star Hector Lombard, who has world championship level judo skills and a huge size and strength advantage over Mr Tonon. Gordon Ryan will take on Jeff Monson, the former ADCC grappling world champion, again at a big size and strength disadvantage. It will be a classic match up of strength vs mobility for both of our athletes. Filming the athletes in training and conducting interviews afterwards, the Submission Underground crew had a busy day at RGA. 😊 It's great to see MMA superstars promoting and competing in these events and using the star power of the MMA game to help grow the grappling game and give our athletes a venue to show our philosophy and methods in the sport. Thank you to Mr Sonnen and the SUG team from RGA and the squad. The rule set will feature shortened EBI matches of eight minutes and then into overtime. Our training has to reflect the higher work rate required by the time constraints - leading to some spectacular matches on the gym floor today! Some of the practice matches could easily have been used as pay per view material!! 😃🤕😜 With over seventy five people in the class it made for an exciting afternoons training...

The Artist's medium: Every art uses a medium through which the artist may achieve self expression. The degree to which he or she succeeds or fails is largely bound up with his or her depth of understanding of that medium. If a painter has only a poor knowledge of paint, color, tone, intensity, perspective, brushwork and canvas; it is unlikely that deep self expression will arise from shallow knowledge of the very medium that makes that expression possible. In the empty handed martial arts, the HUMAN BODY is the medium through which the artist must express himself. Like any other artist, the deeper the knowledge of the medium, the better will be the opportunity for impressive self expression. Not only is knowledge of the working of the human body important here, but so to is your ability to maximize your use of the human body. If you are limited in your ability to move your body, this will always make self expression through the body more difficult. Thus the constant need to maintain and improve the dexterity, strength and overall health of your body to the greatest degree possible. This the martial artist shares in common with all those artists who express themselves through the body - gymnasts, dancers, athletes of every type. With all other artists they share the need for a medium and for the deep study of that medium if their work is to be impressive. Their only difference from these other artists is the direction they choose to express themselves - but like all their brethren, the best among them study and cherish the medium with which they work.

Legs and learning: Probably the single most common question I am asked is this - how can I speed my progress in jiu jitsu? When this is asked as a general question (rather than as a question from a specific athlete) my answer is always the same - LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH YOUR LEGS. We humans do almost all of our complex motor tasks with our hands and arms, yet the strongest part of our bodies by far are our legs and hips. Those who try to grapple predominantly with their upper body will never defeat anyone larger than themselves and quickly fall to exhaustion. The beginning jiu jitsu student must make the transition to using his or her legs as dexterously as most people use their hands and arms if he is to excel. In every class I teach, THOSE WHO LEARN TO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH THEIR FEET, LEGS AND HIPS, QUICKLY OVERTAKE AND DOMINATE THOSE WHO GRAPPLE PREDOMINANTLY WITH THEIR HANDS, ARMS AND SHOULDERS. An excellent example of a fast learner in BJJ is the great BJ Penn. He made a lightning quick ascent up the ranks to become the first American to win a world championship and then went on to a legendary career in MMA. A notable feature of Mr Penn's game was his extraordinary leg dexterity and control. He used this to great effect in every aspect of the game - guard work, back control and passing. He was one of the few athletes I have seen whose foot and leg dexterity closely matched that in most people's hands and arms. This made him much more than a quick learner. It also helped him greatly when fighting larger opponents, as a smaller mans legs are stronger than a bigger mans arms. His example is an excellent one to all aspiring to rise in the sport - TRAIN AND EMPHASIZE THE DEXTERITY AND CONTROL OF YOUR LEGS, HIPS AND FEET, FOR THIS IS A KEY ELEMENT IN YOUR RATE OF PROGRESSION.

Watching vs Observing: When we think of training in jiu jitsu, we typically think in physical terms - drilling, sparring, movement and strength training etc. These are undoubtedly the most important forms of training. Nonetheless I believe that real supplemental progress in your game can be made by observing jiu jitsu as a spectator- provided you approach it in the correct fashion. One of the most impressive examples of this occurred a few years ago when the great Mendes brothers visited our academy. They were in NYC as part of their seminar tour program and stopped by to teach some private classes. As they finished, the famous Monday afternoon class at RGA began. Rafa Mendes came on to the mats to observe the big class. He had to go on to teach afterwards, so he could not participate, but sat alongside me as I taught and coached. When the sparring began I noted his intense gaze as he followed the movements of the many advanced students grappling in front of him. He was not merely WATCHING the matches as most do - entertained by the action as a spectator and seeing nothing more than who wins and who loses. He was truly OBSERVING the class - he appeared to be considering second by second what he would be doing if he were in any of the matches that were unfolding in front of him. Unlike most, he was an ACTIVE OBSERVER rather than a PASSIVE OBSERVER. I was deeply impressed by his powers of focus and concentration as his eyes followed the action and looked into exactly the areas most relevant to deciding the outcome of each match as his mind raced for solutions and answers for whatever problems he saw. This was clearly a man who could learn and grow merely by observing and use observation as a useful supplement to his physical training. What for most people would be an hour of entertainment watching athletes battle each other, was for him a MENTAL WORKOUT that doubtless he could carry with profit into his next PHYSICAL workout. It was an impressive display of the kind of mental acuity and focus that champions carry in addition to their physical skills and attributes.

Words and flattery can make anyone believe they are certain to win a match; but only skill, tactics and preparation can make their opponent share that same belief - yet it is only when both you AND your opponent believe that you will win that the outcome is decided. No one cares if you believe you will win - almost every athlete goes into a match believing that - what counts is your capacity to make your opponent believe it also - and that comes not so much from the mind, but mostly from your skills and attributes.

Pioneers: As an instructor, my path was relatively easy. I started under one of the best known and most knowledgeable teachers in one of the biggest and best academy's in the world. A much tougher task is taken on by those instructors who have to go into territory where jiu jitsu is undeveloped and build a following and student base in an area where there is little or no background in jiu jitsu. My teacher Renzo Gracie was a pioneer. When he came to NYC in the mid 1990's there was virtually no jiu jitsu culture here at all. Students began at absolutely no understanding of ground grappling - a simple triangle was considered a very advanced move by us. In beginners class we had to have it explained to us that bottom guard position was not the same as bottom mount position. Poor Renzo had to go from Gracie Barra in Rio De Janeiro, training with the best black belts in the world, to teaching a bunch of stiff, uncoordinated, woefully ignorant klutzes who did not know the difference between an underhook and an overhook. The fact that Sensei was able to create so many champions from such poor raw material under such conditions is testimony not only to his teaching skill but also his patience! Nowadays there is no need for this pioneering work in America - the sport has matured here. However, in many parts of the world, the sport is still in its infancy. RGA has affiliates around the world who travel vast distances to learn the sport and our approach to it and carry this knowledge back to the jiu jitsu frontiers. Kurdt George, from Renzo Gracie Cape Town, South Africa has done incredible work building the sport in his nation and training with the squad to stay current with our developments. Today Sensei gave him a well deserved black belt for his achievements - one pioneer to another - both men doing a stellar job of growing our beloved sport and ensuring future growth. Well done Kurdt George! And a big hello to South African jiu jitsu from NYC, from Renzo and the squad in the blue basement! 🇧🇷🇿🇦🇿🇦🇺🇸

Insight and direction: I am a big believer in the value of having a primary coach in your developmental years - one person who creates a strong fundamental game and an overall approach to the sport with progress over time. I am also a big believer in the value of occasional alternative points of view to add new insight and perspective that can make you investigate new areas of the sport. As a beginning student I was very fortunate to have the best of both. My primary coach was of course, Renzo Gracie. As you know, he is a he is a jiu jitsu icon running one of the biggest academies in the world in one of the world's premier cities - so we had many extremely distinguished guests over the years. Many of these outstanding individuals had an impact upon me and my approach to the game. I would be doing you all a disservice if I did not talk about them in future posts so that you can learn from their insights as I did. Most importantly, we can look at different modes of teaching. Our daily teaching from our primary coaches is usually technical in nature. The value of visitors is not so much technical - they typically are not there long enough to make significant technical contributions to any more than small parts of your game - their real value is in the NEW PERSPECTIVE they offer and how this can make you think and progress in new directions - LONG AFTER THE VISITOR IS GONE. When I was a blue belt, the great Dean Lister visited our academy. If I remember correctly, he was a brown belt at the time, doing well at local tournaments, but not yet the 2X ADCC champion he would later become. Mr Lister had very powerful Achilles locks and knee bars at that time - he had not yet fully developed the heel hook game he later used so successfully. When speaking to us he spoke of the usefulness of leg attacks in his game. At that time this was VERY unorthodox. He said something like, "upper body or lower body- a tap is a tap and a tap is a win." That one sentence stuck with me and as I rode the NYC subway home that night - my mind was racing with possibilities. From that day I began the study of lower body submissions and a whole new door opened.

Reflections on my sensei: There was a blizzard of snow today in NYC. When I Made my way down to the academy I was wondering how many people would show up for training. When I arrived, Sensei was on the mat teaching a packed class 😊😊 He had driven in all the way from Holmdel NJ in the blizzard to make sure whoever came in got a memorable workout - and that they got! 😊😊 Mr Gracie taught a fascinating kimura variation often utilized by his student, Matt Serra, along with some modifications he had made. It was a beautiful demonstration of teaching skill. Anyone can teach their own game - BUT IT TAKES REAL INSIGHT AND KNOWLEDGE TO TEACH ANOTHER MANS GAME AND ILLUMINATE ITS SUBTLETIES AND NUANCES. Mr Gracie has a warmth and charisma that makes a class more than technical lesson, but also a joy to the soul. Afterwards he and judo superstar Travis Stevens stayed to help the squad through a days training for upcoming tournaments. I came down to the academy wondering if anyone would be there - it ended being one of the most enjoyable training days I can remember. 😊😊 As I make my home through the blizzard I cannot help but think of how fortunate I am to have had this man as my teacher more than twenty years ago and how the same knowledge and personality can lift and inspire a new generation of students today.

Recognize: It was great to see some of the achievements of the squad recognized at the flograppling 2016 grappling awards. They were nominated for five awards and won two. Gordon Ryan was voted best upset of the year for his win via submission over the great Keenan Cornelius. Garry Tonon won the award for no gi match of the year for his epic encounter with the great Leg locking maestro Rousimar Palhares. Interestingly, Mr Tonon was nominated twice for match of the year for two separate bouts - a real distinction. The two bouts were very different from one another due to their very different rule structure. Mr Tonon's was a blaze of action, featuring high lifts and slams, plenty of action both on the ground and standing, many submission attempts and quick positional work to back attacks. Mr Ryan's was a calm, measured chess match with long periods of calm interspersed with powerful positional attacks by Mr Cornelius and submission attacks by Mr Ryan. Both matches were thrilling to coach, by in very different ways. I love the purity of submission only with no time limit, but realize that they are unlikely to happen often for business reasons. The shorter matches with criteria for wins are much more spectator friendly for the average fan. Still, I was proud to see the squad put on such fine displays in varying formats against such dangerous opponents and get recognition for the hard work I see them put in day after day in the gym. Interestingly however, public recognition must always be preceded by private recognition. It is in the dojo that success is first experienced. It is the recognition by your training partners of your progress, a technique well performed, a sparring session showing improvements, an approving nod from your coach, which first tell you that your hard work is paying off and that which once seemed impossible for you is becoming normal. In this process of recognition is born the beginnings of confidence and self belief, and with time, discipline and with continued cycles of action, achievement and recognition can come something great and remarkable - recognition can go from friends and coaches to recognition from the sport itself

Basic and advanced: One of my favorite coaching memories of 2016 was Garry Tonon's spectacular submission win over world champion Gilbert "Durinho" Burns in England at Polaris grappling. Mr Burns was a formidable opponent, considerably heavier and stronger than Mr Tonon and with tremendous takedown and positional skills. After a sharp exchange of skills, Mr Tonon was able to utilize a rolling entry into one of our favorite ashi garami variations and secure a brilliant victory by way of heel hook. The video captures the action well. Most people are impressed by the fluidity and confidence with which Mr Tonon entered and completed this rarely seen and seemingly spectacular entry from standing position down to the floor. In truth however, the move is founded upon the most basic movement in the sport - a simple forward roll that we all learned on our first day as a means of falling safely to the mats. This says much about our sport. The most complex and advanced moves all rest upon the most basic as their foundation. That Mr Tonon is so proficient in these types of entry is no accident. He is truly a master of ukemi waza - rolling and falling technique. Every day he uses it as his warm up. I must have seen him perform it many thousands of times - yet to this day he impresses me with the ease and fluidity with which he performs these essential basic skills before class. It is this daily drilling and perfection of this simple skill that makes it so easy for him to perform much more advanced variations at the big shows. THE SKILLS OF JIU JITSU ARE STRONGLY SEQUENTIAL - THERE IS NO MASTERY OF ADVANCED MOVES WITHOUT PRIOR MASTERY OF BASIC ONES. So often I see students rush through ukemi rolling drills to get to what they think is interesting - yet the very thing they are rushing towards is impossible to do well without those basic skills they are brushing aside. Take pride in your basic skills and your mastery of them - they will make your journey to advanced skills far easier.

Reflections on my Sensei: The most important lesson Mr Gracie ever taught me: Anyone involved in the kingly art of jiu jitsu can understand that their Sensei delves out countless important and valuable lessons, especially in the early stages of development where every day of training seems to offer huge new insights and ways of looking at things. As time passes however, the value of the lessons changes from straightforward technical and tactical advice and starts to move into the strategic and life defining areas. When I was a white belt and training in Mr Gracie's dojo, the senior students were of a very high level. I developed a reputation as a white belt that was difficult to finish, so many of the seniors enjoyed training with me as a solid test of their finishing skills or a tough warm up before serious training with the other seniors. This kind of training gave me a solid defense, but not much else. I fell into a mindset of thinking that success consisted in holding out for a respectable time. That mindset is acceptable for a beginner, but it cannot sustain development over time. One night I was feeling rather proud of myself having lasted a long round with a senior when Mr Gracie sat next to me and, expressed strong disappointment in my game. He said, " John - the way you play you will never be anything more than an ANNOYANCE to your opponent. You must change and become a THREAT to your opponent. When you do this you will see a total change, not only in your game - but in the game that your opponent brings to you." A moments reflection revealed the truth of his words. From that day forward I changed my whole approach to the game. I began a detailed study of the main submissions of the sport and the necessary preconditions to make them possible. In a short time I started experiencing offensive success for the first time and the game became so much more rewarding and interesting. This seemingly simple lesson became the guiding direction for my jiu jitsu study and my teaching philosophy. Defense will always be the basis of jiu jitsu, but it must be supplemented by a positive attacking spirit to prevent it degenerating into a negative game.

First class at Renzo Gracie Academy 2017: So good to get 2017 off to a strong start at our Monday 12pm class as the squad gets back into competition mode. Sensei Renzo came to say hello 😊😊 Over 80 people in an afternoon class? Where else but Renzo's? 😜😜 It was wonderful to see Sensei so proud of the improvements he made to his school - the new fuji mats are superb and proving very popular with our students, especially Eddie Cummings, grinning like a maniac as he works some elements of our back control/submission system on the comfort of Fuji smooth series tatame 😂😂 Whoever new that ushiro sankaku (rear triangle)!could be so photogenic? 😂😜 So great seeing all our dedicated and hard working students back in the dojo - looking forward to many more great workouts together through the year and taking the skills out into top level competition for another year of success 😊😊

Reflections on the nature of our sport: We work in a sport where if a single submission hold is applied perfectly - the match is over. Yet if that same submission is applied 99% perfectly but the opponent escapes, it counts for nothing. A failed submission hold, no matter how close, is no more effective than a missed punch in a boxing match (this point does not apply to a well applied submission hold that is effective, but the opponent opts not to tap and is damaged but continues to fight - in these cases, it had a positive effect insofar as the opponent will be damaged and easier to defeat with subsequent attacks). This creates a demand upon us to have a very deep knowledge of a few match winning moves where we have total confidence in our ability to pull them off against even the strongest resistance, rather than superficial knowledge of many moves. As we saw, superficial knowledge of a move only allows us to INITIATE a move, but only deep knowledge allows us to COMPLETE a move - AND IT IS ONLY COMPLETED MOVES THAT WIN MATCHES. You will succeed or fail based not upon how many moves you can initiate, BUT HOW MANY YOU CAN COMPLETE AGAINST RESISTANCE. The surest way to be able to overcome resistance is to have deeper knowledge around a complex of moves and counters in a specific domain than your opponent does. Your training should reflect this fundamental fact about our sport. Here, Eddie Cummings shows his extraordinarily deep knowledge of the ashi garami position as he locks in a terrifyingly tight heel hook variation during his outstanding run to the finals of EBI 10. Note that these reflections pertain to the specific case of submissions - in other areas of the sport broad knowledge- even superficial knowledge- is necessary for success. Photo by Michael Plaster

Happy New Year from the squad! Thank you all so much for your support and interest in our approach to jiu jitsu 😊😊 Its been a great year of achievement and learning for the team. Looking forward to new projects and challenges in the new year 😊😊 We hope you work hard towards your jiu jitsu goals and through your patience, discipline, planning, work, creativity and self belief; get to those goals and most importantly, grow along the way - don't forget to have fun! Tonight and all the other days 😊😊😊 Wishing you all the best from NYC! 😊😜😉😈☃🍰🍢🍺🍻🍷🍾🍾🍾🍾🎸⌛️⏰😊

Speed vs relative speed: Are you faster than Usain Bolt? This is a question that every single human on earth would currently have to give a negative answer to - provided we qualified the question with the usual unspoken assumptions - the race will be a fair one, on a standard athletic track, over 100-200 meters etc etc. what if we started adding some seemingly strange conditions to the race? Perhaps Mr Bolt has to run with a fifty pound weight vest strapped to his torso - that would definitely allow many good athletes to defeat him. What if he had a two foot rope tying his legs together? Then many people could defeat him. What if the rope were shortened so that his ankles were locked together? Then almost any healthy young person could probably defeat him. What if his left foot was handcuffed to his right hand? In that case I believe even I, with a crippled leg and a hip replacement, could probably defeat him (on a good day at least 😉😜). The point is that EVEN THE BEST ATHLETICISM IN THE WORLD CAN BE OVERCOME IF WE SUFFICIENTLY HANDICAP OUR OPPONENT. Jiu jitsu is essentially a means of doing exactly that. JIU JITSU IS AN ELABORATE MEANS OF HANDICAPPING AN OPPONENT IN WAYS THAT STRONGLY UNDERMINE AND DEGRADE THEIR ATHLETIC POTENTIAL RESULTING IN AN UNFAIR ADVANTAGE IN OUR FAVOR WHICH CAN BE EXPLOITED TO GAIN VICTORY. In this way, bigger, stronger, faster people can, if the discrepancy in grappling technique is sufficiently In our favor, be controlled and defeated. Skills that don't seem overly impressive to beginners- subtle skills of control and positioning that prevent your opponent from freely utilizing his or her strength, Speed etc are in fact, the very heart of the sport. The detailed study of WHAT CAN A MAKE STRONG MAN WEAK, A FAST MAN SLOW AND A HEAVY MAN LIGHT, is the basis of our sport and can make for a lifetime of study.

Foundationalism: When I taught philosophy courses at Columbia university, we often talked about the doctrine of Foundationalism as it applies to human knowledge. When it comes to a sophisticated theory of human knowledge, I am not a foundationalist; but when it comes to jiu jitsu, I am. Just as no builder would ever think of beginning the construction of a new house by working on the roof and attic, but instead digs deep in the earth to lay down secure and strong foundations upon which he sequentially builds the house from the bottom up, with each layer providing a strong support for the layer above it - so too, we must build our jiu jitsu in a similar vein. Just as any failure in the foundations of a house will immediately imply weakness in every other part of the house, so too, weakness in the foundational aspects of our jiu jitsu can never be covered up by fancy flourishes in the other areas of our game. Often students come to me asking to learn aspects of our style that they see in competition. I always tell them the same thing. It is far easier for me to teach my leg lock system (or any other part of our approach to the game) to a person well versed in the traditional foundations of the sport than it is to someone who wants to skip steps and jump straight into it. There is a lot to be said for a sequential approach to learning jiu jitsu where the foundational skills of CONTROLLING MOVEMENT - both my own and my opponent's -comes first and the more esoteric elements come second. Here, the squads youngest member, ten year old Mikey Wilson, learns the foundational elements of control to Kuzushi through the x guard/ashi garami complex as a precursor to the submissions game from the same positions.

Big plans for new year at Renzo Gracie Academy: Sensei Renzo Gracie has done an incredible job of bringing in the expertise of Judo superstar Jimmy Pedro and Fuji mat company to install new mats at RGA NYC!! Over the Christmas break our staff and team Fuji have been hard at work installing the mats and painting to give the academy what must be the best footing for grappling I have ever seen! The new mats look and feel incredible! I had the honor of teaching the first class on the new surface in our small room - it felt like I was teaching in a new gym! 😊😊 The squad came in full force and were joined by child prodigy Mikey Wilson and MMA superstar Jake Shields - who fights this Saturday in WSOF. He looked great on the mats today doing his submission work with squad members. The professionalism and production of team Fuji is impressive to behold. The blue basement has been transformed to a very eye pleasing blue and grey 😊😊 Sensei once told me that the best investment a man can make is in himself. That is exactly what he is doing now - he is investing in his dojo in a way that is transforming it daily 😊😊 Looking forward to a new year of training, goal setting and achievements at our "new" headquarters 😊😊🇺🇸🇧🇷😊😊Huge thanks to Sensei, Mr Jimmy Pedro, Team Fuji, RGA staff and our loyal students who come in every day to train around the temporary inconvenience of construction and change 😉 to come in an improve their skills 😊 The academy has never looked better!

The story of the sniper: Part of the pleasure of teaching at a major academy in NYC is the breadth of people who pass through for instruction in the kingly art of jiu jitsu They come from all walks of life and every corner of the globe. One who left an impression upon me that struck me as useful to students of jiu jitsu was an American sniper who had returned home from active duty. After training we talked about his work. I have always had an interest in weaponry and we talked about his craft and compared it with his interest in jiu jitsu. At one point he turned to me and said, " John, my world is a world of uncertainty. I can't guarantee that I will get into a good position to hit my target. I might get seen before I get there. My target may not be in the place I anticipated. The course of battle might interrupt my plans in some way I never even foresaw. But I do have one certainty. IF YOU GET ME TO A SECURE HIDEOUT WITHIN ONE THOUSAND METERS OF MY TARGET, it does not matter whether it's day or night, rain or sunshine, warm or snow - THAT MAN IS A DEAD MAN - THAT MUCH IS CERTAIN. We were silent for a moment as we reflected upon his words - then we both smiled as we recognized at the same time THAT EXACTLY THE SAME SENTIMENT IS TRUE IN JIU JITSU. Fights are uncertain affairs, we can't guarantee that we will get into a good position to lock in a good submission hold, we might get knocked out before we get there, we may struggle to get the opponent to the ground and keep him there. But IF we get him in a well locked breaking or strangulation position - OUR MECHANICS OUGHT TO BE SO WELL TRAINED AND REHEARSED, that like the sniper, we do not see failure as a a possibility. All jiu jitsu athletes can benefit from this mindset. Research and rehearse your finishing mechanics to a point where you know that if the opportunity to lock in a tight submission should arise in the whirling chaos of a fight- the fight is yours. We can't be confident about everything in combat - but that is something that every jiu jitsu fighter worth his salt must know and believe

Knowledge and wisdom: From an early age I have always been impressed by the classics of Asian literature. None impresses me more than the work of Lao Tsu, in particular "To attain knowledge, add things every day; to attain wisdom, remove things every day." There is so much in this that pertains to our improvement in jiu jitsu. It begins with his crucial distinction between knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge is a RESOURCE. It concerns facts and ideas that we seek to accumulate through study, research and investigation. Wisdom is very different. It is an ABILITY. The ability to discern the RELATIVE VALUE of these various items of knowledge and judge which ones are more important and are necessary and applicable to my goals. Initially students in jiu jitsu are in a rush to accumulate knowledge. This is good, as they are starting from naivety and need something firm to stand upon just to get a start. As they progress they get more and more facts as they get deeper and deeper into the sport. At some stage however, the student must, if he or she is to rise to the next level of development, make a critical switch in direction away from the basic ACCUMULATION of facts and ideas, to the DISCERNMENT of which ideas and facts are most important to their goals and focus upon them. There must be a progression away from wasteful accumulation in favor of trimming the knowledge base down to the essentials that take you to your goals. A replacement of new facts for conceptual ideas. I would rather have knowledge of one fact that I use profitably every day than a thousand facts that I use once a decade. This shift from acquiring knowledge to acquiring wisdom is critical to high level jiu jitsu. It allows you to look at a complex problem and quickly see it's essential element so that a simple and workable solution can be implemented immediately.

Merry Christmas from the squad and NYC!! 😊😊☃🍰🍧😊😊 Today was a relaxed day of training for the squad - focus was more on technical development and sparring in a relaxed manner. This idea of variable intensity is critical to long term training. Not every session can be a war. Big holidays give a great opportunity to reinforce this idea to the athletes. I love to see athletes train every day, but not to see them train as hard as possible every day - that quickly leads to breakdowns. Improvement is measured in months and years, not days and weeks, so it is critical to be able train effectively over long periods. A huge part of this involves variation in intensity levels of daily training so that every day can represent a step forward and as few days as possible are lost to attrition and injury. Now that work is done - it's time to eat - something the squad does very well 😜😜 Merry Christmas to you all from NYC!!

The greatest skill of them all - learning: Every jiu jitsu athlete is in a constant quest to improve current skills and learn new ones as a means to performance improvement. However, there is one skill that stands above all other skills that one might acquire on the long road towards mastery - the skill of learning. Every day we have people telling us how to learn a given skill, a new move, a new concept. Yet it is rare to have someone tell us how to learn. Learning how to learn is absolutely one of the keys to success in life in general and jiu jitsu in particular. Most people take a very passive approach to learning. They learn from their teacher and practice when told to practice what they are told to practice. This is fine at recreational level, but if you wish to go further you must take a proactive approach to learning. This is a huge topic, but let us talk today about three key methods of learning that we can use to improve our understanding of the learning process so that we can make better progress. The foundation of my coaching program is always THE TRIAL AND ERROR METHOD. This simple method of taking ideas and subjecting them to rigorous tests to determine their value. We spend countless hours on the mat testing our theories and ideas through sparring and competition until we put provisional faith in them. The second is the GREAT PERSON METHOD. I am a big believer in the idea of using great athletes in the sport to inspire and enlighten. If a given athlete is having tremendous success with a given move, that's a very clear sign that he is doing something right and important. By studying this, you are very likely to improve some aspect of your own game - even if your own method ends up being significantly different from the athlete you studied. The third is THE ORGANIC NATURE OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT. Skills are like life forms - they are born weak, naive and vulnerable; but if nurtured and cared for, can grow eventually into something strong and confident and capable. When you learn a skill, give it a chance to grow. Don't start using it on world champions. Start small and work your way up with it. In time these three principles can transform your game

Forcing progress: We all want to maximize our rates of progress in the sport . Most people work on the assumption that if they just show up for class, progress rates will be satisfactory. In the early stages, this is usually correct, since the learning curve at introductory levels is very steep. At some point however, you are going to run into your first experience with growth plateaus. This can be very frustrating for a student who has grown used to easy progress. As a coach, a big part of my job is to make plateaus less likely to occur and also to get students over them when they do occur. I have fond memories of my own first experience with growth plateaus and my sensei, Renzo Gracie's method of dealing with it. When I first began jiu jitsu as a white belt I was physically bigger and stronger than most of my class mates. In addition, this was at a time when jiu jitsu was very young in the United States and the skill level among the average student was much lower than it is today. As a result, when grappling the other white belts I usually had an easy time of it and only got into trouble with the few blue and purple belts we had in class in those days. In my mind I thought I was doing extremely well with my peers. You can imagine my surprise when sensei pulled me aside one day and told me how poor my overall game was and how my training needed to change! Mr Gracie told me that henceforth I was only allowed to start matches in inferior bottom positions and was not allowed any top position at all until told otherwise. This change had an immediate effect - those same smaller white belts who I had been dominating were now crushing me. Every match became an exhausting, frustrating battle for survival. It was immediately apparent that what I had thought was good training previously was anything but. I was forced to learn a whole new range of skills, tactics - even mindset - and grew greatly as a result. This example shows two important elements of good coaching. The first is obvious - by forcing a student into new areas you can create progress. The second is not obvious. Athletes often are not aware that they are in a plateau and sometimes need outside intervention

Positive and negative - the two faces of jiu jitsu: it is of the first importance to understand that in every aspect of jiu jitsu, there are two directions my game must push. One the one hand, I must do everything in my power to facilitate my ability to move freely in the directions I desire (presumably in the direction of control and submission). On the other hand, I must do everything in my power TO UNDERMINE MY OPPONENTS ABILITY TO DO THE SAME. Let us illustrate this point through the example of speed. Obviously physical speed is a desirable trait in almost all sports, especially combat sports. When we first think of speed, typically we think of our ability to move at speed, and compare this to the speed of others. In jiu jitsu however, our speed potential is not nearly as important as OUR ABILITY TO UNDERMINE OUR OPPONENTS ABILITY TO MOVE QUICKLY. To put it simply - I don't HAVE to move quickly if I have first immobilized you. My need for speed is proportional to my ability to tie up and immobilize my opponent. The better my skill at undermining my opponents ability to move, the less I will require physical attributes to succeed in sparring. THIS ABILITY TO INTERFERE WITH MY OPPONENTS PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES (the "negative" side of the game) IS IN MY OPINION, MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES. This is NOT to say that physical training is unimportant- only a fool would claim that traits such as speed and strength are unimportant in combat. What I am saying is that more of your training time and thought should go into the skill of interfering with your opponents attributes than the development of your own. Here, kohai student Oliver Taza does a fine job of tying up a struggling opponent with some more advanced elements of our back attack system - he has created a situation where it will be extremely difficult for his opponent to use physical attributes with effect. Having negated those attributes, there is no need for speed now - he can move at his pace and in the directions he wants to advance towards submission.

New environment - new perspective: I have always loved to teach in a new venue to strangers. I spend the vast majority of my teaching time in the basement of RGA with my long suffering students. It is always a fascinating change of pace for me to go to a new venue and teach strangers (and doubtless a relief to my poor students back home 😉😜). When I go to a new room to teach, my intention is not merely to show a set of techniques, but always to show a new mental framework within which those techniques are housed and arranged. In truth, the most influential visiting teachers when I was a beginner were not those who showed me techniques- techniques come and go as your game changes and evolves - it was those who made me look at the sport in a new way that inspired me to look into and research some part of it in a way that created positive change and growth. It was CHANGE IN PERSPECTIVE , rather than learning new tricks, that had the greatest benefit for me. I always try to reflect this when traveling and teaching. As a stranger it is unlikely that I can, in the time available, create substantial and lasting improvements to your technique- I have no doubt that I can improve them, perhaps even substantially improve them, but in a single session I cannot give you the heel hooking skill of my best students. One thing I can do however, is change your perspective and introduce new modes of thinking that can in time, with sufficient dedication on your part, point you in directions that can create real improvement and lasting change. I try to use the techniques to show a way of thinking about development which will create improvements not for a single day, but for as long as those ideas interest you. Here I teach at my good friend and former class mate at RGA, Shawn Williams, at his school in LA. Because Mr Williams and I share a common history and philosophy, it's not so different as other schools I visit, but still, the notion of using techniques, not as an end in themselves, but rather as a vehicle for a new perspective on a given part of the sport, is the same. Just sixteen hours after this photo was taken in LA I was back in the blue basement in NYC teaching class 😊

Great day of Grappling at Studio 540 San Diego: The squad went into a tough day of grappling under extended time limit EBI rules today in San Diego with mixed results but all positive experiences. Fifteen year old Nicky Ryan lost in over time to the very talented 19 year old Kennedy Maciel in a great match of two super talented youngsters with a world of grappling ahead of them. Mr Maciel showed great positional skill with excellent passing and pinning control along with a superb transition from back to triangle (sankaku) in overtime to get a great win and show his potential. In the adult matches, Garry Tonon took on a very impressive Kim Terra, who came out looking to play a positive attacking game - very praiseworthy given that he is a weight division below Mr Tonon. Within regulation time however, Mr Tonon was able to make a very nice transition from back crucifix to high elbow guillotine and follow Mr Terra' defensive maneuvers through to a beautiful submission victory. In the final match It was Gordon Ryan's turn to match a larger opponent. He did a fine job of dominating the submission attacks, whilst his world champion opponent, the very talented Felipe Pena, dominated the positional attacks. At the 42 minute mark however, Mr Pena capitalized brilliantly on a mistaken entry to ashi garami, took the back and sank an excellent strangle to take a great victory. There was much for the squad to take away and learn from, much to be happy about and much to be improved upon. Tomorrow I shall teach a seminar in LA and then it's back to the basement of wisdom in NYC Monday to start making the changes necessary to improve and win. 😊😊😊 Thank you to Studio 540 and flograppling for putting on a great event. Thanks also to Eddie Bravo for another great job of impartial and skillful referee work. Most of all - thank you to my athletes who give their all and who have come so far in such a short time - I am immensely proud of all you have done and extremely confident of even greater future success

Meanwhile....As I wait for a plane to California, Eddie Cummings waits for a plane to Costa Rica! Mr Cummings will teach the first squad seminar at the dojo of my friend and student Arturo Wesson, who regularly comes all the way to NYC to train in our method and bring that knowledge back to his students at home. I am delighted to see Mr Cummings heading south to spread our message of control leading to submission. Of all my competitive students, Mr Cummings has spent the most time with me in private classes and has the deepest knowledge of my leg attack system. He is much more than that however. Like all my students he is an independent and innovative thinker and has developed his own specialized methods that have made him arguably the finest ashi garami exponent in the world. There is a sense in which Mr Cummings is the victim of his own success - his leg attacks are so successful that few besides those he trains among have seen his other great skills. He has outstanding back attacks, superb attacks from front head lock and truly excellent armlock and triangle (juji gatame and sankaku) attacks, among others. He is a very fine teacher and I am delighted that our Costa Rican friends will get the chance to see such high level technique explained by such a fine practitioner who can really express the depth of his knowledge. If you are there - don't miss it! Just don't let him anywhere near the ice cream or pineapple juice stand or he will gain one hundred pounds of blubber in a day! 😂😂😂😂 Mr Cummings will be training hard with the squad when he returns - big plans for the new year 😊😊Stay tuned! A big hello to Costa Rican jiu jitsu in general and Mr Arturo Wesson in particular - have fun!

JFK - California bound: Waiting at JFK after another missed flight 😂😂 Looking forward to meeting up with squad members as they prepare for action on Saturday. Gordon Ryan, Nicky Ryan and Garry Tonon will match up with three extremely talented Brazilian Grapplers - all three with an outstanding pedigree and competition record. As always with the squad, it's been a rough last week with minor mishaps, illnesses, miscalculations and general tom foolery 😜😜 but come Saturday we will be ready for action and ready to put on a show at studio 540 in San Diego. I leave a frigid NYC for the sunshine and smiles of Southern California 😊😊 Always a good feeling! The squad continues to impress me with their continual technical development - so many new moves and tactics added to their always expanding repertoire. They face a very tough test on Saturday however. Young Nicky, just 15 years old will take on 19 year Kennedy Maciel, current world champion at purple belt and son of Ruben Charles - "Cobrinha" Mr Maciel exhibits the same superb sense of movement and transition as his illustrious father and clearly has a big future ahead of him. Kim Terra, brother of jiu jitsu icon Caio Terra, has carved out a fine competition record of his own. These two brothers are known for the depth of their technical knowledge and this will be a fascinating stylistic contrast to be sure. Felipe Pena will square off with Gordon Ryan in the main event. Mr Pena is at the top of the jiu jitsu world both gi and no gi. I well remember his outstanding performance at the last ADCC. He is a mix of physical power with very refined technique that enabled him to go toe to toe with the heavyweight icon Rodolphe Viera - in a titanic struggle he showed he can go for extended periods of time against the world's best. He is a tremendous opponent. Sitting on plastic chairs at the airport, listening to the muzak, eating the lousy food, watching people scuttle by is usually pretty damn boring, but the thought of getting the squad ready for this epic challenge makes it much more exciting! 😊😊

Improvising: Most of our training drills and principles involve learning precise algorithms of movement that take our opponent in predictable directions so that we can follow his defensive options all the way through to submission. As such, there is a lot of rote learning, memorization, repetition etc. it is an undeniable fact however, that in sparring and competition, situations commonly arise that are outside our normally drilling and training experience and we are forced to improvise as the situation unfolds. It is also undeniable that some people seem to improvise better than others. The question thus becomes - HOW DO THEY DO SUCH A GOOD JOB OF IMPROVISATION? I believe that the most important reason for disparity in ability to improvise is the mental process that different athletes carry into the bout. Most people focus on the details of their algorithms. As long as the action stays within the boundaries of those algorithms, they do very well. This mindset however, does not cope well with unforeseen circumstances, as it does not have a precise, well learned algorithm to cover it. Other athletes focus more on the big picture of WHAT THEY ARE TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH at any given moment, rather than THE PRE-LEARNED DETAILS OF EXACTLY HOW THEY ARE GOING TO ACCOMPLISH IT. As such, they can take situation that is unfolding in ways they did not foresee or want, identify the end result they want and find an improvised path toward it. A fine example of this occurred when Garry Tonon won the EBI 9 event. Mr Tonon was by far the smallest competitor and entered with only three days notice. He battled to the final where he met world champion Vinny Magalhaes, a man far larger than himself. Our usual back control protocols were severely challenged by the size difference. Mr Tonon immediately switched his mindset from the usual routines to the overall desiderata- maintaining spinal alignment long enough to create time pressure that would hopefully set up submission opportunity. He switched between a cluster of unorthodox grips and movement that saw him win a thrilling victory on riding time against his great rival.

Gaining and retaining: Imagine you met a man who told you that his annual income was one million dollars a year. Would you not be impressed by his wealth? I believe that most of us certainly would. What if that man then revealed that his annual expenses were $975,000 a year? Would you still be impressed by his wealth? Probably much less so. When it comes to accruing wealth, the amount of money coming in is not nearly as important as the amount you retain. EXACTLY THE SAME IS TRUE OF KNOWLEDGE. so often I see students chasing after knowledge. This is a good and desirable trait. Never forget however, that important issue is not how much knowledge you learn - BUT HOW MUCH YOU RETAIN - for it is only the knowledge you can access and remember that will prove useful to you in future action. It is critical therefore, THAT YOUR ATTEMPTS AT GAINING KNOWLEDGE FOCUS AS MUCH ON KNOWLEDGE RETENTION AS THEY DO ON KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION. You must have a program set out that solidifies the knowledge you have gained in a way that enables you to access it on demand in a way that leads to effective action on the mat. In the case of a group of professional athletes like the squad, this is relatively easy, as we spend large amounts of time together and begin and end each training session with discussion of the central concepts and problems we work on - along with vast amounts of repetition to cement knowledge in place. In your case this may not be possible, as most people have busy lives, professional and family commitments etc. in these cases I always recommend the same methods we used successfully(well, partially successful 😉😜) in school and college - note taking, periodic reviews, occasional informal tests etc etc. By shifting focus from acquisition to retention of knowledge you will quickly find the knowledge you have translating into more effective action. Here, squad members discuss technique and strategy before stepping out onto the mat in competition (shiai). This helps to ensure the themes we want to express in the match are at the forefront of the athletes mind as steps out to face his opponent.

Setting tough goals for progress: I believe that whatever progress you make in your chosen field will be determined by the goals you set. If your goals are modest - so too your progress will be modest. If you set difficult and challenging goals - the greater work required to make an honest attempt at them will ensure greater progress - even in cases where the goals are not fully met. I often create very difficult short term challenges for developing students. Their hard work and study in trying to overcome that challenge almost always creates progress. For example, Oliver Taza is a rapidly improving kohai student who is making all the kinds of commitment necessary for championship grappling in the future. He was looking for a tough assignment to gauge his progress. He entered a tournament this weekend - a 10th planet brown belt invitational at 205 pounds. This was a very strong test, as Oliver normally competes at around 165-70 pounds. To make it more interesting - we placed the goal of victory by submission in all matches - not easy given the rank of the event and the level of competition. Mr Taza trained with his usual great commitment and attention to the critical details that spell the difference between success and near success. In a superb display of skill he did exactly what he planned to do - won every match by submission (a mix of leg locks and triangle (sankaku) strangles) and each in a dynamic and impressive style upon much larger opponents. These kinds of difficult short term goals, interspersed among your long term goals, are one of the best ways to main progress over time and maintain a bridge between long term and short term ideals. Of course it's great when the goals are attained, as was the case with Mr Taza, but the deeper point is that even if they are not - you will be closer to your long term goal of excellence in jiu jitsu.

Reflections on my sensei: Cross training When I first began jiu jitsu in the early to mid 1990's, the overall ethos of the martial arts scene was very different. This was a time of style versus style in MMA (as opposed to the modern spirit of well rounded athlete vs well rounded athlete). This was a time of proving a new martial art BJJ, among the more established traditional martial arts and sports. As such, most jiu jitsu practitioners took on an "us vs them" mentality that was necessary at the time if jiu jitsu was to show it was a viable art that could stand on its own merits and be counted among the foremost fighting arts. One of the great insights of my sensei Renzo Gracie, was that this attitude, whilst necessary in the beginning, was limiting in the long term. Accordingly he strongly encouraged all his students to engage in the study of other arts, especially those with a competition sports aspect, such as boxing, Muay Thai, wrestling, judo, sambo etc. I can say of my sensei that HE WAS INTENSELY PROUD OF JIU JITSU AND HIS LINEAGE WITHIN IT, BUT AT THE SAME TIME, ENDLESSLY CURIOUS ABOUT OTHER COMBAT SPORTS AND HOW THEY COULD BE DRAWN UPON TO IMPROVE PERFORMANCE IN JIUJITSU. This insistence upon some degree of cross training was I believe, one of the many reasons why Mr Gracie was able to keep a very modern and cutting edge vibe to his school and his teachings after more than twenty years here in the USA. I have seen so many students profit from some degree of cross training, some more, some less - but I have NEVER seen a student get worse from it. Nowadays cross training is the norm, with most jiu jitsu athletes happy to work wrestling and judo and other arts into their program. Whenever you find yourself stagnating or in some form of jiu jitsu plateau - take heed of my sensei's example and find inspiration and new directions in another art - it will only make your jiu jitsu stronger.

Chasing after the wind: There is an old cliche in the sport of boxing: Don't try to force a knock out - those that do almost always end up disappointed and quite often the victim of the very end they sought after. Exactly the same is true in jiu jitsu. Chasing directly after submissions feels like chasing after the wind ; those who do so usually fail to get what they so badly wanted. Rather than chase directly after submissions - CHASE THE PRECONDITIONS THAT MAKE SUBMISSIONS MORE LIKELY TO OCCUR. Once those preconditions are attained - THE SUBMISSIONS WILL COME. So often I see students take to heart our program of emphasizing submissions, but falter badly when they race directly for submissions. Their game takes on a scrappy and forced look that garners meager results. A much better approach is to always to ask yourself - WHAT ARE THE PREREQUISITES OF SUBMISSION? And FOCUS ON ATTAINING THOSE. Traditionally, jiu jitsu has always posited that POSITION is the prerequisite of submission. There is much truth to this. Our approach to jiu jitsu however, adds to this by emphasizing other prerequisites in addition to the traditional understanding of position. A deep study of this area will be of immeasurable value to your submissions percentages. Here kohai student Oliver Taza shows excellent preparatory skills in preparation to submitting an opponent in a recent tournament.

The great problem of endurance: When I watch beginners train together the single most common method of defeat is fatigue. Beginners typically lack the skills required to gain a victory through the purity of their technique and thus usually one of them is worn down to a state where they cannot maintain resistance and they succumb. The problem usually gets better with time, but remains to some degree throughout our jiu jitsu lives. Everyone has to confront and overcome this problem if they wish to remain in the sport. The problem is, most people attack the problem in the wrong way. The overwhelming majority of students deal with the problem by trying to bring about changes in their bodies - they make efforts to make themselves stronger and fitter. This is good and desirable and yes - it definitely helps to some degree. However, WHATEVER ENDURANCE IMPROVEMENTS YOU MAKE FROM STRENGTH AND FITNESS INCREASES ARE MINUSCULE COMPARED WITH THOSE THAT COME FROM INCREASED MECHANICAL EFFICIENCY IN TECHNIQUE AND PACE CONTROL DURING A MATCH. It will take a lot of time and training to increase your maximum bench press by just 10% - but that increase will be barely perceptible to your opponent in sparring. However, small improvements in the placement of lever and fulcrum as you apply technique throughout a match will be immediately felt by an opponent as increased force and by you as energy saving - if this is combined with pace control you will find dramatic improvements in grappling endurance without any significant changes in your physiology. Please be clear: I am not trying to argue that strength and fitness are irrelevant and unimportant - they definitely are (were they not the shameful proliferation of steroid use in our sport would never have arisen). What I am saying is that the more important element of grappling endurance by far is technical efficiency and pace control. If you want dramatic improvements - don't look to change your body, rather, look to change your technical insight and pace control. Here, Gordon Ryan shows superb pace control and technical efficiency in a marathon victory against the great Keenan Cornelius.

Shared vision: Teaching technique is one thing, teaching an overall vision of the sport is another. When I work with my advanced students we constantly talk about our own approach to the sport. Any technique we learn is done so in the broader context of that vision. One day I will get the time to outline exactly what that vision is to a wider audience - but I am sure the more astute observers can look at the work of my students and make a good guess already. When there is a general vision that a team follows I find the optimal training environment develops - students can express their individuality in technique while showing their allegiance through conformity to that broad vision and its principles. My role as coach thus has two main areas. The first is technical - the refinement of existing technique and development of new systems to maximize their effectiveness. The second is directional - to give those techniques and systems a guiding philosophy that creates a group of students who have their individual differences, but also a recognizable similarity that's suggests a lineage and a particular approach to the game that stands out for the norm. Here, Eddie Cummings and myself make observations of the next opponent at EBI 10 as Mr Cummings gets ready for another match. When he goes onstage he will be ready to express more than technique- he will be trying to express a philosophy that we all share.

The human body: To be a student of jiu jitsu is perhaps more than anything else; TO BE A STUDENT OF THE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE HUMAN BODY. The more knowledge you accumulate in this regard, the more precise your attacks upon your opponent's body and the defense of your own shall be. Our bodies are remarkable insofar as they exhibit both remarkable weakness and surprising strength at the same time. What makes the difference is knowledge and training. Think of two twins separated at birth. One of the twins is out in an Olympic gymnastics program and rigorously trained for decades in elite gymnastic skills. The other is allowed to relax and enjoy himself on the couch and feast and watch movies. When they meet thirty years later, the difference between the two in physical performance capabilities will be massive - EVEN THOUGH THE GENETIC DIFFERENCES WILL BE MINIMAL. One will have a deep knowledge of how his body can be utilized to maximize physical performance, whilst the other, despite having virtually the same body, will lack the knowledge of body mechanics to perform anything more than the most rudimentary physical tasks. In jiu jitsu we must learn how make our own body strong, but even more important - HOW TO MAKE THE OPPONENTS BODY SLOW AND WEAK. This requires a deep knowledge of our physical structure and how to hold it in positions that prevent it from moving efficiently and how to manipulate it in ways that cause it damage. In the long term, we also need knowledge of dietary and lifestyle habits that extend the lifetime of our body, since our goal is to train for the longest possible time to accumulate the most skill possible. This is wisdom with regards the human body the beginning and end of wisdom with regards jiu jitsu. The latter cannot be understood without the former. Here, rapidly developing kohai student, Oliver Taza shows excellent knowledge of the structure of the upper body as he ties up an opponent with juji gatame (armlock) at a recent tournament. Look how immobilization skills allow him to maintain a very relaxed demeanor to begin solving the problems his opponent is creating and go in to overcome them and take victory.

Back in the saddle: Monday morning in the basement of suffering - the squad and all cohorts back in training for future events - the most important of which will take place on December 17 in San Diego where three squad members take on three extremely talented Brazilian grapplers in what should be a fascinating contrast in styles. It was great to see Eddie Cummings and the others working on problem solving issues in our last outing and formulating solutions for our next. We always believe that consistently losing suggests something is deeply wrong with your training program and it must be revised from the ground up; but occasional losses are both expected and healthy - THERE IS NO SURER ANTIDOTE TO COMPLACENCY AND HUBRIS THAN OCCASIONAL DEFEAT - two elements that will undermine the success of a training program very quickly. Here the full compliment of Senpai and kohai get the camp off to a great start on a NYC Monday morning 😊😊

Back in NYC: Great to be back in NYC - first stop - the blue basement of learning where the Ryan brothers are preparing for their big challenges on Dec 17 in San Diego against an extremely talented set of Brazilian athletes. Young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years old, will take on world champion purple belt Kennedy Maciel, son of one of this generations greatest jiu jitsu practitioners, Ruben "Cobrinha" Charles. Mr Maciel is considerably older (19), bigger and more experienced than Mr Ryan, but Mr Ryan is training exceptionally well and is anxious to step up to the next level of competition. Normally I am very much against matching very young athletes against older athletes, but in this case I am willing to make an exception. Mr Maciel has a game of dynamic movement combined with isometric strength allied to superb technique - a combination that made his father one of the most successful competitors of all time. This will be a truly formidable opponent for Nicky Ryan. Mr Ryan is too young to have an adult belt in jiu jitsu and the youth belts don't really seem to apply to him - so I never gave him a belt, but he does very well against experienced older belt levels in training and competition. Both Ryan boys are entering a phase of grappling maturity where they are starting to develop their own moves and tactics in ways that are truly exciting for me as a coach to observe - I am confident that that excitement will be seen in this match up of the two rising stars. The true camp begins tomorrow, so today we spent time setting directions and goals and light rolling. The squad will all return tomorrow and then it's on and forward!!

A great night for submission grappling and jiu jitsu tonight in Mexico City at EBI 10. Geo Martinez successfully defended his 135 pound title against Eddie Cummings in a thrilling final match. We are all immensely proud of Mr Cummings - he showed his amazing skills in leg attacks again tonight, scoring quick submissions on the path to the final. In the final he was able to dominate the attacks in regulation time but Mr Martinez did a fine job of getting through to overtime where he was able to take a fine victory. Hats off to the EBI staff who put on an amazing event in Mexico City and Geo Martinez and team 10th planet for an exceptional performance. The squad will do as we always do -
Back to the basement to work on our skills to emerge stronger, smarter and ready to compete again when the opportunity presents itself. Thank you to all our social media supporters for your support in the lead up to the big show. Tonight we rest, but tomorrow we train. Messrs Gordon Ryan, Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan must now prepare for the next big show - the year finale - in San Diego against very strong opposition. Can't wait to get back to the blue basement and get the squad together watch the action unfold 😊😊 Special thanks to Mr Eddie Bravo and Mr Victor Davila and his son Tory who put on a such a great event - tonight was their night - congratulations

Ashi garami in Mexico City: I had the pleasure of teaching our leg lock system at my old friend, Mario Delgado's school here in Mexico City. Great to see students quickly understanding and appreciating the core principles and techniques in a new venue. Now it's on to the arena for EBI 10, where Eddie Cummings will showcase many of those principles and techniques as he and the other squad members have done so often before. Going from the classroom to the stage is always a thrill - even more so tonight in new territory and new atmosphere 😊😊

Sacrifice: Eddie Cummings living the life of the dedicated professional athlete. Making weight for EBI 10 the bantamweight tournament. Nothing comes easy at world championship level and Mr Cummings shows his usual dedication to his craft here with meticulous preparation that began weeks ago and peaks tonight here in Mexico City. This ability to get the details right and stick to a disciplined and well thought out routine that trades current discomfort for future pleasure is the essential feature of every championship program. Here you can see the strain of a harsh weight cut. Mostly done now 😊 Tomorrow will be recovery followed by our contest preparation drills and then on stage. Looking forward to the change in venue and putting on a show for our Mexican audience. 😊😊

First workout of the day - New York City: Second workout of the day - Mexico City: At the airport now, waiting for flight to Mexico in prep for EBI 10, Just finishing working with Messrs Gordon and Nicky Ryan who are training brilliantly. Looking forward to seeing Mr Cummings and crew and getting in some more prep work for the big show. Mr Cummings always greatly impresses me in training, but never more than in his training for this show. Looking forward to the change in venue and hats off to Mr Bravo and his great crew for helping to grow this great sport in new directions with such an exciting line up of talent for this lightweight event. Looks like the thin air of Mexico City has had some strange effects on Ottavia Bourdain and Mr Garry Tonon...😂😂😂

Growing together: As Kano so wisely insisted; the best form of benefit is mutual benefit. When two people work together and each brings something good to the table, great things can happen from their shared efforts. In my daily coaching, nowhere do I see this more clearly than in the development of the Ryan brothers - Gordon and Nicky. Their symbiotic relationship is an inspiration to the other athletes around them. As one rises, the other must rise to stay in the game - and the one who helps him rise the most is his own brother. Mutual growth is the healthiest state for the training room and there is no better example than these two. Both are deep in preparation for tough matches at studio 540 in San Diego on December 17 in a variation of EBI rules (much longer regulation time before over time begins). When the squad returns from Mexico City this weekend, camp begins in earnest for Both Ryan boys and Garry Tonon in what should be an incredible event.

Georges St-Pierre works out with the squad...meanwhile...in Mexico City...One of my principal aims as a coach is to develop a sense of independence in the senior students (Senpai). When we all talk technique and strategy, we talk as equals. Indeed, the senior students often shock me with the depth of their insight and originality. The greatest thing a teacher can give students is not technique or strategy or any of the usual things people judge the worth of teachers by, but rather THE ABILITY TO RESEARCH AND PROGRESS INDEPENDENTLY. instilling this sense of creative independence in the senior students has several great consequences. One of them is on display in this photo collage. Eddie Cummings is currently in Mexico City preparing for EBI 10 on Friday night. He is working with Local jiu jitsu players in the same system that the other squad members used today to train in NYC with Georges St-Pierre; who will himself go back to Montreal tonight to train independently what he learned today. If all these seniors could only blindly follow orders, this kind of activity would be impossible. It is their capacity to grow independently within themselves that ensures the growth of ideas that keeps our overall program growing and improving. Looking forward to the squad getting together with Mr Cummings Wednesday night in Mexico City for the big show 😊

Founding member of the squad: Mr Georges St-Pierre returned to the basement of wisdom through pain for some some fine training sessions with the youngsters. The majority of my time training with Mr St-Pierre was in developing grapple boxing skills for professional MMA fighting - very different from pure submission grappling. When he retired, he was able to have fun working on submission grappling skills and has made impressive progress 😊😊 Here the squad watches as he works his ashi garami drills with partner Garry Tonon. We use these drills to develop deeper mechanical knowledge of the position so that we increase the chances of success under the pressure of live combat, whether in the gym or in competition (shiai). Often I have the students teach the move back to the class to ensure they have a solid understanding of the core concepts and principles that underly its use. A huge part of Mr St-Pierre's success came from his willingness to always keep training and learning over his entire career and beyond with specialists in a given domain, so that he could add those skills and use them in the broader domain of MMA. Even in pure submission grappling he is one of the toughest training partners for the squad when they prepare for shiai - remarkable, given that this is not his primary focus.

From the basement to the bright lights: Eddie Cummings completed the NYC section of his camp for EBI 10 in the basement of suffering today. As always the senior and junior members of the squad were on hand throughout to assist the preparation. Taking the skills created and refined in the gym and getting them to work under the bright lights of the big show is one of the toughest tests the athletes face. The squad is lucky to have a tight camaraderie that helps this. There is only so much replication of what is expected that is possible in the training room. At some point the athlete must find it within himself to make the shift to the big stage against people he has never faced before, under new circumstances and all under the critical eye of the fans. I have always been deeply impressed by the squads ability to do this. More than any other phase of match preparation, this is where the athlete must go beyond whatever assistance his team and coaches can offer and find within him or herself the will and the ability to reach their goals. Next time the squad meets as a whole will be in Mexico City, where once again the gulf between gym and stage must be bridged.

"Coach, how's my submissions game coming along?" "Feeble. You could not leg lock a man with no arms, nor arm lock a man with no legs; furthermore, you are wholly incapable of strangling a man who has neither arms or legs."

Happy Thanksgiving from the squad 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸😊😊😊! Nothing earns thanks from the squad like a mat crowded with dedicated and ambitious athletes working on their skills in the kingly art of jiu jitsu. Early tomorrow that's exactly what you will find in the basement of despair and hope at RGA as the squad helps Eddie Cummings in his preparation for a third EBI belt in the new 135 pound weight class in Mexico City next week. Skill development does not recognize holidays. Mr Cummings and his squad cronies are acutely aware of this and so we plan on a good session tomorrow. Afterwards however, our national holiday gives us an opportunity to reflect upon our dual nature as individuals with private ambitions and as citizens, with civic duties and awareness to our nation, without which, no individual ambition or achievement would even be possible. We hope you find happiness tomorrow both as individuals and, perhaps more importantly, as members of family and nation in ways that illuminate our nature as individuals housed the framework of a group, for it is only by understanding both aspects of our nature that greatness is possible.

Perspective: In recent days and weeks the jiu jitsu scene has seen a marked increase in provocative talk between camps and much of it has been centered around my own students and those of Marcelo Garcia. This is odd, as Mr Garcia and I are good friends. As is so often the case, what begins as banter and play can lead to consequences one does not want. Both Mr Garcia and myself are committed to the idea of a strong distinction between the spirit of MMA, where a certain amount of talk and showmanship is good for business, and jiu jitsu, where a more elevated sense of behavior is appropriate. I am all for jiu jitsu athletes being paid more for their hard work, but I am concerned that this may be achieved at the expense of the soul of the sport. Moreover, our schools are real neighbors, just blocks apart, and neither of us wants an "us vs them" attitude here in the NYC jiu jitsu scene. I met with Mr Garcia tonight at his school and we discussed the situation. He is so much more than just one of the sports greatest champions, he is an icon and a role model- in my experience the kindest and gentlest soul in the sport. Accordingly, we have agreed that the mood of the last few days is one that is not good for the sport and even worse for the NYC jiu jitsu scene. As such, both teams will stop the negative social media talk and direct challenge matches (athletes will still participate in regular tournaments with each other, but for now, no internet challenge matches). I have met most of Mr Garcia's team, and they are all great fellows. Our squad may be a little rough around the edges at times, but they all have hearts of gold - I don't teach people whose character I don't like - I just don't interact with them. I believe this is a case of fundamentally good people letting words and escalation put them in a situation that does not benefit the sport as a whole. Mr Garcia is among the most sincere and well meaning men I ever met - I think his concern about the sport and about the relationship of NYC jiu jitsu teams is correct. We all love competition and friendly rivalry, but a sense of perspective is needed to keep it appropriate and the sport we all love healthy.

Beastie Boy: Nicky Ryan, at just 15 years old, entered one of the toughest grappling tournaments in North America yesterday - the ADCC world championships trials. Mr Ryan won his first two matches by submission (heel hook variations) before losing via armbar to take 3rd place, an incredible achievement for such a young man. Mr Ryan has always greatly impressed me with his determination and maturity. Normally I have grave misgivings about very young competitors entering adult competitions as the risk of injury is definitely higher than usual and I've always felt there is something undesirable about pushing young people into tournaments, I prefer to let time pass and wait until they are a little older and enter themselves, rather than be entered by someone else. In Mr Ryan's case however, I made an exception. His older brother trains with him daily and would coach him, and Mr Ryan is extraordinarily mentally mature for his age ( far more mature than all other members of the squad I must say!). As always, Mr Ryan put on a great showing, working hard to get the submission, as is our style. This young man has so much potential and it is an honor to be a small part of his progress. There will be many more ADCC trials for him and as his body matures to match his mind, you will all see the same potential that I see in him now.

Mr Eddie Cummings: With EBI 10 fast approaching, Eddie Cummings will step up to a new challenge - his first EBI at 135 pounds. His record at previous EBI events has been nothing short of outstanding, with a 100% record of submission within regulation time, and the vast majority of those matches in far less than regulation time. This time however, he faces three new elements. The athletes in this event are among the best ever assembled in an EBI, with the man we consider the best of the 10th planet athletes, Geo Martinez, along with a very strong Brazilian contingent, including the outstanding Samir Chantre and Rafael Freitas. This may be the strongest overall EBI card since EBI 6. The second new element will be the weight cut. Even though Mr Cummings has a small frame, he has always operated above his weight category and has this never had to actually lose weight to compete before, so this should be interesting. A third factor will be of interest to all the athletes - altitude. Mexico City is a difficult venue for those unused to the thinner air. This will effect everyone except the locals equally and is definitely a source of concern as we have no experience with this whatsoever. Mr Cummings will, as always, have to rely on his great depth of knowledge around submissions to get around these three problems. Of my students, he has spent the most time with me in private classes and has a truly superb knowledge of the mechanical details of our favorite attacks. Here we work both offensive and defensive measures in irimi ashi garami, a position that Mr Cummings truly excels in and has developed a very fine reputation for very effective use in competition (shiai). A strange result of Mr Cummings excellence in ashi garami based attacks is that he has had few opportunities to show his other submission strengths - he has many - I suspect it is only a matter of time until the world sees what we see every day in the gym.

Attacking the whole body: A common misunderstanding of my approach to jiu jitsu is that I emphasize leg attacks over others. This is probably due to the fact that I teach a very advanced system of leg attacks to my students who compete in an atmosphere where most of their opponents have a relatively primitive understanding of leg attacks - so a disproportionate number of their victories come via that method. In fact, I always preach to my students the theme of attacking the whole body in order to succeed with favorite moves (tokui waza). When it comes to submissions, we have three choices. Strangles, upper body joint locks and lower body joint locks (there are a few others, but they are of much less importance). Any attempt to over emphasize any one of those three options will always create strong defensive reactions which ironically, will make it harder to break through at that intended target. A much better idea is to spread your attacks over the whole body with equal skill. The confusion and distraction created by this whole body attack will open an opponent up far more successfully than predictable localized attacks. Thus if I want a leg submission, I would be well served to vociferously attack the neck and upper body and allow the resultant distraction and reaction to open the door to the legs. Here, kohai student Ethan Crelinsten shows excellent dispersal of attacks in a recent local tournament. He attacks with great determination with armlocks (juji gatame) and strangles (triangle/sankaku) and legs (ashi garami). The barrage of attacks leaves a confused opponent open to a finish via sankaku/juji combination - a fine example of dispersed attacks creating openings for a favorite technique (tokui waza)

An observation: When I go to write my daily Instagram/Facebook posts, I make use of the photographs that my students and friends send me. Usually I like to post a visually arresting image of a competition victory or dramatic training footage or some image that captures an important principle or theme. Today when I went through my cache of photos I made the observation that for every dramatic or eye catching photo Stored in my phone, I have fifty mundane photos of daily training that suggest fatigue, frustration,
Repetition and pain. A moments reflection reveals that this is how we experience jiu jitsu on a daily basis. We carry in our mind an image of the sport that is like a highlight reel - we remember the big victories and defeats, the big breakthroughs and challenges, the revelations, the drama etc. Yet on a day to day basis it is a repetitious slog towards distant goals. It is critical that you find ways to make that daily grind fun and rewarding or you will not last. Everyone has their own way of doing it, but humor, camaraderie and goal setting are probably the most effective. This is another way that jiu jitsu mirrors life. Just as life is a daily grind interspersed with occasional peaks of joy and sadness, so to in jiu jitsu, where daily training usually is characterized by long periods of discomfort and frustration, but which is the engine that propels us towards our memorable moments and justify the hardships we went through. Here, the strain of high level contest (shiai) preparation shows on the face of Eddie Cummings as he takes a breather after a tough morning class and now must focus of weight loss and then on to an afternoon class as EBI 10 in Mexico City approaches. Whilst our memory will usually focus on the peaks and valleys of our lives, we must remember that it is only the multitude of forgotten days of grinding and struggling towards our goals that make those wonderful peaks possible.

A word of support for Mr Bravo: One of the costs of being an innovator is criticism. In general, people resist change, especially if they have invested a lot of time in the status quo. One of Eddie Bravo's most important innovations was the rule set for his competition which involves the use of over times to force a decisive result to a match within a reasonable time frame. An important innovation in his overtime was the use of classical jiu jitsu submission positions, the rear mount and juji gatame armlock (he calls it spider web) positions. He was widely criticized for this. Most of the criticism centered around the idea that athletes should never be GIVEN those positions, but should have to EARN them. My own belief is that jiu jitsu needs around five different rule sets to make sure sure all the skills of the sport are kept strong and growing in healthy directions. I want to say, however, that I really believe Mr Bravo's over time innovation is a healthy and good thing for the sport. First off, in EBI, the athletes have ten uninterrupted minutes to earn whatever positions they want - the same time they have in IBJJ rules. Once in overtime, they must choose between the two most classical finishing positions of the sport - back strangles and armlocks. This is where things get interesting. In truth, the overwhelming majority of jiu jitsu athletes spend 95% of their jiu jitsu defensive awareness on NOT GETTING INTO bad positions - and only a fraction of that in actually training the skills and awareness of how to ACTUALLY GET OUT OF THESE POSITIONS ONCE THEY ARE IN THEM. EBI overtime rules FORCE ATHLETES TO REDRESS THIS IMBALANCE. For the first time, they have to devote serious training time to defending and escaping the main finishing positions of the sport. They can't simply train themselves to avoid the attack at the onset, BUT MUST LEARN TO WORK THEIR WAY OUT FROM THE COMPLETED POSITION. This takes real skill. As a coach I can personally attest that these overtime rules forced both me and my athletes to learn a LOT more about defensive strategy and technique in two of the classical submissions of our sport and this is a healthy thing for our athletes.

Formality and informality: As a general rule I prefer a rather informal class setting. I believe formality can be a good thing in children's and beginner class, but I don't emphasize it at all in advanced classes. I don't really like being called professor, I work with first names and students do the same to me. We laugh a lot and say horribly inappropriate but (usually) funny things to each other all day 😉😂. I have always found the deepest and most profound forms of respect are unspoken in daily life and only get uttered on special occasions. The ceremonial aspects of respect, belts, saying "osu" to everything you hear, calling everyone above you in rank professor- we only do on a few special occasions. I always liked the informal atmosphere that my master, Renzo Gracie fostered. There was no endless talk about respect - but there was a stronger unspoken sense of respect for him and the project we engaged in than any ceremonially lavish atmosphere I saw. Real respect manifests itself in significant actions, not words or trivialities. When I see athletes who study under me getting up every day at 5am to get to morning class and then work out between then and the afternoon class and then go home to an evening workout, study and practice the moves and concepts we expound, push through pain, fatigue and injury to finish a workout, make an extra effort to help a team mate prepare for competition - how can I not respect them? And what words can capture the respect I feel I my heart for these men and women who do this, not for weeks and months, but for years, until they break though to their goals. Better to leave it unsaid. I focus on performance improvement and let respect come about naturally. Here the squad relaxes after another tough workout getting Eddie Cummings ready for EBI 10. Judging by the looks on our faces there is a 99% chance we are talking about women or some other fun subject - anything except jiu jitsu performance 😂😂😂

EBI 10 coming soon: Eddie Cummings has been training very hard for EBI 10 at a new weight of 135 pounds. He has been adding new attacks to his already extremely dangerous repertoire and is looking to put on a another great performance under the lights. This time the event will be in Mexico City. As part of the trip I shall teach a seminar on some of the elements that have allowed our team to do so well at previous shows. It will be hosted by my old team mate Mario Delgado Davila, who has a very successful school in Mexico City. I will be my first trip to Mexico, so I am very much looking forward to seeing the land, the city and the jiu jitsu of this great country. I hope to be able to help in some small way the development of the game in the ways that the squad is known for 😊😊😊

Drilling without sparring is unrealistic: sparring without drilling limits growth: Students often ask me about the structure of their training. The most obvious element of structure is the relationship between sparring and drilling - there are many other training methods between these two that have their place, but they form the most fundamental and important means of training. Nothing will ever beat live sparring for giving the student the opportunity to practice his or her skills in a realistic fashion under the same kind of pressure they can expect in match conditions. Sparring in all its variations and intensity levels is the king of contest preparation. Sparring alone however, is not enough. The great problem of sparring, especially when it is intense, is that it often forces us to use our most trusted moves to achieve victory. If I really want to win against a very tough opponent, I will inevitably fall back on my favorite moves (tokui waza) to get the win. This is fine for the further development of that tokui waza, but in the long term it can limit the influx of new moves into your Arsenal and create a lack of growth within your game that makes you predictable and leaves you in a plateau that you find disappointing. This is where drilling comes in. Drilling allows you to practice a move without resistance or against very low resistance and thus gain confidence as you learn about the mechanics and principles of the move. As your expertise increases, the move can be brought into sparring until in time it becomes a natural part of your full sparring repertoire. This ensures constant growth in your game over time. Thus the essential role of both sparring and drilling in performance improvements sparring improves your ability to apply moves in realistic situations, drilling expands the repertoire of techniques that you are willing to use in sparring, which in time will lead to performance improvements. Thus our training mantra: DRILLING WITHOUT SPARRING IS UNREALISTIC: SPARRING WITHOUT DRILLING LIMITS GROWTH. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan go through leg locking drills in England prior to Polaris 4, where those same skills won Mr Tonon victory via leg lock

A truly remarkable performance: UFC 205 had many outstanding performances, but main event star, Conor McGregor saved the best until last with a stunning victory against the title holder and immensely talented Eddie Alvarez. Much of what guides our intuitions as to an athletes ability is not just who he beat, but how he beat them. In truth it was shocking to watch the degree to which Mr McGregor used superb control of distance, pace, timing and placement to dismantle such a talented and tough opponent. In doing so he did what he said he would - hold two belts at the same time. Whatever ones opinion of Mr McGregor's public antics outside of fighting, one cannot deny that he has backed up what many see as overly brash talk with brilliant and successful action. Moreover, he has made huge waves in the sport in relatively little time - it was not long ago that people where discussing him as a talented new comer and whether he was really worthy of a title shot at all - now he has two belts around his waist - both won against extremely good opponents via very impressive knockouts. In addition, he has shown a true champions ability to come back from a bad loss in short order and not just rectify the loss, but greatly surpass where he was prior to that loss. Whilst his style seems almost entirely built around the ability to get his dangerous left hand to bear upon his opponent, and there are open questions about his ability to prevail when he can't: no one can deny the incredible achievements he has made with his relatively narrow skill set in a sport where we typically believe a very wide skill set is essential just to survival, let alone world beating success. His lifestyle, his demeanor, his fighting style and his goals all make him the biggest risk taker in the sport - so impressive to see a man stand on the cusp of disaster and ridicule on the basis of those risks - yet through the power of his personality, self belief and skill, turn it all into a bigger triumph. Hats off to a truly great fighter and personality who took the biggest event in MMA history and made it his.

Heavy artillery: The UFC has gone all out to bring in the big guns for UFC 205 tonight in NYC. For the first time, the UFC is on stage at Madison Square Garden tonight. This is the stage that in another era hosted Ali vs Frazier to decide the world's most eminent fighter. Now in the modern era it hosts a slew of great fighters in the best combat sport to launch operations in New York. Has there ever been so much talent in one event? I remember in the 90's going to small sports bars in NYC trying to find a place that would show the sport - it was banned on cable and could only be seen on satellite TV. Now it is in the premier venue in America in shining lights. Thank you to all the remarkable men and women who have made this transition possible - this is a special night for the fans, but also for the sport itself 😊😊😊😊

All American Brian Stann trains with the squad: It is always a pleasure to meet the many visitors who come to the fine city of New York and make the journey down to the basement of learning. None were a greater pleasure to meet than former UFC standout, Brian Stann, who is in town for UFC 205 where he will provide color commentary in his field of expertise. This man is so much more than just another athlete. He is a former Marine in our armed forces and today runs a charity dedicated to helping former servicemen and women find employment after national service. Talking to him you get a strong insight into his sense of civic duty. He is truly a gentleman warrior who finds that balance of the true martial artist between strength and kindness. It is a humbling experience to meet such a gentleman. We taught him submissions, but I think he taught us something much greater. Of course grappling for MMA is very different from pure submission grappling, but Mr Stann fearlessly went in and got his hands dirty with some of the latest techniques and strategies of submission grappling - a real mensch of the sport. The squad is hard at work preparing for the ADCC trials, refining old skills and adding new ones. Look for Eddie Cummings to come roaring back into the spotlight as he prepares for both ADCC and EBI 10 in rapid succession- he is training in an outstanding fashion for both rule sets 😊😊

Assembling the troops: The biggest show of them all - UFC 205 has rolled into town. Chris Weidman came to RGA to hone his highly developed skills in preparation for his fight with the uber talented Yoel Romero. It was a joy to see all the premier fighters and trainers around Madison Square Garden for this historical event. MSG was a fight center I would see on television when I was a child growing up in New Zealand when the greats of boxing in the 1970's and 80's fought their epic battles. To be among it all at the very first event at MSG in the modern era of MMA is such a special feeling. All the troops got together for a special night of training that went past midnight and created a memorable atmosphere among the many coaches and athletes. My beloved master, Renzo Gracie was on the mats delving out his priceless wisdom , experience and wit. My senpai (big brother) Ricardo Almeida was there. He is one of the few men I know who has been incredibly successful as a jiu jiu jitsu athlete, mma athlete, coach of both sports, ambassador of the sport and as a businessman growing the sport through schools - he has done it all and done it exceedingly well. The immortal Ray Longo and tactician extraordinaire, Mark Henry were working hard. UFC Champions and standouts Fabricio Werdum, Eddie Alvarez, Stephen Thompson, Khabib Nurmagomedov showing a skill set that would make the entire Marvel and DC superhero line up look like wimps. What a room to be in!! As I went home at 1am on the subway I felt so privileged to be a tiny part of such a special city, at a special time, among so many special people 😊😊😊

Competition intensity: Very often I am asked how I am able to reconcile safe training in the gym with the breaking intensity required for top level competition (shiai). The squads safety record in training is very good despite being a group whose philosophy of jiu jitsu is based around ruthlessly seeking submissions over the whole body. People ask how they are able to train in a relatively mild way with each other every day, yet when the time comes in shiai, to be able to take a lock or strangle through to completion with maximum torque. The key is to focus skill development around CONTROL rather than power. When your ability to control an opponent's movement is well developed, you can apply whatever degree of power you choose at the time you wish to use it. When control is insufficient, you will be forced to apply full power in the hope that maybe you will get a break before your partner can effect an escape. This creates a very unsafe training environment and a hit or miss competition record. Most of the major joint locks and strangles offer great amounts of control as well as breaking leverage - learn to exploit that so that you can break and strangle at your discretion rather than in a flurry of movement where you are racing against time to get the job done. The great cliche of our sport is "position before submission," but the squad operates with a different mantra - CONTROL BEFORE SUBMISSION. In this way the gulf between the training room and the big shows can be spanned much more easily. Here Garry Tonon takes his skills honed in the gym on to the big stage with devastating results as he applies severe pressure to his opponents leg via heel hook at EBI 9. The big size difference is easily overcome as excellent positioning and precise positioning of lever and fulcrum create crushing power with excellent control.

Reflections on my senior students: I am often asked about how different body types influence the way I coach students. I have talked about this in the past. A question I am asked much less often, but which is in my opinion more important, is that of TACTICAL STYLE and how that influences my coaching. When you look at my three senior competing students, it is obvious that they are physically very different, but more importantly, they are tactically very different as well. Gordon Ryan has a PRESSURE based game where that pressure elicits defensive reactions that create opportunity. Garry Tonon has a SCRAMBLE based game centered around using movement where he controls the direction and pace of that movement to create advantage. Eddie Cummings has a KUZUSHI based game where he works from bottom position to off balance people in ways that create advantage (Interestingly Mr Cummings game is the most similar to my own of the three). The great theme that I push to my students is this - WHATEVER DIFFERENCES THERE ARE IN TACTICAL STYLE, THE FINISHING POSITIONS ARE THE SAME FOR ALL. Thus my students may employ very different overall approaches to the game, yet all have very similar finishing holds. In this way I approach the great problem of SIMILARITY AND DIFFERENCE in jiu jitsu. How to reconcile the need to promote individualism and spontaneity whilst remaining true to the mechanical nature of the sport which is based around lever and fulcrum and whose strictures dictate the same way to all, regardless of difference. In this way jiu jitsu can function both as a means of self expression and as a humbling lesson in the primacy of physics over our wants and desires.

It's a celebration bitches! NYC style: Actually no, the squad never celebrates victories. Tomorrow it's back to the basement of suffering to refine and develop skills for the squad. The ADCC trials are around the corner, Eddie Cummings must step up to face the challenge of EBI 10 at a new weight of 135 pounds - against the man we consider the best of Eddie Bravo's students - Geo Martinez. He is very interesting as an opponent because he is one of the few remaining 10th planet athletes who is really skilled in the true 10th planet system based around rubber guard/ lockdown half guard/twister rather than the modern 10th planet athletes style which is basically cloned after our own style. Mr Cummings preparation so far has been superb, but his aspirations are even higher. Then Gordon and Nicky Ryan face big superfight challenges in San Diego - so it's back to training and development for the squad - time to turn off the disco lights and crank up the ashi garamis 😂😂😂 Awesome photo by Jeff Chu

Reflections on EBI 9 and rule sets: The remarkable victory of welterweight Garry Tonon over a distinguished field of light heavyweights has impressed many, but underneath that victory are some interesting reflections upon the notion of rule sets and promoting desirable behavior among the competitors and directions of growth in the sport. The fundamental problem the sport faces is this: on the one hand we want to make the sport progress in directions that express our ideals of the sport; on the other, athletes want to win, by whatever means the rule sets allow. In practice this often means that athletes will utilize the rule set to achieve victory in ways that fulfill the letter of the rules, but not the spirit of the rules. Thus they exploit the rule set by acting in ways that increase the likelihood of their victory, but which go against our ideals of the sport. At EBI 9 it was obvious that some athletes were looking to stall to get to the overtime and then exploit the overtime rules to secure victory. Whilst this is perfectly legal and even understandable (every athletes wants to win after all) it results in a situation where the ideal of the sport - that we must look to secure control that leads to submission at all times, is lost. The usual response is to change the rules to prohibit undesired behavior. My point is this - you can never really legislate away the natural tendency of athletes to exploit a given rule set in ways that raise the likelihood of them winning - that's just what athletes do. GOOD ATTACKING, POSITIVE JIU JITSU COMES FROM A MINDSET, NOT A RULE SET. Ultimately, negative stalling behavior is a coaching problem, not a legislative problem. Athletes must be coached towards the ideal of the sport so that they express that ideal regardless of the rule set. Most of the great players of the last decade, Roger Gracie, Braulio Estima, Marcelo Garcia etc, applied an approach of attacking to submission regardless of the rule set they operated under and this is a big part of what made them great. Here Garry Tonon takes gold at EBI 9 where he embodied once again the ideal of constant attempts at control to submission regardless of time and rules.

The spirit of attack: Garry Tonon showed that a smaller man can carry a proactive attack strategy even against larger opponents tonight as he won EBI 9. Even when he failed to get a submission in regulation time, it was not for want of trying. Here he jumps into a flying sankaku (triangle) attack, showing the kind of calculated risk taking, backed by skills, required to make this approach work. Once again Mr Eddie Bravo put on a great show and format for the athletes and once again the squad showed up looking not just to win, but to do so in a way that shows the best aspects of the sport and helps it growth. I am in an airplane now at LAX, preparing to take the redeye back to NYC to teach tomorrow morning. Normally the redeye flight back from LA is horrid - but when you have a student like Garry Tonon performing the way he does - it's a lot easier to enjoy the flight home 😉😉 Looking forward to seeing all my students tomorrow - thank you all so much for your help in getting the squad ready for the big shows - we could not do this without all of you. Photo by Bane

Mission impossible-Accomplished: Garry Tonon celebrates his third title after winning EBI 9 in dramatic fashion via overtime riding advantage. He fought his way to the finals where he fought the great Vinny Magalhaes, former ADCC champion. It was the toughest EBI yet for Mr Tonon, as he was a last minute replacement for injured team mate, Gordon Ryan. He had just fought under a different rule set a week ago in England and then suffered a small but deep cut that interfered with the little preparation time he had in a weight division far above his own. Yet with characteristic professionalism, skill and gung ho spirit, he battled through to a win over the big men and showed that the true spirit of jiu jitsu - built around the ideal of lesser size and strength controlling and defeating greater size and strength, is not empty talk, but with training and strategy, came to reality on the stage of the Orpheum theater in LA at EBI 9.

Weigh ins for EBI 9: Normally weigh ins are a juggling act of training preparation and weight cutting. This time however, Garry Tonon is massively underweight for the weight class so there is no thought of weight cutting. As always we have to sign paperwork for the show - Mr Tonon's response to the various media questions on his fact sheet were interesting to say the least. Other sports? Gymnastics, professional bull riding and nude chess...um...right. Previous accomplishments? 5X Chilean Sambo champion?...ok...Why do you compete? The three C's...cash, chicks and championships...um...right...This boy has his priorities straight 😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂

The three deadliest leg lockers in the world heading to EBI for grappling showdown: This photo will definitely bring fear to the hearts of the squads opponents as they prepare for submission show down in LA. These three deadly warriors are at the forefront of martial arts - looking to show their lethal skills in the city of angels 😉😂😂😂😉

What exactly are you waiting for? A common problem when I am coaching jiu jitsu athletes is that of students second guessing themselves when opportunity presents itself during a match. Too often students are looking for a perfect situation from which to launch an attack. Whilst I would never advocate sloppy set ups or random attacks; I do caution students on waiting for perfect set ups and moments for the simple reason that they rarely happen and are fleeting in nature. As a general rule, once an opportunity arises, it rarely gets better by waiting - usually an intelligent opponent will become cognizant of his vulnerability and recover. Thus the skill of SEEING OPPORTUNITY AND ACTING UPON IT IMMEDIATELY is crucial to success. The great American General Patton said it well - "A good plan enacted now is better than a perfect plan enacted ten minutes from now." Once you see an opening, follow it with action and be prepared to follow the action through to your goal. This almost always garners better results than waiting for a better and better opportunity that may never arise and then force you to take greater risks as time runs out. Here, kohai student Eric Sherman shows fine recognition of opportunity followed by decisive action in the opening moments of a bout at a local show in NYC.

Smallest competitor - biggest skill set and heart: Garry Tonon walks around at 167 pounds and could easily make the EBI 145 pound division (he does not, as we like to see Eddie Cummings rule that domain). This Sunday he will take on athletes coming down from up to 230-240 pounds to weigh in at 205 for EBI 9. This might seem like a suicide mission - and for most, it would be. Mr Tonon however, has a long history of going up to fight bigger men. When he was a brown belt he took on Buchecha and Cyborg at ADCC and only lost narrowly by points. He dominated most of the action against Rousimar Palhares is a thrilling draw, despite a colossal size and strength disadvantage. He lost by negative guard pull to Vinny Magalhaes after pushing hard for submissions the whole match. He has beaten by submission, Ralek Gracie and Gilbert Burns despite a big size and strength disadvantage. In all my coaching experience I have not seen a grappling athlete with bigger heart and a stronger desire to go out and compete against anyone, any time, any place. Rest assured, the squad may have had a setback today, but come Sunday we shall come out all guns blazing 😊😊 Tomorrow the senpai and kohai will train and drill and get ready for this new challenge - one which represents the best spirit of jiu jitsu - the belief that with superior technique and strategy, greater size and strength can be controlled and overwhelmed by lesser.

Sad news: Gordon Ryan suffered a nasty cut on the eyelid today during his last day of hard sparring in preparation for EBI 9. It has been tightly stitched and dressed but there is no way he will be able to compete on Sunday. He will be replaced by Garry Tonon. Gordon was already the smallest man on the card and Garry is a weight division below Mr Ryan, so this will be a tough assignment indeed. Mr Tonon was himself cut during training in England, but his cut is much less severe and in a much less sensitive area than Mr Ryan's. He will be ready to go by Sunday. Both cuts were the result of training with people outside of our gym - there is always a catch here - it's good to train with unfamiliar partners as this is something you will experience in competition; however, sometimes these strangers bring a spastic and clumsy movement that is hazardous in terms of small and unnecessary injuries like these. Thankfully Gordon Ryan has other big upcoming projects to prepare for as soon as this problem passes, but still, the disappointment is strong. Mr Tonon will commence training as soon as his own cut allows and the show will go on

Tomorrow I will chat with team mate Matt Serra on his UFC Unfiltered podcast. Mr Serra is Renzo Gracie's first American black belt and of course, BJJ world champion and former UFC welterweight champion. When I was a beginning student Mr Serra was one of Mr Gracie's senior students (Ricardo Almeida and Rodrigo Gracie were the others. As such he was my senpai (big brother/senior) and, as anyone who trained at RGA at that time will attest, an inspiration to all of us. Much of my desire to improve in the sport came from daily training sessions with Mr Serra whose skills and abilities left us all in awe - wishing that one day we could attain such a level. Outside of jiu jitsu and professional fighting, Matt is absolutely one of the funniest characters in the sport - he truly can light up a room when he enters. Best of all is when he has a target upon whom to aim that sense of humor. Usually it is the long suffering Ray Longo, with whom he combines to create so many talented fighters in Long Island NY. Tomorrow however, it will be me!! 😊😊 Mr Serra and I shall talk about old times in training along with a host of random topics. If you feel like listening in, you will see what a character Mr Serra is and perhaps learn a little about the approach to training that enabled Mr Gracie to create such a large number of outstanding students in those early days of jiu jitsu in the USA. 😊😊

Next assignment: After a great weekend in England, where Garry Tonon defeated two time world champion Gilbert Burns via heel hook, it's back to NYC for four days of training getting Gordon Ryan ready for EBI 9 in Los Angeles California. Mr Ryan has been training diligently in the shadow of Mr Tonon's big show at Polaris, but now takes center stage on the training mats for this heavyweight event where he will be by far the smallest competitor. We are headed to Heathrow airport now then back to the mats in NYC 😊😊 Great to see the burgeoning BJJ scene in The UK and the rising success of a professional grappling league - Polaris - this bodes well for the future of British and European grappling.

One step forward - one step back: Live training at the seminar today finished with a disappointment. Garry Tonon took a small but deep cut to the forehead during sparring - we are off to local hospital now 😞 Hoping to get some stitches in quickly but it's going to be a while until Garry can train again, so Worlds competition is in jeopardy at this point 😞 We will have a better idea of situation after we spoke to local doctors - off to Birmingham hospital now

Going over ashi garami at Braulio Estima's school in Birmingham England. The British lad and ladies are doing a good job following some complex material from myself, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan. Mr Tonon is doing a superb job of showing the tactics he used last night to defeat Gilbert Burns. Though I am very proud of all the squads competition (shiai) achievements, nothing makes me more proud of their ability to teach - that way I feel very positive about the future growth of the sport - so much more important than mere individual achievement 😊😊 Gordon Ryan even agreed to take off his crown to teach - amazing! 😂😂😂 Thanks to @braulioestima and Garry and Gordon and most of all, British BJJ which appears healthy and full of enthusiasm 😊😊

Breakthrough!! Garry Tonon wins via his tokui waza, inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami - defeating two time world champion and ADCC bronze medalist Gilbert Burns despite a major size and strength disadvantage at Polaris 4 in England tonight. It was an interesting match, with Mr Burns scoring some nice takedowns and positional scrambles to pins whilst Mr Tonon employed an interesting strategy of recovery into standing position to set up submissions. About two thirds of the way through the match, the strategy worked as Mr Tonon locked out a very tight cross ashi garami and controlled it through to the finish against the very explosive and strong Mr Burns. It was a good show overall. There was a fine match between 10th planet standout Nathan Orchard who countered the dangerous leg lock game of Japanese wizard Imanari with a solid traditional BJJ positional game through to a strangle. Dillon Danis put on a superb performance, two fine looking arm in guillotines, one of which was unlucky not to get a finish; then a very well applied inverted heel hook for a very nice win indeed against highly decorated and larger opponent, Jackson Sousa. It was nice to see three such well engineered submissions at such a high level against such talented opponents. Now we head back to NYC to prepare Gordon Ryan for EBI 9 where he will once again be then smallest man in the field - depending upon his technique and tactics as his lifeline to victory.

Size difference: I always urge my students to see the main attribute of jiu jitsu training as the ability to control and defeat greater size and aggression with less. Often the squad struggles to find opponents their own size to compete against. Very often they have to fight opponents significantly larger than themselves as a result. Today at the weigh ins for Polaris 4, Garry Tonon weighed in at his actual bodyweight of 167.5 - after eating a steak lunch. His opponent - Gilbert Burns was supposed to weigh in at 170 but failed to make weight by almost 10 pounds. He was so far over that he will not even try to make the weight and once again the squad will face a much larger opponent and rely on technique to prevail. Nothing shows belief in our technique better than taking on much heavier opponents.

Structured training: So often I see people engage in training with no plan as to what they are trying to accomplish. This will always limit your ability to improve over time - the whole reason why we engage in practice. It is critical that someone in the room have a clear idea as to what we are trying to improve and how we are going to do it. In a beginners class or a general class, it is enough for the coach to know what the plan is and run the class accordingly. At elite levels however, I like to make the athletes part of the discussion as to what we are trying to achieve - they have the knowledge and insight to add to the discussion and we can make adjustments based on their input. Here Garry Tonon, Gordon Ryan and myself outline want we want to go over at a local gym in Poole England just prior to Polaris 4 - once the plan is set, words get replaced by action and the room heats up accordingly.

An American werewolf in London: After-training dinner with Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon is always an adventure. On the way back to the hotel Gordon Ryan saw a pair of poles in the street and immediately went to street ninja mode and began climbing them, screaming something about the memory of Harambe!! I always dread seeing things like this before a match, fearing accidental injury - maybe I am getting too old! Anyway - after paying tribute to Harambe,
Mr Ryan climbed down safely in front of an admiring (?) crowd of curious English people and not so admiring police officers and went to sleep - ready for another day of training 😂😂😰🤕😜😳😅🤒😷😂😊😊🙄💀😄😄😃😉😂😂😂

Shiai preparation: Garry Tonon and Gordon prepare for their upcoming respective competitions (shiai) in a local gym in England. the high humidity and cold create a steam room effect that made for an eerie but enjoyable mist - appropriate for England - the misty Isle that has given so much to world history. At this stage the training takes on the same character as the final stages of sharpening a knife - the hard work has been done - now it's a matter of gently polishing the edge without removing any more metal - body movement and mental programming are the emphasis now, not physical conditioning or skill development. Mr Ryan's training is still physical as he still has a week before his event. Building the athlete to a peak over time is key here.

Newark airport: Heading to England for Polaris 4 where Garry Tonon takes on the outstanding and physically very powerful Gilbert Burns in fifteen minutes of submission grappling action. Mr Tonon has trained extremely well. Fellow squad member Gordon Ryan is traveling with us also as he prepares for EBI 9, the heavyweight competition where he will be by far the smallest competitor - a situation that is becoming normal for the squad now. After we return Monday its a quick turn around to California for Mr Ryan's show. It's a privilege to be able to go to so many shows to exhibit our approach to grappling against such distinguished competition

Realistic combinations: In the past I have talked about the critical need for students to learn to combine submission attacks into short sequences to overcome resistance and break through to victory by submission. Just as no good boxer would expect to defeat a worthy opponent with single punches, so too, no jiu jitsu player would expect to defeat a worthy opponent first time everything time with the first submission he tries. One problem I often see however, is people selecting inappropriate combinations. Sometimes these look good when drilling on a non resisting training partner, but fail in live sparring. The key is to select combinations that allow us to transition in a way that MINIMIZES THE DISTANCE WE HAVE TO TRAVEL TO GET TO THE NEXT ATTACK WHILST MAXIMIZING OUR CONTROL OVER OUR OPPONENTS MOVEMENT AS HE TRIES TO ESCAPE THE FIRST ATTACK. This creates very effective submission combinations that are difficult to avoid even when resisting as hard as possible. Here, talented kohai student Matthew Tesla shows fine form at a recent local tournament with a well selected combination leg attack that offers his opponent little opportunity to avoid or counter the second attack - resulting in a nice submission win. Creating rationally ordered, short submission combinations based on the criteria I just outlined will greatly increase your chance of success with the various submission holds we work with with.

Staying relaxed: Probably the single greatest obstacle to efficiency in human movement in general, and jiu jitsu in particular, is EXCESS TENSION. We all have a natural tendency to equate maximum effort with maximum muscular tension. In jiu jitsu this usually leads to poor movement and an inability to mold our body into the complex postures required to complete the various moves of the sport. Don't get me wrong - there are times we need tension in the body as we grapple - finishing a submission is an obvious example - and certainly we don't want to be so relaxed that we cannot form a tight connection to our opponents body when we need it. Nonetheless, as a general rule we must train ourselves to avoid unnecessary tension that inhibits efficient movement. Much of jiu jitsu requires us to fold, roll and tumble our body, all of which is best done whilst in a fairly relaxed state. In any given match there will be long periods where you can be very physically relaxed, along with many short periods where you can be fairly relaxed and a few moments where you will need to be very tense and tight. Finding the right proportions of relaxation vs tension is a big part of the journey towards expertise. Here, kohai student Emmanuel Vera shows a excellent degree of relaxed body allowing fluid motion into cross ashi garami and a fine heel hook finish - where maximal tension is applied for a brief time. Very impressive for a blue belt - on his way to winning gold all via submission in the expert no gi division at a recent tournament

The link between standing technique and ground technique: A theme that I always push upon my students is that of balancing standing technique (tachi waza) and ground technique (ne waza). The most high percentage submission holds are all best performed on the ground, where control over an opponent's movement is usually much easier than standing positions. Nonetheless, considerable time must be invested in bringing the fight down to the mat in ways that make submission possible if the art is to have serious combative value (and of course, the opposite - getting back up to your feet from the ground if the situation should demand it). This ability to move naturally and easily from standing positions to ground and back and forth at will is a fine thing to behold and has immense combat value. Of course in submission grappling most of our attention is devoted to the means of getting to, and finishing, submission holds - so we cant realistically expect the kind of level of technique in specialized standing grappling styles like Olympic wrestling and Judo. What I often say to my students is this: I EXPECT YOU TO BE KILLERS ON THE GROUND AND COMPETENT ON THE FEET. This a fair view that reflects the priorities of the sport whilst paying respect to the realities of combat. What we must avoid is situations where students get to a high level on the floor but are straightforwardly incompetent on their feet. Here kohai student Matthew Tesla shows a nice link between standing work and ground work utilizing de ashi harai, a form of footsweep that our team greatly favors for its efficiency (you may remember it being used to good effect by Gordon Ryan against Keenan Cornelius) in a recent local tournament. It is a very nicely performed sequence and reflects very well on Mr Tesla's rapidly growing skill set.

I see much to admire in the Japanese model of classroom structure. It is based around the distinction between senpai (senior students) and kohai (junior students). The seniors take the biggest challenges and represent the school in the big shows. They provide the inspiration through their skills and deeds to the juniors and assist in the dissemination of knowledge through the training room. Equally important and far greater in number are the kohai. These students are a tier down in experience and skill level, but working their way up. They are absolutely critical in the contest preparation of the senpai and in building a strong training program which can build them into future senpai. The kohai often work in obscurity as they must first prove themselves in small local shows and work their way through merit into the ranks of the senpai. In every tough gym you will see this division occur naturally and organically, even when no one is trying to make it happen. This weekend several of our kohai emerged from the gym and put on stellar displays that show how their hard work and time with the senpai has hardened them and refined their skills. Ethan Crelinsten won first place at Sapeteiro 5 featherweight winning all matches by submission in regulation time (EBI rules). Eric Sherman and Frankie Adam Rosenthal shared first place at Grappling Industries show in NYC yesterday - winning all via heel hook. At the same show Emmanuelle Vera won first place in expert division, every match via heel hook - he is only a blue belt! Watching them train so hard with the senpai every day is a privilege for me, a benefit for them, and a necessity for the senpai. As always, THE BEST KIND OF BENEFIT IS MUTUAL BENEFIT. The relationship between senpai and kohai is the perfect example of this. It was great to see the kohai have their time in the sun yesterday and show the fruit of their labor.

The value of rematches: A very natural question to ask as you engage in the study of jiu jitsu is whether or not you are really improving over time. The problem is that as you train and improve, so do the people you are training with. As a result, it often feels as though no progress is being made. A very good test to gauge the amount of progress you are making over time is to rematch an opponent you have not come up against in some time - of course they too must have been training as per normal, otherwise the test will be rendered inaccurate. Exactly this situation occurred earlier today when Gordon Ryan rematched Todd Mueckenheim, a talented and athletic opponent who had narrowly defeated Mr Ryan by points six months ago. Today they met again in Florida. It was a short match, with Mr Ryan dominating the entire chain of events through to a submission win. It was gratifying to see in such a clear way the improvements in Mr Ryan's performance and the effects of a progressive training program that constantly assesses and improves the sports performance of those following it. Mr Ryan put on a dazzling combination of ashi garami, back control and kimura systems and perhaps most interestingly, the manner in which these different systems can be linked in a bout to make them extremely difficult to defend against. Mr Muckenheim showed admirable confidence in his abilities in taking a bet of $10,000 dollars of his own money against Mr Ryan, who also bet his money - though in the opposite way. However, he was not facing the same man he matched before and the gamble was lost. Here you can see Mr Ryan using some of the more advanced elements of our back control system. Unfortunately the first component of the system has proved so successful in competition that the other five components have not been necessary to use, it was nice to see some elements of the second component being shown in public today.

High percentage submission holds: Our approach to jiu jitsu is centered around the idea of CONTROL THAT LEADS TO SUBMISSION. Accordingly, a large part of our training time is invested in perfecting the mechanical details of the most high percentage submission holds. People are often surprised to learn that I only teach around 15-20 families of submission holds. These are the most successful types of hold in high level competition in all weight categories and across all belt levels. There are only so many ways the human body can be broken and strangled by another body. Among those we find around fifteen to twenty types of hold are truly effective in competition. There are innumerable other holds, but I don't believe the meager results gained from them justify the amount of training time it would require to perfect their use - instead we focus all our attention of those with a high probability of success. You will notice that I said "families" of submission holds - thus the American lock (ude garame) is one such family. Within that single family there are many, many variations and still more set ups etc etc. thus fifteen to twenty families of submissions represents an enormous amount of study. Among them you will find all those families that one sees in every grappling event, juji gatame armlocks, kimura, knee bar, figure four toe hold etc etc. A big part of my job as the coach of this program is to deepen my students knowledge of the essential families of submission hold and and then embed them in coherent systems that enable a student to apply them against strong resistance; then let their knowledge of the mechanics of the move create the kind of pressure that will force a submission against even a very determined foe. Here fifteen year old Nicky Ryan gives Eddie Bravo, maestro of his own system - the rubber guard - a nice view of one of his favorite high percentage submissions, the heel hook, as he uses our ashi garami system to work into a variation of the move to secure victory in a recent super fight.

Classroom role models: An impression many people have is that the social dynamic in the gym is one of teacher teaching and students learning. This certainly may be the case in a small local class, but in a big and well established classroom it is an over simplification. A critical role is played by the senior students (senpai). They often have a more direct contact with the junior students than the sensei does and often are an essential part of getting the teachers vision into the hands of the practicing students. One of my most important roles as a teacher is to establish a strong cadre of senior students who assist in the learning process of the entire training room. That way one can create a room where there are many guiding hands to help those who need it and yet all are united by a common vision of the sport. That is one of the reasons why I always teach to the level of the most talented people in the room. It builds that upper echelon who can then assist me in getting the knowledge to everyone in time. I was myself a product of this system. When I was a white belt we had Renzo as our sensei, but also Ricardo Almeida, Rodrigo Gracie and Matt Serra as our senior students. They were incredible role models and inspirational to us juniors. I never forgot how crucial they were to my development and worked hard to build a similar structure when I began teaching. Here I am with one of my favorite senior students, Garry St Ledger, whose world championship level judo skills (in addition to his BJJ black belt) make him a truly valuable addition to the room as he helps immensely in the standing skills that are such a big part of my vision for the future of the sport.

Friends from afar: One of the great things about being based in NYC is the frequent opportunity to have visitors come in to learn the kingly art of jiu jitsu at the academy. As the greatest of the great, Jigoro Kano emphasized - the best kind of benefit is mutual benefit. It is a pleasure when talented and enthusiastic visitors come in. They bring new skills and perspectives and challenges to our squad, whilst gaining the same for themselves. Best of all is when they come regularly through the year. Then they get great feedback on their progress and the effectiveness of their training program - and of course - we get the same. The critical ability to apply your skills on an unfamiliar partner is also worked - that is important for contest (shiai) preparation. It also creates a strong and important link between jiu jitsu and our overall happiness, as travel and friendship are two of the very best means of bringing joy into human life - when combined with a passion for jiu jitsu - it's smiles all around 😊😊 Here talented visitors and friends Asim Zaidi and Assane Diop bring French flair and je ne sais quoi, their lovely girlfriends bring the looks and charm, the squad brings the submission skills and me...um...I guess I bring the sunblock and hairstyling skills 😖😜😂😂🤕😅

It's a long way to the top: Very often people ask me how my students progress so quickly to headline major professional grappling tournaments after a relatively short period of time in the sport. My answer always runs along these lines - people only take notice of athletes once they get to the big shows - what they don't realize is that all these athletes started small and did their time in local shows that no one pays attention to, developing their skills, their ability to control performance anxiety, their capacity to take their game and apply it upon someone they have never grappled previously etc. This developmental phase is crucial to anyone with big aspirations in the sport. Great athletes are not created fully grown and mature - their athletic life mirrors their actual life - they start off weak and totally dependent on others for help and sustenance, but in time grow in capability and confidence to become independent and strong. Nobody remembers the innumerable small local tournaments that Garry Tonon, Eddie Cummings and Gordon Ryan trekked to on their own volition and dollar, gaining critical experience that would prove invaluable later at the big shows. Don't rush this phase - once it's gone, it does not come back. Learn and grow here, always with your mind on your distant goals, but learning here and now to build the foundation upon which something great can be built. Here, Frank Adam Rosenthal takes his rapidly developing gym game to the local tournament scene and controls a variation of the juji gatame armlock position very nicely on route to the winners podium in one of many small, but very significant steps that must be made and profited from before the big leaps are made.

Body type and advantage: observe the three men in the photo. It is immediately apparent that all three differ markedly in body type. They share something in common however - all three were Olympic champions in Judo and rose to be the absolute best in the world in their generation and arguably of all time. The same game can be played in jiu jitsu. There are many distinguished figures in contemporary jiu jitsu, too many to list here, but six names that nobody will argue against being described as among the foremost in success and influence in their time in the sport would be Roger Gracie, Braulio Estima, Marcelo Garcia, Rafael Mendes, Cobrinha and Leandro Lo. Yet it is clear that these champions have very different bodies and even look very different in the way they move their bodies. The lesson is simple - WE CANNOT USE BODY TYPE AS AN EXCUSE FOR SUCCESS OR FAILURE IN ANY FORM OF GRAPPLING SPORT. There is no link between championship success and body type. So often I am asked whether an athlete I coach is more successful with a given move or position due to his body type. For example, people will often tell me that the long rangy body of Gordon Ryan is the key to his strong back control. Yet they overlook the readily observable fact that Eddie Cummings, with an entirely different body type, also exhibits very strong back control - he just uses different methods. The same can be said of Roger Gracie and Marcelo Garcia - both were superb in attacking the back, but they have very different bodies and very different methodologies. In truth, THERE ARE SO MANY DIFFERENT WAYS TO ACHIEVE VICTORY IN OUR SPORT THAT NO ONE BODY TYPE CAN MONOPOLIZE GOLD MEDALS. There are sports where body types and attributes confer advantage - basketball is an obvious example - there are only so many ways to get a ball in a net high above the average persons reach; but jiu jitsu is not like this. None of the major submission holds require any exceptional physical gifts and the means of getting to them are limitless - so success is equal opportunity in jiu jitsu and the winners podium at the best known competitions reflect this heartening fact.

Expertise: When we think of expertise in jiu jitsu we typically equate it with skill level on the mat - how good are you at performing the various moves and tactics of the sport and applying them against skilled opponents? It is important to realize however, that expertise is a concept with many faces. One of the most important elements of expertise and one which makes it easy to distinguish beginner from expert, is the ability of an expert to make significant distinctions between events and situations that the beginner simply does not see. Most people are familiar with the often used example of Alaskan natives (Inuit or Eskimo) and their vocabulary for "snow." Most people typically use the word "snow" to apply to any situation where white powdery condensation falls from the sky in winter. For our purposes, one word, "snow" conveys enough information to get the job done. The Alaskan natives however, live most of their lives in snow. They must be able to travel, hunt, fish, derive water, build shelter etc in snowy conditions. As such, they need to be able to make fine grained distinctions between different kinds of snowfall, as this can have very important consequences for their actions. Accordingly they have a vast number of different words for "snow" each describing subtle, but very important, types of snow that I simply do not see or make. As such, they have an experts view of snow, whilst I have a naive beginners view and our respective vocabularies reveal that. So too in jiu jitsu. When the squad talks about a given move like "ashi garami" together in training, we have a complex vocabulary to match each of the many subtle but important distinctions that will make the difference between success and failure when applying the move on a skilled opponent. Thus we will talk about irimi ashi garami, outside ashi garami, ushiro ashi garami etc etc so that we can easily coach each other and indeed ourselves, to make those subtle but important distinctions that demarcate success and failure. So much of what we call expertise is exactly this - the ability to make fine grained, but relevant distinctions, that others do not. Here the squad works on irimi ashi garami

Information overload: When I first began coaching I was anxious to pass as much detailed information as possible to students when demonstrating moves; in the belief that the more details they had, the more perfect their performance of the move would be. I soon found the opposite effect took place. The students did not have the experience to know which details ought to be given priority and so tended to emphasize the least important details over the most important. In addition, many simply lost track of vast amounts of detail and ended up remembering nothing. Worst of all, I often saw students in live sparring desperately trying to recall information and hesitating when speed of action was required much more than some additional detail. As I gained in experience I came to believe that it is quite counter-productive to throw vast amounts of detail at students, even advanced students, at one time. The real value of a coach is to make good assessments as to what are the CRITICAL details a student needs to get the job done, not ALL the details underlying any given move. Further details can always be added at another time. The determining factor in whether the student will be successful in applying his or her knowledge is not how much he or she knows, BUT HOW MUCH THEY CAN RECALL UNDER STRESS. The truth is that none of us can recall very much under sufficiently stressful conditions. My job then, is not dumping information - IT IS ABBREVIATING AND PRIORITIZING INFORMATION. Once I feel it is absorbed in ways that a student can utilize it under stress, I can add more. As soon as I made this adjustment, I noted increases in my students actual mat performance - which of course, is the most important element in my work. Coaches share much in common with editors - our most important role is to organize and arrange information in a way that the reader will benefit the most ( of course there is considerable irony in me, a man infamous for writing the most long winded and poorly edited posts in the history of Facebook and Instagram, try to tell you these things 😉) Here I have clearly gone into information overload with poor Gordon Ryan -
Perhaps I should read my own posts! 😉

The transfer of knowledge: One of the greatest attributes we humans have is the ability to transfer knowledge from one person to another and one generation to another. It is this feature of our species that makes progress from one generation to another possible. If each generation had to start at the beginning of knowledge acquisition every time, there would be no progress - just repetition from one generation to the next. Only the fact that each generation can build upon the prior work of the previous generations by learning their lessons through language is progress over time possible. This applies in jiu jitsu also. However outstanding the current crop of jiu jitsu athletes may be, I am very confident that the following generations will be better, as they are the beneficiaries of the knowledge given to them by the current generation and can build upon and improve upon that. Indeed - I would say that MY CAREER AS A COACH WOULD BE AN UTTER FAILURE IF I COULD NOT RAISE A CLASS OF STUDENTS WHOSE SKILL LEVEL WAS CONSIDERABLY HIGHER THAN MY OWN. Anything less would mean I had failed to convey all that I knew and created students who had absorbed it all and had the individualism and initiative to improve upon it. Here I work with Gordon and Nicky Ryan on the mechanical tightness of their Achilles lock. When they go home for the evening they will work again with each other, experimenting and researching and then testing it in live sparring over the next few weeks, making small modifications for their own bodies along with their own insights. When I look at this photo I smile as I can see the intergenerational growth of the sport in a very clear and positive way.

Guard passing in submission grappling: Quite often I am asked whether I emphasize the skill of guard passing among my students. After all, in most of the tournaments in which my students take part, no points are awarded for passing an opponent's guard. Given that guard passing on a talented opponent can be very hard work and that it scores nothing, and that my students are strong in leg attacks - many people ask the question - do you people even bother passing guard? The answer is absolutely yes. Indeed, visitors to the academy are often shocked at how much time we invest in guard passing skills - EVEN WHEN WE ARE ARE PREPARING FOR TOURNAMENTS WHERE WE KNOW IT WILL SCORE ZERO POINTS. Even in this context, guard passing has great value - for it allows you to ATTACK THE WHOLE BODY. The moment you start limiting your attacks to one part of your opponents body, you become predictable and defense for your opponent becomes easier. Our ideal is to attack our opponents whole body - legs, arms and neck. Guard passing makes upper body attacks possible. Without it you would be limited to leg attacks - only 50% of your opponents body. So in training, we often look quite traditional in our constant practice of passing work. The only difference is our MOTIVATION. We are not motivated to pass guard by points, but by the ability to attack the upper body with submissions. Thus we value guard passing as highly as anyone, just for slightly different reasons. Here Eddie Cummings does a good job of nullifying my guard attacks to work to a stronger passing position in training before an EBI event, where ironically, he knows guard passing will bring no points reward.

A theory of pinning: Most people think of pinning (osaekomi) as the act of displaying control by immobilizing an opponent. This certainly demonstrates control and is a very useful skill in combat. However, when one make SUBMISSION his primary goal, total immobilization of an opponent is not necessarily desirable. The act of totally immobilizing an opponent usually results in totally immobilizing ourselves as well. As a result, we are unable to make the transition to submission holds. The goal of the submission hunter is thus not static pins, but DIRECTIONAL PINS. These are pins which control the opponent in a way where he can only move in predictable ways that we control and determine. Thus we can anticipate his movement and take advantage of the inevitable extension of his body as he moves to shift from a pin controlling the torso to a submission hold attacking a limb. Static situations rarely give opportunities for submission. As a general rule - WHERE THERE IS MOVEMENT, THERE IS OPPORTUNITY FOR SUBMISSION. Thus directional pinning, rather than static pinning, is the focus of those who favor submission over all else. Here I work the theory of directional pinning with the immensely talented Mikey Wilson, youngest member of the squad, who at age ten displays a maturity and talent that astounds me.

Pre-contact: Due to the very nature of grappling, which requires us to have some form of grip upon our opponent in order to be able work the moves, most people have a tendency to underestimate the importance of skills utilized prior to establishing our grips. It is very important to understand that the game begins BEFORE EITHER ATHLETE HAS LAID A FINGER UPON THE OTHER. As the two athletes approach each other, they should be working to gain advantage before a grip has even been taken. This can be done through stance, movement, angle, level and limb positioning. Subtle use of these factors as we approach an opponent prior to making grips can result in advantage that will give us the initiative as we enter the grappling engagement. Good athletes don't wait until they establish contact to begin the fight for advantage - they begin as soon as they approach an opponent so that by the time contact has made, they already are a step ahead - then it's a battle to keep moving from advantage to advantage until victory. As in most areas of life, he who begins with advantage generally has an easier time in a competitive setting, jiu jitsu is no exception to this general rule. Here, Nicky Ryan has begun maneuvering to advantage with hands feet and stance before contact has even been made in his superfight in Canada yesterday. The small advantages he was able able to gain prior to contact translated into bigger advantage as the match progressed until he got his victory via heel hook.

Winners podium: Young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years of age, went all the way to Canada after a solid camp with the squad and competed today in a super fight against local adult (31 years old) grappling stand out Danny An Khoi Vu. Nicky won via submission with a heel hook variation in around two minutes. At the same tournament, Oliver Taza entered a tournament format and defeated multiple opponents all via heel hook to win gold. Here are the two junior squad squad members enjoying victory at the Submission Series Pro event - looking forward to seeing them back in the gym as they help the squad prepare for more upcoming challenges in the near future 😊😊

Proposed changes: Mr Eddie Bravo, founder and chairman of EBI, one of the most successful and fastest growing grappling competition organizations, is proposing some radical changes to the shows format that will essential take it out of the grappling competition business and put it somewhere between grappling and MMA. The idea is to allow limited striking on the ground via palm strikes as a means of taking the grappling a step closer to MMA. This is certainly interesting. It may be a solution to a commonly voiced criticism of submission only formats - that they allow athletes to take positions and make moves that would get them severely hurt in a real fight. Also it may encourage athletes to play a more traditional positional game as they will be rewarded with the opportunity to set up submissions with flurries of palm strikes from dominant position. I spent much of the first part of my coaching career developing grapple boxing systems for MMA fighters, but striking with the palm only is a very different game, so from a coaching perspective, this should be interesting. The main danger of the proposal is that it will scare off high level grapplers who don't want to be part of what they may perceive as a crazy slap grappling event that will be quite different from their usual competition training. Also there is a danger that it may end up looking like a mix of weak striking and weak grappling and thus please neither the MMA crowd or the grappling crowd. Obviously there will practical difficulties also, how to deal with cuts, broken noses etc in a tournament where athletes may have to fight four times in an evening. How it will work out is anybodies guess, but as they say, there is only one way to find out. The only certainty is that, as always, training, adaptation and strategy will determine the winners.

Changes over time: Ideally you should look at jiu jitsu as a lifetime activity. Of course there will be times you have to train less, or perhaps not at all, life is complicated and uncertain, sometimes our jiu jitsu training will reflect that - but you can always return and resume. An interesting facet of life time training is the changes that occur naturally to our game over time. Sometimes these changes occur rapidly, other times they are barely perceptible even to ourselves. Sometimes they are due to changes in priority. When my sensei Renzo Gracie first came to NYC and began teaching, his bottom game was based around tomoe-nage sweeps from open guard and lapel and Ezekiel (sode guruma) strangles. When he began professional fighting and no gi ADCC grappling, he had to change his bottom game drastically towards hook sweeps (Sumi gaeshi) and guillotine strangles. Other times the changes are due to changes in our bodies (usually due to age and damage). Whatever the reason, I always see change over time as a healthy thing. There is more to jiu jitsu than victory over an opponent. Much of its value comes from self expression, self knowledge and enjoyment. All of these are enhanced by variation and change in our game. If we just stuck to the moves most likely to generate a win the game would soon lose its appeal. It would become monotonous and boring and we would experience no growth over time. When we experiment and move in new directions we may initially lose some combat effectiveness (though I am confident that in most cases you will eventually increase it by having a wider repertoire to attack with) but we gain so much more. One of my favorite examples of change over time is that of my friend and coach, Matt Serra. When he first began as a standout grappler at the Renzo Gracie Academy his game was based around open guard work combine with lightning fast heists to guillotine strangles or rear strangles. After a long mma career and half a lifetime of change his game now is totally different, almost unrecognizable, based around top pressure passing and kimura attacks. Yet it is every bit as effective as the game that first made him a world and adcc champion.

The importance of tokui-waza: So often the Japanese grappling tradition expresses great wisdom. A core concept in the Japanese tradition is that of tokui-waza or "favorite technique." Every athlete will naturally develop certain techniques that he or she becomes particularly adept in. Usually it is our personality and body type that determines our favorite moves, though there can be other reasons as well. Tokui waza are extremely important for our technical growth in the sport. As soon as a beginning student develops their first tokui waza, I know they are on the right track. In our jiu jitsu life, the first tokui waza plays a similar role to our first car, first job, first apartment and first girlfriend does in our adult daily life - it is a critical first step in the path towards grappling maturity. As soon as you have a favorite move, you can add variations and combinations to it. You can develop counters to your opponents counters - IT FUNCTIONS AS MUCH MORE THAN A FAVORED MEANS OF WINNING MATCHES - IT IS A CATALYST TO FURTHER TECHNICAL GROWTH AMD PROGRESS. The acquisition of just one tokui waza will often bring about more technical growth in a given time period than any number of generalized lessons. As time passes you must develop more tokui waza. The number need not be great - I have met many fine champions who had a surprisingly small set of tokui waza. The importance is not so much the BREADTH of your tokui waza, but rather the DEPTH. The idea of tokui waza is to develop such depth of knowledge and skill around a small set of moves, that once you enter that tokui waza, your opponents cannot match your knowledge and skill in that specific domain and you can overwhelm them there to take victory. I am sure you can guess what Mr Eddie Cummings tokui-waza is 😊 Interestingly, when I first met him it was the guillotine. He is a good example of someone whose first tokui waza is not necessarily his mature tokui waza. Photo Tiago Molinos

Combination attacks: In an ideal world, all of our submission attempts would succeed on first try. Unfortunately the world rarely cooperates with our desires. Most of the time our opponents anticipation and resistance,
Combined with imperfections in our technique, result in a failure of the first attempt to get to a submission. This is where combination attacks come in. Combinations allow us to break through resistance and defense via a second, third or fourth attack which compliments the initial attack in some way that hopefully will take advantage of those defensive reactions and get the break though. The notion of combination attacks become more and more important as you climb in skill level, as your opponents ability to read and foresee the set ups to attacks increases. I find that students quickly learn to appreciate the value of combination attacks and work hard to incorporate them into their game - but then a new problem emerges - the problem of COMPLACENT ATTACKS. Students start thinking that since the real attack will be the third or fourth attack, they might as well put little or no effort into the initial submission attack that begins the combination. This is a crucial failure. A good opponent will simply not feel threatened by the initial attack and either not react in the way needed to set up the subsequent attacks, or worse, launch into his own counter attack off your weak attacks. It is critical that the first move be A GENUINE THREAT. Only then will you get the kind of reactions needed to drive the combination forward to success on the second, third or fourth move. That is why it is good for students to have several very strong and threatening moves that opponents know and fear. Faking these moves will always elicit strong and predictable defensive reactions that can be exploited via combination attacks. If there is no plausible threat at the onset, the subsequent moves are unlikely to be any more threatening. Here I work on leg attack drill combinations with Ms Ottavia Bourdain, looking to create predictable reactions off an initial attack that has to be taken seriously and thus set up a chain of events that will get to a submission.

Connection and body geometry: A critical part of grappling is the ability to create a solid sense of connection of our body to that of our opponent. Separation is the death of effective application of nearly all grappling technique. Most beginners use strength as the primary means of building that tight connection and as a result, quickly fatigue and become ineffective. A much better approach is to consciously SEEK TO FIT THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR BODY INTO THE GEOMETRY OF YOUR OPPONENTS BODY. There must be a precise fit of your body into that of your opponent throughout the relevant areas that are in contact. This immediately creates a connection that can be maintained against strong resistance with minimal strength. The only way this fitting in of your body to his can be achieved is if your body is sufficiently relaxed and supple that you can fill the spaces in the same way liquid can fill the inside of any vessel into which it is poured, regardless of shape. Only when that precise fit-in has been achieved is tension applied and the submission attempted. The feeling here is one of a key precisely fitting into a lock - only then can the doorway to submission be entered. Developing this sense of relaxed fitting-in of your body's geometry into that of your opponent, followed by the isometric tension required for breaking, is a huge part of the development from beginner to expert. Here my student Shy Ace shows fine form as his ashi garami fits precisely into the geometry of his much larger and heavier opponents legs and hips to create a powerful submission win in a recent local tournament

The principle of localized force: The central feature of jiu jitsu is to use mechanical advantage to control greater strength and aggression with less. How is this possible? It is done largely through the principle of localized force. Let's say we have an opponent who can apply an average of one hundred units of strength in standard strength tests while we can only generate 50 units of strength. As a whole, he is roughly twice as strong as us overall. How is victory through grappling possible in such a case? The key is to understand that it is possible to use a very high percentage of our overall strength to attack a small percentage of my opponents overall strength at a point of his body which, if attacked successfully, will end his ability to continue the fight. If I can use the various movements of jiu jitsu to maneuver into a position where I can create a temporary LOCAL strength advantage at a critical point of my opponents body (neck or joints), I can overcome an OVERALL strength disadvantage. The whole basis of our sport is precisely to develop the skill of maneuvering into these local advantages as efficiently as possible and using that to create a threat to a critical but vulnerable body part in a way that leads to submission. A good example would be ashi garami, where a very high percentage of our overall strength - both legs, both hips, back and both arms are used to restrain an opponent's single leg and hip in a way that allows us to threaten severe damage. If a good ashi garami allows us to use 90% of our 50 units of strength against an opponent's single leg, 33% of his 100 units of strength, then we shall have a considerable local strength advantage on an opponent twice as strong as ourselves overall. This is one of the core principles of our sport and one which we must constantly keep in mind as we train and develop. Here, Gordon Ryan uses a high percentage of his total strength on the isolated leg of his opponent through a variation of ashi garami, creating a local advantage long enough to threaten a break and get a submission on his way to victory at EBI 8

Banning moves: Jiu jitsu is a contact sport based around the skills of breaking joints and strangulation - as such injury is inevitable at some point. Nonetheless I believe there are certain movements in our sport that are unacceptably dangerous and which do very little to enhance the desired skills of the sport. In my experience, the most hazardous movements in jiu jitsu are not the joint locks and strangles, these usually cause no injury among responsible athletes and even when used recklessly, rarely do catastrophic damage. Far more dangerous is UNCONTROLLED FALLING BODYWEIGHT. This is often the result of throws from standing position where people try to resist the throw and land poorly. Sometimes it is the result of a poor throwing attempt that results in one athlete sitting on the outstretched leg of his opponent and crushing the knee or ankle. The worst offender however, is the most common and the most preventable - the common practice of people jumping to closed guard and landing on the opponents hips, knees or ankles with their entire weight and momentum. Thankfully this dreadful practice has been banned at white belt belt level after years of unnecessary injury. It is time to extend the ban to all belt levels and training. I banned the practice entirely in all my classes many years ago after witnessing many terrible injuries. It is a worthless practice that teaches no worthwhile combat skills and has only (very) bad consequences with no redeeming features (unlike flying submissions which do teach valuable skills). We should enforce a rule that if an athlete wishes to pull guard they must make contact with their buttocks or back on the mat rather than their opponent. It is comical to see a sport where knee reaping is illegal, but the act of jumping guard, which has ruined more careers than all the joint locks and knee reaps put together, is perfectly legal for upper belts. A good closed guard should be feared as Roger Gracie's was - for its fine tactics and technique - not the injurious clumsiness of it jumping entry. The sport needs to ban this dangerous movement that does nothing to promote the skills of the sport and does much to reduce its safety

The indirect path: We work in a sport where we are actively trying to defeat someone who is actively trying to defeat us. This almost always creates a mindset in both athletes to go as fast and directly as possible to their respective goals. The problem is that both athletes usually have a good idea of what the goals of the other are. As a result, we run into a wall of defense and get shut out. Often you will get much better results if you employ an indirect path to your objectives - here is a general rule which I work hard to instill in all my students, the law of direction - the more sophisticated and knowledgeable your opponent, the more you will be required to choose the indirect route to your real objectives - The less sophisticated and knowledgeable your opponent, the simpler and more direct your attacks should be. Only when your real intent is masked behind fakery and deception will you pass through the defenses of an astute opponent. Now reading and saying this is easy; but performing in this manner whilst being vigorously attacked by a dangerous opponent is quite another. Very few people ever achieve the nerve, subtlety and patience to carry it out in a combative situation. If you can however, the rewards can be tremendous, as creating confusion and misdirection will make it far easier to execute your favorite moves in the heat of competition. Of all my students, none surpassed the subtlety, patience and indirectness of Georges St-Pierre in the set ups to his favorite move - the double leg takedown. People usually remember and admire his strong driving finish to the double leg. Very few ever comprehended the subtle indirect set ups that enabled him to get to that move on all comers for over over a decade. Here, Mr St-Pierre gives one of his strongest rivals, Josh Koscheck, multi time NCAA wrestling champion, some serious air time in the second match in Montreal.

All or nothing: An interesting element of jiu jitsu and of submission holds in particular, is their all or nothing character. They either work 100% and end the match, or they don't work at all. If you show me a man who knows 95% of what is required to complete a juji gatame arm lock, I will show you a man who has never submitted anyone with that move. As such, there is, perhaps to a greater degree than any other aspect of our sport, a need for exactitude and precision. There is nothing more heartbreaking than getting very close to a submission and then losing it in the last stage. Not only is it psychologically damaging, it is usually physically exhausting, as most submission holds require considerable amounts of isometric strength in execution. Students have to learn through experience to walk a fine line between working hard to successfully finish a submission versus abandoning one to save energy and switch to another option. We are engaged in a sport where a failed submission has no more worth than a punch that missed. As such our execution must be perfect down to the smallest details or, if not, it must be followed by another movement that justifies the energy expenditure of the first submission attempt. Nowhere else in our sport is greater knowledge and precision required in the placement of fulcrum and lever - small mistakes can have deep consequences here. At the ADCC world champions, Garry Tonon took the attack to his much larger rival, Vinny Margalhaes, an extremely talented ADCC champion, in the open weight division. The expression on Mr Magalhaes face shows that he is close, but despite several determined attempts, was ultimately unsuccessful. It takes great self belief to choose the path of submission - failure almost guarantees losing in points based tournaments - but success brings the deepest feelings of satisfaction our sport offers. Photo by Tiago Molinos

The basis of confidence: Often I am asked how it is that my students play such a confident attacking game. They appear to attack without regard for the risks of failure. Many people voice to me a commonly felt fear that if they attempt submissions and fail, they will lose positional control and be defeated. This is a sensible fear. All offense, especially submission offense, carries inherent risk within it. If it should fail, there is often a price to be paid, as it can lead to positional loss or even being strongly countered by submissions. This is why I always teach escape as the foundation of a strong offense. If a student truly believes in the effectiveness of his escapes, both from pins and submissions, he will have no fear of failure in his offense. On the other hand, if a student knows his escape skills are weak, he will always hold back on his offense in a high pressure situation, no matter how technically proficient his offense may be, his inner doubts will stop him from pulling the trigger, even when he has all the physical tools and tactical opportunity in his favor. Escape work is thus a huge part of our training - ironic for a squad known primarily for submission offense. Let this be one of your training principles: confidence in your offense rests upon an unshakeable belief in your defense. The skills of jiu jitsu are evenly divided into offense and defense. They are not opposite ends of the game, but rather work in unison, as yin and yang, to create a confident proactive game that is a pleasure to behold and a terror to face. Here I put Gordon Ryan through his defensive drills with Garry Tonon shortly before his superfight with the great Keenan Cornelius - where his defensive skills would be strongly tested before his eventual victory.

Everything begins with grip: In all the grappling arts, every engagement, whether in training or competition, begins with grip. When I first grapple a stranger I can tell in the first few seconds all I need to know about his skill level by the manner in which he grips me. Sadly, gripping is usually taught as an attribute rather than a skill. It is usually understood in terms of strength and so usually trained in the same way. Most people think that increasing the strength of their grip will improve their gripping. Whilst this may have some small benefit, it will be insignificant compared with the gains possible by training it as a skill. Precise placement allied with a tactical sense of what you wish to achieve with the grip you are fighting for is the backbone of gripping skill. Often visitors to the academy are shocked at the gripping skills of my best students and claim they are extraordinarily strong, then when they see those same students do strength training they are shocked to see they have very modest strength. They failed to see the technical precision which creates the illusion of great strength. Here Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon go over gripping drills in standing position just prior to EBI 8

Getting the squad back together: I have been running away from crocodiles and snakes in Australia, Mr Cummings has been living grappling samurai fantasy in Japan, Gordon And Nicky Ryan have been California cruising and Mr Tonon has been trying to push people in some grappling matches with crazy rules in Florida. Now it's time to get serious about training again in good old NYC! 😊😊 Can't wait to get back to Old Glory! Does our great country have problems? Yep. Are we perfect? Hell no. But still would not live anywhere else 😊🇺🇸😊 "The greatest" does not imply perfection.
America is a work in progress. Our founding fathers gave us a tremendous starting vision, but there is still so much to be done. Can't wait to get back and be a part of it 🇺🇸

Teaching the teachers: One of the more interesting facets of my job is the division between my usual task - improving sports performance of students; versus another, very different task - teaching coaches to improve the performance of their own students. The central concern of an athlete/student is his or her own skill enhancement. The central concern of a coach is the skill enhancement of others. As such, they are very different enterprises. Often I see people who are very strong in one area, struggle in the the other. Once the distinction is made we can begin to explain the often seen phenomenon of people who never excelled as athletes do well as coaches and vice versa. Some of the most admirable people in sports are those who conquered both realms. My own teacher, Renzo Gracie, had an outstanding career both as athlete and coach. In Judo, Jimmy Pedro is doing an outstanding job of transitioning from stellar athlete to coach. In wrestling Dan Gable, John Smith and Cael Sanderson are obvious examples of men who made the transition with enormous success. Here I work with the teaching staff of VT1 gym in Sydney Australia as they work hard to create a strong instructional program in the rapidly growing Australian jiu jitsu scene.

Elvis sighting: Teaching leg locks at the Sydney Australia school of early MMA era standout, Elvis Sinosic. So much fun to teach at the school of an athlete I used to watch in UFC shows when the game was young and wild! It was an interesting chance to reflect upon the many changes in our beloved sport and the different directions it has taken since those early days. It was also fascinating to watch how easy it is for someone well trained in classic BJJ to learn and incorporate our leg lock system into their game when its main structure is explained to them.

Working against skilled resistance: The true measure of competence in the application of any given jiu jitsu move is not whether you know how to perform it per se; but whether you can perform it against skilled and knowledgeable resistance and counters. At this stage, everyone knows my students have strong leg locks. When they go out to compete, their opponents have done much research and deeply practiced countering the expected leg attacks. Yet in the vast majority of cases, my students break through the resistance and get to their submission hold. So many times I meet people who think it is enough to know how to perform the move in basic drill form, and from this erroneously believe they have a working knowledge of the move. The rubric we work with cannot be "I can perform the move," but rather, "I can perform this move against skilled and knowledgeable resistance." The former will gain you victory only against beginners and the incompetent; the latter will take you to championship level. Here, Gordon Ryan follows the movements of his rival Matt Arroyo through multiple defensive twists and turns and hand fighting to get a fine submission victory against strong resistance in EBI 8 on the path to gold.

From the gym to the big show: Here is an interesting photograph - it was taken one day before EBI 8 at Shawn Williams academy in LA. I taught a seminar on our back control system. Afterwards Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon did some light sparring both to help Mr Ryan finalize his EBI preparation and get a workout for Mr Tonon before his bout in Florida the following week. Can you identify the move Mr Ryan is using here on Mr Tonon? It is the exact Kimura sequence that he would use the next day to defeat Mr Hillebrand in his second match of the evening. This ability to take moves from the gym to the big show is critical to success at the highest levels. So often athletes have all the skills they need to perform, but lack the confidence to pull the trigger when the opportunity arises on the big stage. Note the calm reaction of young Nicky Ryan as he watches this action unfold. He has seen the sequence so many times he barely reacts - interestingly his reaction the next night at the big show was identical - he calmly called out the steps in the sequence as we have all seen and done thousands of times. Breaking down the psychological barriers between gym rolling and big league competition is a huge part of our contest preparation- it is interesting to see such a clear example of it in operation here.

Calm during the storm: Gordon Ryan displays his submission versatility with a beautiful transition from our kimura system to back control system during his run to gold at EBI 8. Interestingly I encouraged him two weeks prior to the bout to work more on kimura as a means of broadening his Arsenal for this show - he did not let me down. His opponent shows admirable poise and calm in a tough situation, but it does not matter, the end is near now as a heavily practiced transition kicks into operation that will make resistance very difficult indeed. This constant need to keep diversifying our attacks without losing our previous ones is critical to maintaining progress over time in a sport where opponents learn and adapt quickly to known threats. Photo by Bane

Teaching in Australia: Going over elements of back control with the gi (whilst not wearing a gi myself 🙄) at VT1 gym in Sydney Australia. So much fun - the Aussies are a true bunch of characters and very enthusiastic about the sport 😊I am certain they will become a jiu jitsu powerhouse one day.

A democracy of ideas: A part of my teaching style which is very important to me is that I always strive to create students who can think independently about the sport and draw their own conclusions based on observation and experience. There comes a point with the senior students where I trust their judgment as much as my own. At this level I become very libertarian with my coaching. As we discuss technique we bounce ideas and concepts off each other in a democracy of ideas that often creates exciting new ways of looking at problems we face during preparation for competition. Here, Garry Tonon and Gordon Ryan discuss some technical nuances just prior to EBI 8, some of which were used successfully by Mr Ryan to win his second EBI title.

An interesting point: an interesting point from last nights EBI 8 tournament is the relative size of the competitors. The weight limit was 185 pounds. The winner, Gordon Ryan walks around in daily life at 187-8 pounds and often competes at 160 pounds. As such he was one of the smallest competitors on the night. Most of the athletes dropped considerable weight to make the limit (it appears Joe Baize was the only other athlete who did not have to lose weight though I can't be sure of this). The squad has a good history of fighting much larger opponents and prevailing. I believe this is due to our strong emphasis of ashi garami. In this position there is no chest to chest top pressure - which is where weight discrepancy has its most effect. The most important determinant of success in this position is knowledge, rather than size as there is relatively little body contact. Mr Ryan will next compete at EBI at 205 pounds where he will be very small compared with his opponents indeed. Still, our team is getting used to this and are proud of our ability to use our tactics and techniques to control and submit larger opponents - a test that we consider the fundamental desiderata of jiu jitsu

The day after: Immediately after winning EBI 8 Gordon Ryan completes a tough training session with team mates Garry Tonon and Nicky Ryan at my good friend Shawn Williams gym in LA. We worked in preparation for Mr Tonon's match in Florida this weekend. It is impressive to see an athlete coming back to train hard the day after victory to help his team mate and it gives a good sense of why these great friends have experienced so much success. Unfortunately I won't be there for the last few days of training as I shall be headed to Australia tonight 😞 but we got a clear sense of direction worked out in the last two weeks and we will communicate across the pacific to finalize plans. Mr Ryan will be there to corner and support Mr Tonon 😊 Always sad to leave LA - it is a city I have always been fascinated by and always enjoyed my time - sometimes I think about teaching here, I am sure it would be fun 😊@shawnwilliamsbjj

Shared vision: When you dedicate your every thought and action to a single sentence - jiu jitsu is the art and science of control that leads to submission- you will have the necessary focus to change the jiu jitsu world photo by Scott Hirano

When knowledge, skill, discipline and tactics come together and are given direction through a guiding vision - great things happen. Gordon Ryan shows near perfect form last night in the finals of EBI 8 with a heel hook variation that won him gold over the very tough and talented Kyle Griffen ( who was himself involved in some truly epic bouts before this one). His training leading up to the event was superb and it was a thrill for his great mentor and friend, Garry Tonon, younger brother, Nicky Ryan and myself to watch his work from the corner. Now the four of us will train today to get Garry Tonon ready for his bouts in Florida this weekend! I hope you all enjoyed the show and another look at the philosophy, tactics and techniques of our approach to jiu jitsu

The return of the King: Expectations were high when Gordon Ryan returned to EBI 8 tonight. Mr Ryan did not disappoint - he submitted all four of his opponents, one in overtime to take the gold. It was a fascinating tournament for him as several people who had defeated him when he was younger were present. However, there was no stopping him tonight as he showed many excellent entries and finishes to submission holds. It was a superb demonstration of our vision of jiu jitsu - control that leads to submission. Mr Eddie Bravo continues to put on a strong and exciting show that promotes a new vision of the sport.

Heavyweights: Very often people ask me whether they should train differently based upon their size. In truth, I train my heavyweights exactly the same way I train my lightweights. I find that they adapt very well in time and often surprise their opponents in the heavyweight division with their agility and transitions. Here one one Georges St-Pierre's best friends, who we call "Big Will" (I have no idea why 😉) shows how a heavyweight can easily adapt our ashi garami leg lock system at a recent grappling event in Canada. It always pleases me when people confound people's expectations. Big Will enters and rolls around the leg like a man half his size to secure a very nice heel hook indeed 😊 Unfortunately his understanding of the rules was not as good as his leg locking skills and he was immediately disqualified as heel hooks were illegal in this tournament! Oops! 😉😉 Still, the physical lesson of size being less relevant to movement than most people think is there to be seen 😊😊

Assembling the troops: The day before EBI 8 in Los Angeles I had the pleasure of teaching a seminar on back attack systems at my good friend Shawn Williams school.
We turned the technical lesson into a great final workout for Gordon Ryan prior to the big show. My good friends Romulo Barral and Kenny Florian came in - it is always such a pleasure to see them and work new moves and concepts. Here the LA squad relaxes after a great seminar and workout. Now for a relaxing night and final elements of weight cut and then it's on to the big show tomorrow.

Getting ready for the big show: Last workout complete. The squad relaxes after the last hard workout in NYC. Now it's travel time and some light work before the big show in Sunday night. Garry Tonon looks to have fallen still further into insanity, whilst Oliver Taza appears to have regressed back into a lost childhood. Thankfully Gordon Ryan appears somewhat normal - hope he can pull it off long enough to get on a plane and get to LA 😊😊

Last NYC training sessions: Gordon Ryan trains with brother Nicky and Garry Tonon works with Oliver Taza during the final build up to EBI 8 this weekend in LA. Here we work positional pressure drills, critical for creating the conditions where submissions will become available. They provide a great deal of intensity to simulate matches, but with greater safety for the athletes as the competition gets close and injury can be a real problem. EBI 8 will showcase many very talented athletes - some of whom have given Mr Ryan real trouble in the past. As such they will provide an excellent measure of his relative progress since the time they last met and also of the training program overall.

Welcome to Australia: Immediately after EBI 8 where Gordon Ryan squares off against a very talented array of potential opponents in a new weight class of 185 pounds, I shall head down to Australia to catch up with family for the first time since my hip replacement 😊😊 Whilst down there I shall observe the friendly local wildlife 😰😳🤕😖😱💀😉 So far the main topics for seminars in Sydney and Melbourne are "No gi butterfly guard vs saltwater crocodile attack," "Spider guard vs great white shark" and "half guard sweeps vs combined taipan snake and box jellyfish attack." Should be interesting...

Getting the gang back together: Big projects coming up with the challenges of multiple EBI's, special rule sets (for Garry Tonon in Florida in two weeks) and high profile superfight for Eddie Cummings (vs Geo Martinez) and Gordon Ryan who has just been matched against the great Claudio Callasans, current ADCC world champion and a very dangerous and skilled adversary. With all these great challenges, training is getting very interesting indeed. Here, the squad relaxes after another structured session designed to build the skills needed to prevail in the face of these big challenges.

Give me a lever long enough and I shall move the world: Chris Weidman and Gordon Ryan experiment with lever and fulcrum together. We work in a sport that is largely mechanical in nature. Learning to impose mechanical advantage on to a resisting opponent is our obsession. Ultimately you do not defeat your opponent - the laws of physics do it through your body. Look at jiu jitsu through the prism of physics and mechanics and a whole new world will emerge before your eyes and you will never the see the game in the same fashion again.

When the match is over: Most people only analyze their defeats - that is why so many athletes say they learn the most from their losses rather than their victories. It is very important that you analyze even your victories. Any truthful analysis of a match will show that in most cases the outcome could have gone the other way if just a few things were changed. This is good news when you lose, but worrying when you win. In order to make victory a habit rather than an enjoyable accident, you must investigate thoroughly what was good and bad about your performance and what concrete steps you will take to improve your faults and maintain your strengths. In this way you ensure progress over time - the fundamental goal of every training program- and create conditions where one victory can lead to others. Here, young Nicky Ryan talks frankly to me about what he could have done better whilst holding the gold medal in his hand - a great attitude that explains much of his current success and points to a bright future

Contingency plans: One of the few certainties of combat is this: at some point things will go wrong. When they do go wrong, they tend to do so quickly and in ways you had not anticipated. It is crucial then, that you have contingency plans worked out in advance to deal with bad situations. Half of the story of victory is not losing - you must be able to work out of potential means of losing and back into means of winning. Having clear and well defined plans for defense and escape ironically helps your offense, as it gives you the confidence to take risks on offense, knowing that if you should find yourself on the defense after failed offense, you will have the means to get out and resume your offense. If you don't believe in your defensive skills, you will avoid any kind risk that may expose that weakness. Here Gordon Ryan begins his warm up with our defensive contingency plans prior to a bout. People talked a lot about his winning offense in this match, but often overlook that it was built on the foundation of belief in his defense.

Walking away from the scene of another leg lock crime: I am always impressed by composure in athletes. A huge part of excellence in jiu jitsu is excellence in problem solving. Unwarranted emotion, excitement or distraction is the opposite of what we need when solving problems. Our best problem solving moments are in our states of focused calm - this ought to be reflected in our jiu jitsu practice. No matter how stressful the situation you find yourself in may be, realize that success will come in the form of technical solutions to problems, not appeals to our emotional side. Here, young Nicky Ryan, just fifteen years of age, shows the match maturity of a much older man as he walks away from victory at the recent Gracie Nationals event where he won a super fight against a tough opponent.

Getting the little things right: We are all involved in a sport where the smallest errors can have the deepest ramifications. So many times I see tiny errors that resulted in failure at critical times - failures that meant an athlete can let victory slip from his grasp and then a short time later suffer defeat in its place. It is so easy to gloss over details that are easy to ignore until the day you really need them. Rest assured that when you think you know a given move, you don't. You have merely achieved a level of competence that you currently find satisfactory. One day in the future you will find yourself in a situation where that level of competence proves inadequate - so keep learning those additional details and nuances. Discipline in this regard is a big part of what separates champions from the crowd. Here, Georges St-Pierre works on his ashi garami attacks with my friend Carl Massaro as I add some ideas. The look on Mr Massaro's face suggests a level of competency has been achieved, but like a true champion, Mr St-Pierre keeps looking deeper into the lock.

This man is extremely pissed off: I have just informed him that all training today will be limited to IBJJF rules...no heel hooks, no leg reaping...if you let your partner pass your guard you lose the match...it was just a joke...please don't kill me sir 😜 Still, his reaction was not as extreme as Eddie Cummings - he tried to stab me with a plastic fork!

Controlled aggression: Ultimately the goal of all combat is victory. This requires at some point the notion of defeating an opponent through physical harm or the threat of physical harm. At some point we have to take the fight to the opponent in a way that gives us victory, thus there must be some degree of aggression involved, sometimes more, sometimes less, depending upon our character and the context of the situation we find ourselves in. The problem we confront as beginners is that nature teaches very naive forms of aggression. Watch any street fight between untrained and inexperienced protagonists and you will see a comedic array of missteps, lost opportunities and unforced errors as the fearless combatants try to express their aggression with what little knowledge they have. The various martial arts require us to direct our aggression through thick layers of technique and strategy. This requires of us all a large measure of self control - in the mental and physical turmoil of combat, we have to insist upon precise mechanical details and refined movement; all set in the context of an overall plan that directs our technique. Building this mindset of a disciplined, methodical, detail oriented inner state whilst engaged in extreme physical turmoil is one of the most import aspects of our training. This is why live sparring must always be the foundation of an effective training program and why those who engage in live sparring have a huge advantage over those that do not. Here, young Nicky Ryan shows the kind of inner mental composure that allows him to focus on all the required mechanical details required for successful application of a heel hook variation he favors - all set during a tough match against a talented, knowledgeable opponent. There is no emotion here - just cold calculation - there will be time for emotion later

Chris Weidman shows his dangerous positional and strangulation skills in training today. He has a sense for opportunity that is a hallmark of champions - once he makes his decision there is no hesitation - that, combined with refined technical skills, makes him a formidable opponent both in training and competition

Training vs fighting: one of my favorite aspects of UFC champions Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman is that when they come to train in my classes they always pull guard at the onset of sparring and work bottom position - this despite the fact they they could easily take down everyone in the room if they chose to. They recognize that the value of training here is in submission grappling, so they expose themselves to that as much as possible in the time they have. They work on their submission grappling skills, even though that will make their work much harder - they will work their takedown training with specialists in that area at another location better suited to that skill. This willingness to come into a room and trade skills with specialists is what keeps them learning and improving over time - and yes - both of them give our submission specialists hell even in our specialized domain! 😉 They recognize the need for an MMA athlete to see the big picture of skill enhancement for their sport overall as far more important than winning anonymous battles in training rooms by avoiding the skills utilized there and stalling away the training time. They come to gain skills rather than to learn to avoid them. Here Georges St-Pierre works bottom position with Robson Gracie during a tough afternoon training session with the squad.

Nicky Ryan - Locked out! Young Nicky Ryan, just 15 years old, was matched with older 10th Planet prodigy Derek Rayfield today at Gracie Nationals. Originally he was to compete in the adult tournament but was apparently pulled into a superfight by Mr Bravo himself under EBI rules. Nicky Ryan attacked with submissions and positional pressure before locking in a very tight heel hook variation to get the submission victory and reward for all his hard training. It is very exciting to see what this young man can do out on the mats - lots more to come 😊😊😊

Carrying the flag: In modern MMA, most people see an individual art like jiu jitsu as a component of the total fight game. For some, that component is more than for others, but regardless, it is never more than a component. Demian Maia is one of a handful of elite MMA fighters who use only a very pure form of jiu jitsu as his whole game, not a component. His fights look like a perfect statement of the traditional approach to BJJ - takedown, positional advance, working through a hierarchy of pins culminating in submission. In bottom position - recover guard, sweep, submit or stand back up and look for takedowns. That he is able to get such a traditional approach to work at such a high level is remarkable. Even more remarkable is the fact that Mr Maia appears to be getting better at this approach with every fight - remarkable for a man of 38 in a young mans sport. One of the most interesting coaching assignments of my career was helping Chris Weidman fight Demian Maia. Mr Weidman had outstanding jiu jitsu skills, so I was not worried going into the fight - even though he took it on only 17 days notice. In truth however, Mr Maia has greatly improved since then. When he fought Mr Weidman, he was trying to add kickboxing to his skill set. In my opinion this actually reduced his effectiveness and made him an easier opponent to beat. When he went down a weight division he went back to his jiu jitsu and refined it in a way that has made him far better now than he was earlier. His traditional jiu jitsu style has not proven popular with many MMA fans, but he will always be one of my favorites. In a world of trash talking, brawling entertainers, he stands out as a man who has dedicated his life to control - both of himself and his opponents - so that he can achieve the martial ideal of bloodless victories in a violent sport. All MMA fighters use some jiu jitsu, but I cherish watching the fights of this man who uses nothing but jiu jitsu. He has a tough fight ahead with Carlos Condit, but win or lose, I will always appreciate the exceptional work of this lone flag bearer of our sport.

Grapple Boxing: My average day is mostly concerned with teaching jiu jitsu, but sometimes my students compete in MMA and then I teach a very different curriculum which I call grapple boxing. This is the merging of grappling and striking technique on the floor - very different from pure jiu jitsu. I always hated the usual term for this skill "ground and pound" as it implies that only the athlete on top who has performed the takedown does the striking - which is not true at all. Moreover, the term "pound" implies a brutish, clumsy activity rather than a highly refined skill, which it certainly is at the higher levels. My students Georges St-Pierre and Chris Weidman were both masters of this critical element of MMA and both could inflict severe damage in seconds. Developing a system of grapple boxing was one of the most interesting and rewarding elements of my coaching career - it was done during the change over of MMA from its beginnings as a single discipline activity to the modern era. It created new skills not seen in twentieth century arts (I suspect they have not been seen in such detail since the Ancient Greek Pankration) and it was thrilling to be a small part of that movement in the sport. I had the privilege of working with students who learned and used it extremely well. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows great poise as he unleashes grapple boxing technique on Carlos Condit - himself a fine grapple boxer during their titanic championship match in Montreal

All limbs working in unity: When beginners come to jiu jitsu, they grapple primarily with their arms. As they gain in skill, they learn to grapple with their legs. Mastery however, will only come when they come to use their arms and legs in unison. Your legs provide the horsepower to your bottom game, your arms (through grips) provide the ability to apply that horse in meaningful ways to your opponent. Think of your legs as the engine, your arms as the transmission that allows you to apply that power to your opponents body. Here Eddie Cummings shows fine unity of purpose between upper and lower body work - legs and arms working in unison to destabilize his opponent in directs that will set up his attacks Photo by Tiago Molinos

Misunderstandings: Quite often I get questions that make me believe there is a misunderstanding as to what my vision of good jiu jitsu is. Many people appear to believe that I favor leg lock attacks over other forms of submissions. This is a natural mistake to make, as the most distinctive and obvious feature of my students work in grappling competition, and that which most obviously makes them stand apart from other competitors, is the use of a new approach to leg locking. In fact this is not the case. One of my major goals as a coach was to correct what I saw as a long standing weakness in traditional jiu jitsu, a lack of effective submissions systems to the lower body. Correcting this weakness has been a major part of my work - however, this correctional work and coaching goals must be distinguished from my notion of what constitutes the ideal of jiu jitsu. My ideal is simple to state - I believe that jiu jitsu players should be able to attack the whole body with submissions with equal efficacy. This (mostly) means legs, arms and neck. If I show any bias in submissions, it is in favor of strangleholds (shime waza) over joint locks (kansetsu waza). But my ideal is a player who can attack the whole body with great and equal effect. Visitors to our training sessions are often surprised to be caught in volleys of leg locks arm locks and strangles. Afterwards they say they expected the leg locks, but were surprised by the arm locks and strangles. This is the ideal we must strive for. If you limit your attacks to one part of the body, they become easy to defend, but defending the whole body against determined and skillful attacks is a difficult task indeed. Here Garry Tonon shows his attacking versatility with a strong strangle attempt on Ralek Gracie, progressing towards an armlock, and ultimately finishing his opponent with a leg lock - a fine expression of our style in action photo by Jeff Chu

Intensity levels: I am often asked "what level of intensity ought I to train in my daily jiu jitsu sessions?" A basic demand of the sport is that we can control bigger stronger opponents doing their best to defeat us - that is, an opponent operating at maximum intensity. Clearly then, we cannot completely avoid hard training sessions where we spar at maximum power. The problem is however, that training at maximum intensity usually has two effects. First, it tends to increase the severity and frequency of physical injuries which can often harm progress. Second, when we operate at maximum intensity, most athletes will limit themselves to their favorite moves (tokui waza) as these work best in tough situations. The result is that if we always train in this manner, our skill set does not expand as we limit ourselves to our current tokui waza. The opposite extreme is where we never spar or only spar in a very soft fashion. This means we never get to use our technique at full power and thus never develop the fine interplay between our physical body and our knowledge set. This usually results in failure to be able to apply the techniques in a harsh competitive situation and the lack of necessary physicality to apply theoretical knowledge. Finding a happy medium between these two extremes is the goal of a good progressive program. Different athletes will find a different balance, but each must monitor his or her progress over time to see if they are in the right track. Here Jake Shields gets some hard work in against Gordon Ryan. Mr Shields often visits before a match, so typically training sessions with him are very physical. However, when he vacations I always make a point of having him spar with the blue belts to work new techniques and make technical progress

Uchi Mata! One of the most versatile and high percentage upper body throws will always be uchi mata - the inner thigh throw. It has so many applications both with and without the gi. It is equally useful as a proactive attacking throw and as a reactive counter to takedowns. Some of the moves of our sport are so fundamental that it is difficult to succeed in the sport without having them in your Arsenal -
Uchi mata is a good example. All jiu jitsu students should be familiar with it and be able to apply it. Students must be able to discern the truly essential movements of the sport and use these as the foundation of their game. On top of that foundation they can add their own favorites to give their game individuality and personality, but the essentials can not be passed over. Here Garry Tonon launches grappling stand out Dillon Danis with a well applied uchi mata at the ADCC world grappling championships photo by Tiago Molinos

The big show: There is nothing like a big prize fight to get people's attention. All of the world's great sports have their appeal - but none of them have such a primal appeal as fighting. Other sports are ritualized, sublimated combat, but a prize fight is combat itself - so much more basic and direct. Love it or hate it - no one will ignore it when it unfolds in front of them. It is like a look back at our common ancestral past and as such, we are all involved at some level. The appeal seems to treble when the two protagonists appear to genuinely dislike each other. I believe this is because most people enter and understand violence on an emotional level. Most people only get into confrontation when their emotions are aroused. A professional fighter must be able to fight cold, even against someone they like. For him or her it is a contest of skills. Most people have a hard time relating to this as they lack the technical knowledge of fighting to understand what is going on - but emotions everyone can understand - hence the appeal. The fighters themselves must be very careful in these circumstances. Managing the emotions prior to and during the fight is absolutely vital to success - many a fighter has drowned in the exhaustion of nervous energy in an overly emotional fight. Tonight's match between Mr Diaz and Mr McGregor will be a fascinating example of an emotionally charged fight where emotion and professionalism must be reconciled.

Structured training: The overwhelming majority of work that I observe when watching people train is unstructured. It is simply two people or a group of people coming together and sparring for a time, perhaps some random practice of a move or set of moves. This is unfortunate, as it limits the amount of progress that can be made in the time available. I much prefer a strongly structured practice where there is a clear goal as to what the athletes are trying to accomplish and a plan as to how that goal will be reached. I usually find this garners better long term results than random practice. We work in a sport where it is quite possible to put in considerable amounts of effort to make relatively little progress. Hard work is of little value of it is not going in a direction that favors forward progress. If students put as much effort into formulating a structure for their training as they did for the actual physical training, I am certain their progress would be better. People are often surprised at the skill level of some of the students I train, given the time they have been training. For example, when Eddie Cummings fought Augusto Tanquinho Mendes, Mr Cummings total time of jiu jitsu training was less than half the time Mr Mendes had been a black belt competing at world championship level (bear in mind Mr Mendes has defeated Rafa Mendes and Cobrinha in competition and is thus clearly at the very top of the game). Even more surprising given that Mr Cummings did not even start jiu jitsu until his late twenties. Yet a well structured training regimen allied with very hard work allowed him to match Mr Mendes positionally whilst dominating the submission exchanges. Paying attention to structure worked for him - it can for you too. Here I work with young Mikey Wilson and Nicky Ryan, we start by outlining our goals for the class and put them in the context of our training overall and then into concrete means of achieving them - then let the workout begin 😊😊

Reasonable expectations: Going into a bout of any kind there will always be huge amounts of uncertainty as to what will transpire. Nonetheless, No matter how uncertain the ultimate outcome and the action leading up to it may be, there are always going to be reasonable expectations that we can make about the upcoming match, based on the evidence we have prior to the bout. These reasonable expectations will determine the nature of our fight camp and even the final drills and warm ups just before the action starts. We begin with a detailed analysis of the opponent and match the strong and weak points we observe with what we believe are our own strong and weak points and start to devise a training program based around that preliminary analysis. Feedback from daily training sessions gives us an idea as to whether our program is going in directions we want and we make any necessary adjustments as time passes. Here you can see Gordon Ryan drilling with variations of heel hooks that we believed would be an effective part of the match based on what we observed and which would ultimately win his match with the great Keenan Cornelius. So strange to see this photo now and see the very move that would bring victory being rehearsed in front of Mr Cornelius immediately prior to the match. Photo by Luciana Marcos @to_fight_

Pre-bout tension: I remember once talking to the great Mike Tyson during the filming of The Ultimate Fighter TV show. He was impressed by the fact that our locker room pre fight was very relaxed with jokes and laughter between each warm up. He told us this was in stark contrast to his fights, where he said the atmosphere was like a funeral. I think every athlete has their own ideal mental state pre-bout (and that can change per opponent). Two of the most interesting are Gordon Ryan and Garry Tonon, who seemingly run a full scale comedy routine prior to a match that always makes preparation fun. Here is Garry Tonon in mid story telling form about escapades from the night before as Gordon Ryan (out of picture) goes through solo drills. Photo by Luciana Marcos @to_fight_

Pre-match Talk: A fascinating part of the match between Gordon Ryan and Keenan Cornelius was not observed by most people. Shortly prior to the match, the referee came by the warm up mat to confirm the rules to the athletes. Mr Cornelius suggested a change to the prior rules. Initially it was deemed that if the athletes went out of bounds, they would be re-started in neutral standing position at the center of the mat. This was due to the difficulty of accurate re-starts in grappling positions. Mr Cornelius suggested this was not desirable, as it could lead to fleeing the mat as a response any submission threat and make the chance of successful submission much less likely, undesirable in a match where submission was the only means of victory. I was impressed by his suggestion. It conveyed a spirit of hunting for the submission and confidence in his ability to get to it and successfully follow through. Not to be outdone, Mr Ryan immediately agreed, even when the possibility of athletes going off the mat and onto the hardwood floors was mentioned as a possibility. It was a delight to see both athletes express a keen desire to get to a submission and prevent weak tactical escapes such as fleeing the mat and instead demand that any escape be a genuine technical escape. It set the tone for a great match in the tradition of the old school approach of whatever time it took to get the truest measure of victory- submission; with as little outside intervention as possible (Helio Gracie once fought an MMA fight that was over three hours long! And many of the early grappling matches went over an hour). It was deeply impressive to see the same spirit in both athletes and their confidence in their ability. Once the match began, both men were true to their word- there was almost no outside intervention in what was a very pure match where submission was the only possible result. A match of this style is not seen often these days, but it was a pleasure to be a small part of one as epic as this.

Pre-match drills and warm ups: Running Gordon Ryan through some pre-match grip fighting drills and warm ups minutes before his match with the great Keenan Cornelius. Interestingly, Mr Cornelius was just five feet away from us as we warmed up! Usually competitors warm up in separate areas, but this time we had a small common mat which was fun 😊 At this stage the work has been done and the drills serve mostly to prepare the athlete for physical activity and remind him or her of the main themes we have focused on in training, whilst keeping the athlete active enough to prevent negative thoughts emerging without unduly tiring him. The nature of the warm up will be greatly influenced by the rule set of the match and the style of the opponent. Here you can see a much more laid back approach than normal due to the anticipation of a long match against a very experienced and relaxed opponent.

Champion attitude: Gordon Ryan and brother Nicky Ryan, fresh off a weekend of victory and tough training camps leading up to it, back in the gym on Monday for morning and afternoon workouts 😊 Mr Gordon Ryan must now prepare for a very different challenge - EBI 8 - an entirely different rule set and thus a different training regimen. So inspiring to see them make the early start back to training.

Gold shines brightest: Chris Sodbinow, Nicky Ryan and Frank Rosenthal enjoy the fruits of hard work with first place medals - winning almost all matches by submission yesterday at grappling industries event and showcasing their rapidly growing skill sets. Always a pleasure to watch them tussle everyday in the gym, but even more so in open competition

New tricks: I always like a coaching challenge. When Jake Shields came to NYC prior to his fight with Rousimar Palhares- the most feared lock locker in MMA - he asked if I could help him defend the leg lock game. It seemed like a difficult assignment, as Mr Shields struggled in his initial sessions to defend moves that he had no training in. I told Mr Shields the only way to defend them is to learn the entire leg lock game. In a surprisingly short period of time he began making real progress. After a little training he went on to fight Mr Palhares in a controversial match where he successfully avoided the leg submissions of the Brazilian leg expert, only to get caught in an upper body submission. It did not matter - he saw the value in what he had seen. Soon he became a regular training partner with the squad. Mr Shields is a no-nonsense hard working sort of fellow who fit right in with the team. Very soon he started telling me of success in training rooms around the country with his new skills. Last night, Mr Shields fought a professional grappling bout against MMA legend Lyoto Machida at an event run by Musclepharm. Mr Machida has always shown fine grappling skills in MMA and has a win against grappling champion Rafael Lavato in submission grappling. Mr Shields was able to show his great improvements in lower body submissions by locking in a very finely applied heel hook to force a submission and show that new skills can indeed be built on to an established game and that change is always possible if a commitment is made. It was a great result for Mr Shields and a testament to his dedication to come such a long way to learn and in his confidence to use new weapons in a battle against such a skilled foe. Here you can clearly see the great pressure he imparts upon Mr Machida that forces a submission on a very tough opponent.

Victory: Gordon Ryan relaxes after a titanic no time limit match against the great Keenan Cornelius. After an epic one and a half hour struggle of tactics and endurance, Mr Ryan prevailed via heel hook variation. Both men showed tremendous skill and tactical sense, but Mr Ryan was coming off a tremendous camp and preparation and his morale was high. After several near misses, he saw opportunity on the legs and took it to victory. Mr Cornelius showed great character in taking this fight, as he is an established superstar in the sport - to take a no time limit match against a youngster like Mr Ryan was a very commendable action on his part. Now the squad must resume training in preparation for EBI 8 and other future endeavors @jeffreyschu

Technique above all: Nicky Ryan at age 15 wins the adult advanced open weight division of Grappling Industries event showing a very finely developed leg lock game along with sound positional work. He closed out the first place with team mate Chris who also showed excellent submission skills via leg lock and sankaku. It is remarkable to see such a young man do so well against skilled adults. The photo shows how small he is compared with adults. And at 15 years old, he is not even close to adult strength levels yet. The ease and relaxed demeanor he shows when competing against grown men of high skill level bodes very well for this very talented young man.

The real significance of this week in Judo: Without question this has been the most successful week in American Olympic judo history. However, few people understand the deeper significance of what happened this week. A truly great Judoka, Isao Okano was once talking to a foreigner studying judo in Japan. He noted the foreigner was making a concerted effort to be as Japanese as possible- he was not just learning judo - he was learning to be Japanese. Okano remonstrated him, saying, "don't try to be Japanese, try to be the best American living in Japan studying Judo that you can be." He was making a very important point. When you try to copy another person or cultures style, you lose your own identity and usually you never perform as well as the person you copied. A much better approach is to build a style that may have components you took from other influences, but whose totality is uniquely your own. This is exactly what Jimmy Pedro is doing so successfully with USA Judo. He is creating a unique American approach to the sport based around disciplined gripping, superior transitions from standing to ground and very strong ne waza attacks on the floor to create a winning team and great success. American judo always seemed to suffer from a lack of identity. Attempts to copy Japanese and European models bought only limited success. Mr Pedro has found a style quite different from our competitors and has forged a winning team with it. Interestingly, this style goes in direct opposition to the current rules of modern judo, which greatly favor athletes who use mostly standing technique, but such is the strength of his approach that his athletes are winning regardless. The future will tell if this model will be able to survive the rule set of the modern sport, but the results so far are more promising than anything we have seen in American judo history. With the rise of grappling as a sport in North America and the cross training many athletes partake in, American ne waza will only get stronger and hopefully create a new generation of athletes for this burgeoning American approach to the sport and the strong sense of identity it has created 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸

Golden Girl: Another incredible day for American Judo as Kayla Harrison wins her second Olympic gold medal! She is the team mate of Travis Stevens, winner of the Olympic silver medal yesterday. Like Mr Stevens, her primary coach is the great Olympian Jimmy Pedro, who has done an incredible job preparing the American squad for the Rio Olympics. I remember Mr Stevens telling me on many occasions how talented Ms Harrison is and how she was not only the best in the world on the mats, but also a truly good and admirable person off the mats - she has an incredible story behind her road to Olympic glory that is an inspiration to all who research it. She showed again how strong the American squad is in Ne Waza (ground grappling) and how the American team is using this skill set to advantage against the world's best. What an incredible year for American Judo, for Ms Harrison, Mr Stevens and Mr Pedro. America and the world grappling community is so lucky to witness their work and success 😊😊😊🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸😊😊😊

One great deed begets another: I am always impressed by the way in which an outstanding deed by one student can serve as a catalyst to the other students and lift their performance. Inspired by the incredible performance of teammate Travis Stevens in taking a silver medal in the Olympics yesterday, the training room was alive with standout performances today. There really is wisdom to the old idea that people feed off their surroundings- when we surround ourselves with outstanding people, each one lifts the next in a chain reaction that can produce something truly great - this may be an individual sport in competition, but in training it is a team that makes the difference. Finding the balance between our own individual ambitions and those of the people around us is the key to longevity in the sport and success within it.

Olympic hero: A massive congratulations to Travis Stevens who represented our country with such brilliance and skill today in the pinnacle of all sports - the Olympic Games. Travis fought through some of the best Judoka in the world to get into the finals, defeating his opponents with a superb blend of powerful and disciplined gripping, mixed with a superb sense of opportunity and technical precision on the mat. One could not hope to see a better display of the fusion of standing grappling (tachi waza) and ground grappling (ne waza). The years of hard work under his great coach, Jimmy Pedro (himself a master of the interface between standing and ground) paid off with a memorable path to the finals. Mr Stevens is the first American male to win a silver medal in Olympic judo since 1992. In doing so he showed that the fusion of standing and ground grappling can produce incredible results at the very highest levels. The squad is so proud of this amazing achievement- made all the more special by the fact that he fought not just for himself or his team - but for his nation. Thank you, Travis Stevens, for representing our nation and our sport so superbly. Can't wait to see you back in NYC
😊😊😊🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸😊😊😊

Integrated grappling: At the ADCC World Championships, Garry Tonon hits a nice variation of Ouchi Gari, one of his favorite takedowns, on the very talented Dillon Dannis, a fine student of Marcelo Garcia. This takedown set up what would prove to be the decisive finish to the match, a powerful inverted heel hook. It represents a good example of skills taken from judo and wrestling integrated into the submission wrestling game with very positive results. What good are powerful submissions on the floor without the ability to bring the fight to the mat? Conversely, what good are throws and takedowns if you cannot do anything effective to a grounded opponent? Only when the two are merged do you get a truly effective fighter. I have never seen a jiu jitsu fighter get worse by adding judo and wrestling to his or her study, but I have seen many limit their development by failing to do so. Photo by Tiago Molinos

Any time, any place: The only constant in the life of a professional athlete is training. Often a busy competition schedule require extensive travel commitments. That does not mean training can be sacrificed. The athlete must be prepared to work out effectively in unfamiliar surroundings at whatever time is available with whomever is available and still get profitable work in. This requires planning and communication with the training partners you meet in location so that they become a temporary part of your program, rather than a challenge to be faced - there will be enough challenge out under the lights at the big show. Here, Garry Tonon gets good work in at Ralph Gracie's school in Northern California prior to a show. Ralph is brother to my teacher, Renzo Gracie - the family connection always makes for a welcome training location when possible.

The best laid plans of mice and men: As a coach one of the main aspects of my job is to conceive plans of action that raise the likelihood of an athlete winning an event. Yet despite our best intentions, there is always a good chance of things going awry that require spontaneous change and adaption in the face of unexpected circumstances. All the major MMA fight camps I have been a part of furnished unforeseen incidents and drama that could not have been predicted and which had to be overcome. Probably the most flawless and well run fight camp I ever saw was that of Georges St-Pierre in preparation for Nick Diaz (Interestingly, his prior fight camp with Carlos Condit was probably the worst). We had an excellent game plan, the physical preparation was excellent, superb choice of sparring partners, all match contingencies covered, no injuries, no backstage drama, perfect weight cut - everything was perfect - until the very night before the fight when Georges drank some watermelon juice for rehydration that had been too long out of the fridge and got a badly upset stomach. He spent the entire night vomiting. It was so sad to see such a perfect camp get ruined at the last minute by such a minor oversight. The night of the fight, Mr St-Pierre came in underweight and drained. We had to curtail the warm up for fear of exhausting him before the bout even began. There was some drama with Mr Diaz's camp insisting that both sides have their hand wraps double checked. This was done, but we did not want them to see how bad Mr St-Pierre looked, so he had to put on an act of confidence and vigor when they came in the dressing room. In the end, Mr St-Pierre showed why he was a great champion that night, putting on a dominant shut-out performance to win a unanimous decision - no one in the audience would have guessed how serious a problem he had to overcome. He used a system of pacing the rounds and timing the takedowns and allowing standing escapes to maintain the pace of the fight whilst controlling the action but at the same time, not exhausting himself. It worked brilliantly and the problem was overcome. This kind of adaptation is crucial in fight preparation at all levels.

Match preparation: Gordon Ryan prepares for his upcoming bout with the immensely talented Keenan Cornelius, without question among the finest grapplers in the world today. Mr Cornelius is equally talented gi and no gi, positional skills and submission skills. He brings a considerable weight, height and experience advantage, but Mr Ryan is very happy to take on such a great man - an attitude I see so often among emerging champions. Here we work on positional skills in open guard scenarios, an area that Mr Ryan often impresses me.

Working for advantage: Most of the game of jiu jitsu is the business of gaining some form of preliminary advantage and once advantage is attained, launching a decisive attack with the intention of finishing the match. In the beginner levels, advantage is typically understood only in terms of relative position - getting past your opponents legs into upper body pins. As you go higher into the sport the notion of advantage must be greatly expanded. Here I work with young standout Nicky Ryan, who at fifteen years of age has a very deep understanding of advantage in grappling.
We are battling simultaneously for balance and foot position advantage and it looks like Mr Ryan is doing a better job than me! Time to abandon ship! 😊😊

Everything begins with stance and posture: When teaching I always emphasize the iron law of stance of posture - that the human body is capable of almost limitless different configurations in stance/posture and that for any given task there is a posture that optimizes the athletes ability to perform that task. Our job is to be able to find that posture under pressure and maintain it for as long as we need to perform that task whilst shifting seamlessly from posture to posture, stance to stance, as our tasks change second by second during a bout. Here, Georges St-Pierre shows near perfect posture in the open position as he squares off with the very dangerous Josh Koschek, who displays a slightly different posture more appropriate to the skills he possesses. Both men have their respective tasks and both have chosen the ideal initial posture relative to those tasks. So often I see athletes who have a clear idea of what they want to do, but find themselves working much harder than they have to due to poor stance and posture

When one begins to learn a move in jiu jitsu, one starts with learning the correct mechanics. Ultimately however, you must go far beyond this and learn to apply moves against SKILLED RESISTANCE. Only then can you hope to win at high levels. You must be able to anticipate and overcome even the most determined counters to the moves you employ. Here Olivier Taza follows an opponent through a vigorously applied defense to a heel hook variation - breaking through the resistance and earning the submission at a recent show in England.

Calm under pressure: One of the most crucial attributes of good competitors is the ability to maintain calm under pressure. The ability to solve problems as they arise during the match is absolutely crucial to victory. Your ability to solve problems is directly related to your ability to maintain as calm a mind as possible as you work. If you look at the faces of elite athletes in all sports as they engage in tough competition, it is surprising how calm and composed they look despite the immense pressure they are under. Here Ethan Crelinsten works hard against teammate Frank Rosenthal - both men showed excellent use of leg locks and back attacks at the recent Finishers Sub Only tournament and fought a pitched battle in the final. You can practically see their minds working to solve problems as they battle for control. This kind of internal control over our own mind and demeanor is a prerequisite of control over an opponent's body. It must be developed in the gym like any other skill - you will need it in competition outside the gym

Georges St-Pierre marvels at the incredible sleeping technique of Garry Tonon napping between morning and noon classes. Note the very advanced "inverted mummy" posture utilized by Mr Tonon. A posture that would asphyxiate normal humans in their sleep whilst simultaneously resulting in a severely flattened face, yet somehow Mr Tonon manages to wake up from this and immediately drill high amplitude takedowns with Mr St-Pierre. Not quite sure what Mr Sigmund Freud would say about this sleeping posture, but I believe there is a clear subconscious desire to defend the neck at all times being shown here 😉

New Champion: Huge congratulations to new welterweight champion, Tyron Woodley. He dethroned the great Robbie Lawler in the weight division that has the most sentimental appeal to myself and so many fans. It has been a year of dramatic change in MMA. Robbie Lawler has been a very impressive champion indeed, but Mr Woodley showed patience and plan to wait for his title shot and when the chance came, he did what champions do - take a small opportunity and make the most of it - a spectacular KO on a man who seemed impervious to blows in championship fights. This was always going to be a clash between fight ending explosiveness in the early rounds versus incredible sustenance over five rounds. As so often happens, the quick starter inflicted damage from which no recovery was possible and he took a well deserved and spectacular victory.

Rainy Sunday afternoon: Grey day in Manhattan - perfect for a day of technical training with the squad. Georges St-Pierre and the team go over details and concepts at a pace that allows for skill progression and helps to avoid athlete burn out, a common problem for people competing many times a year. Ethan Crelinsten shows great work ethic by coming in for training the day after winning the 135 pound division of Finishers Sub Only event, where he used a combination of leg locks and back control to take first place. Tomorrow the weekly cycle of training begins anew with different intensity level and emphasis.

Size difference: The essential quality of jiu jitsu is to be able to control greater size and aggression with less. In the gym we are expected to spar with whoever you match up with in class, which often entails people larger than yourself. Some, like Garry Tonon, make it a feature of their competitive career also. His standout performances against big men like Marcus Almeida Buchecha, Roberto Cyborg Abreu, Vinny Magalhaes, Rousimar Palhares and here, Ralek Gracie, provide inspiration and live up to the ideals of jiu jitsu. Matches of this kind force us to emphasize different aspects of body and limb positioning, along with tactical considerations, in order to cope with the weight disadvantage. While it would be simply dishonest to claim that size and strength are not very important in determining the outcome of bouts ( there is a reason why there are weight/age/sex divisions in combat sports), it is nonetheless remarkable how training and tactics can allow a smaller person to perform very well against much larger people in what often become thrilling underdog matches.

Ups and downs: This photo was taken prior to Chris Weidman's first fight with Anderson Silva. After battling past all the other contenders for a title shot, Mr Weidman suffered a catastrophic injury to his shoulder in a training accident. I still remember getting the gut wrenching news from him via phone - it seemed his dream of a UFC title fight against the greatest middleweight of all time was gone. Soon after, Mr Weidman went through major reconstructive surgery. Shortly after the surgery, my good friend Doug Pelinkovic and I went to see him bring what money we had, food and talk to help. Soon after this he would experience terrible loss again, losing his house to Hurricane Sandy. To anyone in that room that night, it would seem impossible that this man would soon come back in the best shape of his life with near perfect preparation and decisively defeat Mr Silva to attain his dream. Looking at this photo now I remember the doubts and fears we all felt that night and marvel at the the outcome brought about by dedication to a program, a dream and unshakeable self belief. There will always be ups and downs in our lives. In those dark times it is crucial to keep your dreams alive by setting realistic goals in a program toward first recovery, then regaining your former level, and then moving forward to new levels. An odd twist to this photo is that Mr Pelinkovic would shortly afterwards suffer a terrible accident that required multiple reconstructive surgeries. I was already suffering from severe hip problems that ultimately required hip replacement surgery- so everyone in the photo went through problems requiring major surgery. As each man went through problems, he found inspiration and assistance in the actions and achievements of the other two in ways that helped him return to his place in the sport. This kind of mutual support is a crucial addition to the goal setting mentioned earlier. One of the few certainties that life offers us is fluctuation in fortune. Creating the needed conditions to create good times out of the darkness of bad times is critical to your longevity in the sport and indeed, life in general.

Professional cornering: Here is an interesting photo. It was taken less than a second before the submission victory of Garry Tonon over Ralek Gracie at Metamoris 7. Mr Tonon has secured ushiro ashi garami and is faking a figure four toe hold to create a reaction to enter a kneebar variation. The trap has been set and all that remains is to shift his left arm to Mr Gracie's leg - in half a second he will do so and victory will be his. Garry knows this, I know it and so does Gordon Ryan. We have all seen and done the move a thousand times - the only ones who don't know what is about to happen are Mr Gracie himself and the audience members you see behind us. Yet if you look at myself and Mr Ryan you will see no emotion on our faces - though we know already that victory is at hand. There is no sense of jubilation, though we know victory is certain. So often I see cornermen, even in high level events, who essentially function as cheer leaders rather than cornermen. The central idea of a corner man is to offer advice that leads to performance improvement. Yet I usually see behavior that does nothing to improve performance. All too often the advice is so general as to be useless. "Get out of there!" Does not help an athlete escape a pin. Advice must be specific and purposeful rather than general or emotional. I believe there are a few exceptions where certain kinds of emotional cornering can have value, but in the majority of cases, dispassionate, technically useful, tactically sound advice is needed, rather than cheerleading and fervent emotional appeals. MMA cornering is further complicated by the notion of physical recovery between rounds, but in grappling events this is not the case. Every time one acts as a corner man, one must ask - "is this action aiding my athlete's performance?" When those actions stem primarily from emotion and ineffectual generalities, the answer is usually no.

Teaching atmosphere: Visiting students are often quite surprised by the informal and relaxed teaching style we use. I am blessed to have highly motivated students which allows me to teach in this way. The high standards quickly create an atmosphere where the lazy and unmotivated either quickly reform themselves or seek calmer waters. I always teach to the best people in the room. I find this has a way of lifting everyone's level regardless of belt rank and pulls the best out of everyone. Though some students may initially struggle with this, I have grown to have great faith in people's ability to adapt and improve according to the level of the room as a whole. In a short time, they rise in level and make the needed improvements to keep up. A key role is played by the senior students, who often provide inspiration and informal help. Less advanced students can easily observe that the more successful ones have good learning habits - they pay close attention to instruction, spar in an experimental rather than win at all costs manner, and place equal emphasis upon offense and defense in training. Here Eddie Cummings shows his typical attention level in a mixed gi and no gi class. Even when the technique shown (a standing throw utilizing the gi) does not apply to his immediate situation (upcoming EBI 7 no gi tournament) he is actively looking for general principles that might apply to his game, thus improving himself whilst providing an excellent example to others.

MMA and Jiu Jitsu: The link between the two always fascinates me and reflections upon one often illuminate aspects of the other in unexpected ways. Here some of the MMA standouts at RGA, Rafael Natal, Nieman Gracie, Felipe Nover, Joao Zeferino and friends relax after another tough early Monday morning workout. So strange to think of NYC on a typical Monday morning, millions of people going to office jobs, getting children to school, wondering whether they should add an extra sugar in their coffee or not - whilst these young men practice strangling each other, breaking each other's limbs and getting into position to strike each other - such are the different directions we all choose in life!! 😉 In the end, they are all jobs, and like all jobs, those performed with passion, attention to detail, and expertise gained over time - in an area that you believe enriches your life in some way, will be done best, regardless of what form of work one chooses.

Teaching every aspect of the game: Here is an interesting shot of myself and Gordon Ryan cornering Garry Tonon during his victorious match with Ralek Gracie from a week ago. I don't just teach my students how to grapple. I teach them how to create a complete system of support for an athlete or a team mate through every aspect of preparation and match. Cornering is a skill like any other. I believe there are ways of doing it which can increase by some degree the odds of an athlete winning a match. I knew that I would not be available to corner Garry Tonon at Fight2Win Pro 8 the following week, so I had Gordon Ryan at my side at Metamoris 7 to learn and practice cornering for Fight2Win Pro 8 in seven days time. He did a superb job - helping take his team mate through to another leg lock victory. Metamoris 7 was thus an interesting evening for me as I coached two men in two completely different roles simultaneously - Garry Tonon as an athlete and Gordon Ryan as a corner man/coach. I am happy to say both men passed their respective tests with excellent grades 😊😊

Back in action: Garry Tonon celebrates another submission win via heel hook over the very talented champion and coach, Dustin Akbari. The match was made more interesting by the fact that Mr Akbari had narrowly defeated Mr Tonon when Mr Tonon was a brown belt. The rematch offered a chance to gauge Mr Tonon's skill development since that time and the progressive nature of our training system. The match featured some excellent throws by Mr Akbari and half guard sweeps from Mr Tonon. In the end however, the game is always about control leading to submission and in this direction, Mr Tonon showed an interesting use of a scorpion ("lockdown " to 10th planet fans) to generate kuzushi (off balancing) into a submission hold - one of his favorite heel hook variations. Here he celebrates with the victors belt for Fight To Win, who put on a nice event and continue to grow as an organization

Counting down the days: The strain shows on the face of Eddie Cummings during the final workout before his fine victory at EBI 7. These are hard times for the athlete, with a mass of concerns centered around weight loss, strategy, countering the effects of performance anxiety and a host of other factors. Dealing with this is a huge part of the final outcome. As a coach I have to keep my athletes minds occupied in constructive, rather than destructive directions. Isolation and inactivity can be fatal here. Yet at the same time, I have to be sensitive to the individual psychology of the man entering the arena. Mr Cummings is rather like myself and needs his time alone balanced with attention. Here he ruminates after a grueling last day. In a few more days his taunt look would be replaced by a broad smile of victory under the lights at the big show, thousands of miles away from the sparse and claustrophobic basement in which all our preparation is done. @jeffreyschu

How far we have come: people beginning martial arts today are beneficiaries of the best thing that ever happened to modern combat arts- the MMA revolution. Whatever problems there might be with regards contemporary martial arts, they are insignificant compared with the state of martial arts when I was growing up. Without a means of testing effectiveness in combat, the martial arts scene of my youth was littered with wild eyed loonies passing themselves off as experts. The few diamonds in the rough did not have a venue to show real skills and instead had to contend against legions of ninjas, exotic kung fu gods, brick breaking demons and internal energy superheroes. The octagon did us the eternal favor of sweeping all that under the rug. Whenever I complain about the current state of jiu jitsu or MMA, I google old martial arts magazine covers and realize we have it pretty damn good nowadays. Check out this gem from my youth. When you see two white dudes in full ninja uniform talking about competing in an arena "where the only trophy is survival" - you KNOW it's legit! 😉 Wait...those eyes...they seem so...familiar...Eddie Cummings??!! How old did he say he was??!! Could he be one of the long lost "warriors of the night?!" 😄😄

Who is this guy? Why does he savagely lock his hands on his chest and violently twist and bridge in his sleep? What on earth is he dreaming about? Why does he say the word "snap" before smiling and drifting back to sleep? What a weirdo! Perhaps I should alert the air Marshall...

Lock out! Garry Tonon shows near perfect form in a variation of a knee bar attack last night in LA against Ralek Gracie. Such was the technical precision of the move that it got an instant tap against a very skilled opponent around 40pounds heavier than himself. It was nice to see Mr Tonon broadening his competition leg lock repertoire in such fine fashion. Touched down back in old NYC - heading straight to Renzo Gracie Academy from the airport to teach - perhaps kneebars from ushiro ashi garami might be the subject matter today 😉 photo by Scott Hirano

A fun day teaching a seminar on back attack system at my good friend Shawn William's academy in LA shortly before Garry Tonon's bout with Ralek Gracie. Always a pleasure to catch up with old friends and gauge the progress of his students whilst keeping them up to date with developments in our game 😊

Big weekend for the squad: Garry Tonon wins a hard fought match against a very tough Ralek Gracie via leg lock submission. It was a fascinating camp and match as we knew very little about the opponent other than the fact that he was around 40 pounds heavier than Mr Tonon and came from a very fine grappling pedigree. Mr Gracie showed excellent defensive poise and training, a credit to his family heritage, but in the end, Mr Tonon was able to break through successfully with a fine variation of a kneebar out of ushiro ashi garami. Here we all relax with the two stars of the weekend - Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon, who won every match they entered this weekend via submission and advanced our method of grappling in a way that was very pleasing indeed. Now I have to go straight to airport and fly home to NYC and get ready to teach tomorrow morning!

Yeah...we look totally normal. The squad heads out into the night in LA looking for a meal after a long but victorious night. You know it's a bad day when a bald dude with rashguard and a fanny pack looking like a demented Captain Jean Luc Picard impersonator is the most normal looking guy in the photo 😉 God help the people of LA

Big night for the squad in LA at EBI 7: Eddie Cummings wins again - every match by submission in regulation time to win the maximum possible prize money of $20,000. Mr Cummings was able to extend his submission range in this event and incorporate elements of our back attack system which proved so effective for Gordon Ryan in the previous EBI. This system will, I have no doubt, prove as game changing as our leg lock system. It gave his performance a well rounded look featuring both Le g locks and strangles and exploded the myth that his game is one dimensional. His game simply looked several levels above his competitors and shows how he is continuing to make technical progress at a rapid rate. Interestingly the other competitors seem to be following our lead in submission grappling style, but lacked the nuances to make it work. Now we will go on to tomorrow where Garry Tonon will square off with Ralek Gracie in what will be a fascinating contrast in styles along with a big size advantage to Mr Gracie. Thank you as always for your interest in the exploits of the squad and our attempts to change the sport of submission grappling.

The subtleties of ashi garami: Whenever you attempt ashi garami, there will inevitably be some degree of exposure of your feet and legs to your opponents counters. This unavoidable fact must be factored into your plans as you launch your attacks. Sound knowledge of the many subtleties of foot and leg positioning is essential if you are to avoid being strongly countered as you attempt your own locks. A fascinating example of this occurred in what was probably the greatest leg lock battle of all time between leg locking maestros Garry Tonon and Rousimar Palhares. Mr Tonon shocked many by initiating all the leg locks in the match on the much larger and universally feared Mr Palhares. In characteristic style, Mr Palhares aggressively countered with his own locks. The crowd gasped as both men went hard for the break. Most people in the audience expected Mr Palhares to prevail due to his size and reputation as a leg breaker. Yet it was he who had to break away first. Mr Tonon did a fine job of positioning his feet in a manner that gave him mechanical advantage in this ferocious leg lock shoot out. Every jiu jitsu student must have faith in the idea that Mechanical advantage will prevail over size and aggression - this is the proposition upon which our entire sport is based - Mr Tonon showed his faith that night. Interestingly, as the match progressed, Mr Palhares stopped trying to counter leg lock and went straight to escape as a safety measure - such was the precision and effectiveness of Mr Tonon's leg attacks on his opponent. Here the two men go for their respective locks early in the match.

Progressive training programs: It is of the first importance that you design training programs that continually refine existing skills whilst adding new ones. So often I see people who make a certain amount of progress and then stop, often resulting in drop out or stagnation. When I first started training young Georges St-Pierre, he was just a blue belt. He would come down part time and learn what he could. When he first fought Matt Hughes, he was very inexperienced and his overall game, though filled with enthusiasm and talent, was unrefined. It was just his third fight in the octagon against the man who that time, was the most dominant welterweight in the sports history. Amazingly, Mr St-Pierre came out on fire and took Mr Hughes down and appeared to be winning the first round - only to be caught in a beginner level mistake and lose by armbar submission. The next time the two fought, a greatly matured Georges St-Pierre knocked Mr Hughes out to win the title. When they met a third time, Mr St-Pierre was a very good black belt in Jiu jitsu. I encouraged him to show this taking the fight to the floor and looking for submissions, even though the floor was Mr Hughes forte and it would have been safer to look for a standing KO as he had done in the second match. When the fight went to the floor it was immediately apparent just how much progress had been made. Mr St-Pierre easily passed guard into dominant pins and finished his legendary opponent with the very same armbar that he once lost to. Underneath the irony was an important lesson in progress. Time and training, ordered according to a rational plan, can completely reverse the relative skills levels of two athletes. It is so important that training programs be monitored to ensure progress is being made and that degeneration has not set in. Only in this way can you reasonably expect to defeat tomorrow the people who are beating you today.

Last training day in NYC: Last training day for the squad. As always, the idea is to take the athlete to a peak on the night of the big show. That means a juggling of conflicting demands and priorities that makes for an interesting last week. In this case it was particularly interesting as the two athletes involved have very different opponents in a completely different rule set and are themselves very different individuals. Here Eddie Cummings and I fervently discuss possible scenarios and problems whilst the supremely confident Garry Tonon looks on in bemusement at our folly.

When two truly horrible people like myself and Garry Tonon are looking happy and smiling menacingly whilst looking at the same thing out on the mats, that can mean only one thing...some poor hapless student has royally screwed up a move that was just taught - probably locked a kimura with hands improperly placed, or messed up ashi garami leg positioning or even worse, Eddie Cummings attempting any move in the standing position. We are happy because we are about to launch into a fusillade of verbal abuse and torment that will involve several different languages, evoking many gods and as many different generations of slang and curse words as we can yell in the time allotted. #horriblesenseisatwork

Four cameramen died in the taking of this photo...Eddie Cummings prepares to defend his belt at EBI 7 this weekend. Hell! I'd be too scared to take his picture - forget about the belt! 😉

Composure: When one looks at the best jiu jitsu players in competition, it is clear that the majority of them exhibit a very impressive degree of composure as they compete - even when they are under tremendous physical pressure. This stands in contrast to an average beginner class where most of the students grunt and grimace their way through the session, even when under very little pressure. This transition from grunting beginner to composed expert is critical to your long term success. Only when you are in a relatively composed and mentally relaxed state can you work methodically through the many small details required to make the moves work and make second by second adaptations to your opponents resistance. Remember this: it is not enough to merely defeat your opponent in training. You must be able to understand HOW and WHY you defeated him, so that you can replicate and eventually improve upon that performance next time. If every muscle fiber in your body is in maximal tension and your lungs are on fire, you will assuredly not be able to recall what you did during the match to win and thus you will not remember the details that brought you victory and employ them upon subsequent opponents - thus ensuring poor rates of progress in training. Learn to keep your physical intensity levels at a level where you can think and remember the reasons for success and failure in each sparring session so that each lesson builds upon the other in a way that generates progress over time, rather than a collections of exhausting brawls that furnish no lessons for the future and guarantee performance plateaus. Here Olivier Taza shows admirable composure as he locks in a heel hook to finish another opponent. Note that he is literally observing his own actions as he performs them to ensure the various details are in order. There is no unnecessary tension, just enough to get the job done. He is in full control of his mental faculties as he performs the move. Whether the move succeeds or fails he will be able to tell you why and how. Thus will he be able to either replicate its success or correct its failure the next time he uses it.

Passing guard: If you have ever had the experience of watching an MMA fight with a group of people who know very little about fighting, it will immediately become apparent that none of them understand the significance of the fighter on top working to get past his opponent's legs to a secure and dominant pin position - passing the guard. To the naive, every top position is equally dominant. The Japanese appear to have been the first in the modern era to note that this is not the case. Kano's judo clearly specifies that pins (osaekomi) do not count unless the fighter in top clears his opponents legs. The Brazilians inherited this tradition and greatly added to it, making it the centerpiece of their top game. The habit of pressuring past your opponents legs to side or mounted positions must be ingrained from the earliest days of training. Only by being able to pass your opponents legs will you be able to attack your opponents entire body with submissions. If I cannot get past my opponents legs, the only submissions I can attempt are locks to the legs. Whilst these are very good and effective, they are only 50% of my opponent's body. Eventually my opponent will see my attacks as predictable and counter. The ability to pass the legs means I can also attack arms and strangleholds - bringing the entire body into the firing line and making my attacks more wide ranging and thus far less predictable. In addition to making the whole body a target for my offense, guard passing strongly undermines my opponents offense. The vast majority of grappling offense from bottom position involves the use of the legs tangling around my head, arms and legs. Once I clear the legs, my opponent cannot do anything offensive until he first recovers his leg position. Considerations like these show why it is so important for developing students to form the habit of constantly pushing past their opponents legs into dominant pins. Among a crowd of MMA fans, when you see one of them murmuring approvingly as the top fighter passes his opponents guard whilst all around the naive fans boo and hiss, you know you have found a kindred spirit. Here,
Eddie Cummings and I tussle for leg position

Three milestone UFC's: whatever complaints people may voice about the UFC, it remains the longest running, most prestigious, most financially successful, most recognizable MMA organization among a sea of failed competitors. UFC 1 was the shot heard around the martial arts world that started a revolution. It transformed overnight the publics ideas of what real fighting would be like. UFC 100 was the biggest event in UFC history, with superstars like Brock Lesnar and Georges St-Pierre and the then unknown, Jon Jones. Mr St-Pierre fought the outstanding kick boxer Tiago Alves that night. It was truly a coaching highlight for me. I was privileged to be among the top MMA talent in the world - a who's who of fighting all stars from every era of the sport and to see Mr St-Pierre put on a flawless display to win a decisive victory from cage side. By UFC 100 the sport has matured greatly from its primitive beginnings and Mr St-Pierre epitomized the modern professional fighter in a sport exploding in popularity. Now we are in the eve of another milestone for the sport and the organization. UFC 200 represents new improvements in drug testing. Earlier UFC's had only the most rudimentary testing. Mr St-Pierre's stand against drug use and retirement over the issue prompted much discussion and change. Now the testing system, whilst far from perfect, is considerably better than previous milestone UFC's. This is a healthy direction for the sport. Here's to UFC 200 - I hope one day I watch a UFC 1000 and marvel at the positive changes since those crazy early days 😊😊

Positional advantage: A core element of Jiu jitsu is the notion of advantage. As much as possible, students are encouraged to seek some form of advantage prior to attack. In this sense, jiu jitsu is the skill of creating unfair playing conditions in my favor. Most students are introduced to the notion of advantage through the concept of POSITIONAL advantage. Indeed, this is the basic structure by which the sport is judged and scored. This provides an excellent and easily understood means of getting students thinking along the correct lines as well as giving them a very effective sense of direction as they spar each other. Interestingly, the concept of positional advantage is only really taught and discussed on the ground. In fact it applies just as much in standing positions, though this is not reflected in the scoring system. Here I coach one of the best means of gaining positional advantage on the feet - a variation of the duck under, which takes us from a neutral position in front of our opponent to an advantageous one behind him.

Peaking for an event: The main purpose of our training overall is to raise our general skill level in the sport of jiu jitsu to the highest degree possible. The purpose of a fight camp is quite different. Here the emphasis is on maximizing our performance against a specific opponent or set of opponents on a particular date in a particular venue. As such, the training tends to be much more specialized and structured according to the time available before the event. As Eddie Cummings prepares for EBI 7 we begin to work on specific drills for given opponents. Here we work on leg pommeling drills in the ashi garami position where the subtleties of the leg lock game come into play. So many people see only the general features of this position and claim knowledge that they simply do not have. I often tell the squad "it is one thing for everyone to SEE what you do, it is quite another for them to FEEL IT." People look with superficial eyes and miss entirely the key elements that make our game effective. Daily drilling between Mr Cummings, myself and the rest of the squad keeps his skill set moving in the right directions as EBI 7 approaches...

My students displaying high level sleeping technique between early morning class and afternoon class. Note the full face plant method favored by young Nicky Ryan - fascinating contrast with Olivier Taza's preferred fetal zombie position. Master of them all, however, is the sleeping wonder, Garry Tonon, who generally prefers the open mouthed drooling head-rolling-over-shoulders technique, particularly whilst in moving vehicles or airplanes...If a visitor came into the academy and saw this scene, he would conclude either that we are the laziest bums in jiu jitsu or the hardest working...I guess only the medal platform will reveal the true answer 😉

Young masters: One of the enduring cliches of the martial arts is the idea of the aged master, having spent a lifetime acquiring knowledge, having greater fighting ability than his younger, less knowledgable opponent. The simple observation that the old masters of the sport never appear on the medal podiums puts this silly cliche to rest. There is a lot more to fighting ability than knowledge. More importantly, I want to go further and say that age and time in the sport is not even a guarantee of greater knowledge. It is my belief that students can be taught in such a way that they can become young masters - they can have the knowledge of people who have spent a lifetime in the sport whilst still in their athletic prime. The key is in their method of instruction. So often I see the following problems that limit knowledge acquisition over time. First, students stop learning at a certain point and permanently plateau. Second, their instruction leaves them with only partial understandings of technique rather than complete understanding. Third, less than optimal methods of inculcating whatever theoretical knowledge they have into their physical movement in ways that lead to lowered performance. It is my belief that if these limitations are removed, there is absolutely no reason why a dedicated student of a young age could not acquire a degree of knowledge that would shock his older masters. This is always the way in which I teach my leading students. After just a few years of such instruction they often surprise and delight me with the amount of learning they carry within them. An interesting test of my beliefs occurred when 23 year old Garry Tonon took on Masakazu Imanari, the man most people identified as the most knowledgeable leg locking expert in the world. In his home country of Japan, he is known as "Tenth Dan of leg locks" in recognition of his technical depth. Yet when the action started it was Garry Tonon who easily prevailed, winning via leg lock against the leg locking master himself. The fact that the match was over so quickly and that Garry never made use of top pressure show it was not fatigue due to age or size that got the win - it was knowledge.

Happy Fourth of July!!! 🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸Our great nation was founded by revolutionaries who broke from tradition in seeking a better way. I hope to create a revolution in grappling in methods of learning, operations and strategy. Happy fourth from myself and my students 🇺🇸😊🇺🇸

Keeping it fun: sometimes I talk so much about the need for intelligently directed training programs backed by intensely disciplined students that one could get the impression that training ought to be to be a joyless slog towards higher skill level. This is definitely not the case. In fact I have always found that overly serious and joyless training environments have very negative effects on long term progress. The inescapable fact is that humans are drawn towards that which they find enjoyable. The moment training ceases to be fun, it is only a question how long before you stop - some will last longer than others, but the end result will be the same. It is important to understand that a training environment can be both fun and very challenging. Shared humor is the backbone of the camaraderie that can produce a championship training room. The trick is to instill a sense among the students of when they need to be serious and hard working and when they can release tension with humor and training room silliness. Finding the right balance between the two is so important. Visiting students are often quite shocked to hear me cursing and swearing like a trooper at my students and laughing at off color jokes- I like an informal , but hard working room. Just always make sure the work gets done. Here I trade jibes with Eddie Cummings, who often exhibits a prodigious work ethic well balanced with a fine sense of humor and fun that makes him a huge asset in the training room.

Learning curves: Often I am asked questions about the length of time that will be required to achieve proficiency in jiu jitsu. An interesting corollary to this question is of great importance to many of the professional athletes that I teach - if I am to compete against an opponent who has trained far longer than me, how can I ever hope to catch up to his level, given the disparity in total training time? On the face of it, it seems impossible. If athlete A has been training 20 hours per week for ten years and athlete B has been training 20 hours a week for 5 years and A and B are of similar size and body type, it would seem that B ought to have little chance of success. It is my belief that this is not the case. Once an athlete has a strong foundation of the basic movements and concepts in the sport, there can be radical differences in learning curves that can allow for seemingly miraculous acts of catch up where athletes with significantly less total training time can do very well against more experienced opponents. The most important factor in an athletes training background is NOT length of time training, but rather rate and sustenance of performance improvement. Most coaches and teams simply teach students the same way they were taught themselves, with no thought for improving transmission of knowledge. As a result, many training programs cease being effective in continuing to build new skills after a certain point. Athletes go into skill stagnation and are more or less the same at ten years as they were at five. An interesting test of my beliefs occurred when my student Eddie Cummings competed in EBI championships. He knew he was slated to fight the outstanding veteran grappler, Baret Yoshida, who had competed very successfully at the highest levels for well over a decade. Understandably, Mr Cummings was worried that his total training time of only just over five years would not fare well against the highly skilled Mr Yoshida, who had been doing jiu jitsu three times longer than that. Yet on the night, Mr Cummings won with relatively little trouble despite having only a third of his opponent's total training time - a gratifying vindication of our program.

Body type and jiu jitsu: Very often people will ask me about the effects of body type on jiu jitsu. It appears that many people hold the belief that there is an optimum body type in jiu jitsu that confers advantage over other body types. Even a moments reflection will reveal that this is false. A look at the medal platform at the world championships will always show a wide variety of body types which are represented in no particular order of success. If I ask you to name for me the five most successful jiu jitsu champions of all time, I guarantee your list will show big disparities in body type. There is no dominant body type on the medal stands. There is however, a dominant body ETHOS. Champions always maximize the ability of whatever body they have been born with to perform the skills of the sport. Whilst there is no one body type that dominates the sport, there is a need on everyone's part to maximize what you can do with your body that will improve your jiu jitsu performance. Everyone's body has an optimal weight and conditioning that maximizes its performance for a given activity. It is your duty to find what that is for you and to maintain yourself close to that ideal (getting closer if competition is near). Thus any body type can win a world championship, but only one way of maintaining that body of yours will maximize your ability to perform the skills you hope to win that championship with. Here are three EBI champions. All three are very different somatotypes- Garry Tonon is a classic mesomorph. Gordon Ryan an ectomorph and Eddie Cummings an endomorph masquerading as a mesomorph. Yet all three have found a way to maximize their very different bodies to perform the skills they needed to win. Thus any body type can win a world championship, but only one way of maintaining it will maximize your chances of doing so.

The relationship between MMA and jiu jitsu: In my teachings I try never to lose sight of the relationship between jiu jitsu and MMA. This is something I inherited from my teacher, Renzo Gracie. My first four teachers and training partners from white to brown belt were Renzo, Ricardo Almeida, Matt Serra and Rodrigo Gracie. All four were both grappling and MMA stand outs. All of our grappling was done in the context of fighting. Indeed, if jiu jitsu had not figured so heavily in early MMA, I never would have taken notice of the art and joined up. Effectiveness in fighting will always be the most basic appeal of any art that seems to call itself martial. As modern jiu jitsu has matured, the relationship with MMA is slightly more distant. This is a natural consequence of the two sports evolving and pushing in their own directions and the need for specialization to stay ahead of the competition within a specified rule set; but those early years still bear heavily in my thinking and in all honesty, no part of my coaching gets me as excited as helping an athlete prepare for a professional fight. Here, Georges St-Pierre and Kenny Florian go through their grappling drills in our Monday afternoon class.

The power of adaptation: Very often in the sport we have to adapt our game around changes in our body. Usually these adaptations are in response to injury or age. When one part of our body is incapacitated we have to adapt our game around that problem and find new ways to play in order to maintain our overall effectiveness. The main thing to remember is that our goal is to continually improve our overall effectiveness in the sport. It does not matter if I lose some of my best weapons due to injury, so long as I can adapt and create new ones. Sometimes this cycle of adaptation in response to physical changes and problems can have very good effects. An injury can make us play the game in a very new and exciting way; then when the injury resolves itself over time, you get your old weapons back along with your new ones. In my own case, I always favored ashi garami on my left side, but after my hip replacement I completely lost my ability to perform it. I quickly had to become more proficient on the right hand side in order to demonstrate to my students post surgery. Now it feels as natural as it used to on my left. Here I work for a rather feeble looking ashi garami on my left against the highly skilled Eddie Cummings - the end of my 14 inch surgical scar visible outside my shorts - perhaps one day it will return and I shall be ashi garami ambidextrous 😊😊

Teaching to teach: Throughout my coaching career I have always avoided the common tendency to teach with a "do this, do that" approach to jiu jitsu. I always try to teach not only the "how" of a given move, but also the "why." In this way students learn not only the technical performance of the move, but also the contextual elements that show them not only how to use it, but when and why. As I teach my students, I always try to do so in a way that enables them to teach others the same lesson. I do this by trying to explain the logic and rationale behind each move. I don't want students who can merely mimic a move, I want students who can understand its underlying principles. Teaching in this manner has a pleasing side effect; not only do students make faster progress in their own games, they rapidly take on the ability to teach these skills to others. Rather than be able to merely regurgitate information, they can explain information - a critical difference. In this way the overall level of the training room can increase quite rapidly and a mutually beneficial training environment can emerge and take root. Here my student, Garry Tonon shows his pedagogical skills with young Mikey Wilson, an outstanding ten year old student. Garry is explaining the mechanical underpinnings of ude gatame, one of our favorite upper body attacks as young Mikey enacts them.

Defeat: The only people that never lost are those that never went against the best competition. In life and jiu jitsu, defeat is as certain as death and taxes in other people lives. The question then, is not whether you will be defeated, but how you will react when defeated. Of course the initial reaction is always emotional, but after that comes two general types of reaction. The first is denial. The athlete tells him or herself that the loss was an aberration due to outside factors, an injury, a distraction, an unfavorable environment or whatever. The loss is dismissed and the athlete goes on doing what he has always done and goes to the next match essentially the same person. The second approach is acceptance. The athlete accepts the defeat as a sign that something needs to be changed if the cause of that defeat is to be overcome. It may be something small, or it may be a major overhaul, but some form of modification is necessary. This second approach generally gets the better results in the long term (though many athletes have had good careers using the first). Here Eddie Cummings and his team show the pain of a narrow loss by penalty in over time at the world championships, but already ideas of change and modification are going through our minds photo by Tiago Molinos

The iron law of posture: For every given human physical activity, there is a posture that maximizes our ability to successfully complete that activity. This insight is critical to success in physical action. In jiu jitsu our ability to work in accordance with this law is severely tested, since our position and goals can change second by second and everything is done in a competitive environment under duress. Learning how posture can improve our efficiency, learning how to move from posture to posture in accordance with the unfolding action and learning how posture is related to the goal of minimum effort for maximum effect is the foundation of the truly deep part of the study of jiu jitsu. It is here that we begin to gain deep insight into our physical bodies and their workings. Here Eddie Cummings and his opponent, Tanquinho, both display fine posture relative to their respective goals as they engage in their match at the ADCC world championships Photo by Tiago Molinos

Continuous combat: The ideal grappler of the future will be able to apply him or herself through the full spectrum of positions from standing to floor. Once combat is begun they will be able to follow the action effortlessly and confidently from upper body throws to leg takedowns to standing submissions down to the floor in both top and bottom position - strong in both positional and submission attacks over the whole body. Currently, most grapplers are specialists who are much better in certain areas than others. This creates a rather artificial or limited look to their game where the action stops as soon as they get to an area outside their speciality. This creates problems when they have to transition to fighting or MMA. Some great figures of the past give a good idea of what is possible for the future. Here is the truly great Isao Okano, who displayed great balance and flow between standing and ground technique of the highest level. Men like him are an inspiration to a future where grapplers exhibit an ability to flow continuously between every scenario in grappling at a high level of proficiency

When the fighting is over: Garry Tonon finishes another impressive performance. The self analysis that must follow every match has already begun as we reflect on his immediate assessment of the match. His initial feelings and thoughts are the first part of the process. As the next few days unfold, the analysis will deepen into video review and a congress of informed opinions, so that training and behavior can be modified in the light of experience. Only in this way can progress be made over time. Only in this way can an athlete build strength upon strength and put on increasingly better shows. Most people celebrate a win. The best analyze a win and see where improvements can be made so that winning becomes a habit rather than an accident.

If I asked you six moths ago to find a photograph of someone attempting a leg lock on the great Rousimar Palhares you would have come up empty handed. Such was his reputation in the area of the game that people would have thought it suicide to even try. Yet when Garry Tonon engaged him in a match he went forward with confidence and attacked Mr Palhares' legs repeatedly, along with a host of other submission and positional attacks. This was not the result of any suicidal tendencies on Mr Tonon's part. It came from confidence in a system of leg offense and defense he had put a tremendous amount of work into over years. Despite a huge size and strength disadvantage, he took it to the legendary leg locker and dominated all the leg exchanges. Here he tests Mr Palhares' legs with a powerful inverted Achilles lock variation that puts great pressure on the big man. Real confidence comes from knowing you have the answers to all the problems you can reasonably expect out there under the lights and the physical preparation to manifest them.

Happy Fathers Day to all! 😊😊

Three forms of body control: There are three major forms of control over the movements of the human body. The first is control over the movements of our own body. The human body has a vast potential for movement which very few people learn to fully exploit in the course of a lifetime. Sports such as gymnastics, yoga, solo dance, contortionism and others teach the student how to maximize their body's ability to move through its full potential range. Their goal is to teach control over the movements of our own body. A second form of control is seen in partner dance, professional (fake) wrestling and other such activities. Here the intention is to work with a cooperative partner and demonstrate control over the movement of two cooperating bodies. The two work as a unit and try to exhibit control over their shared movement through whatever art form they are trying to express. The third form of control is to me the most interesting. This is control over a the body of a resisting opponent who is simultaneously trying to control you. Now you have to control someone who does not want to be controlled, but who on the contrary, seeks to control you. That is when things get truly interesting. The key is to understand that the grappling arts, jiu jitsu included, must involve training in all three areas if progress is to be maximized. Students must make sincere efforts to maximize their control over the movements of their own bodies. This can be done with gymnastics and yoga or some other equivalent. Remember always - THERE IS NO LEARNING TO CONTROL THE MOVEMENTS OF ANOTHER PERSONS BODY, WITHOUT FIRST LEARNING TO CONTROL THE MOVEMENTS OF YOUR OWN. Jiu jitsu also involves the second form of control, over a cooperating partner. This is done during partner drilling, where movement skills are learned with a partner who assists you through the movements until they are understood and natural. Lastly comes control over resisting opponents in live sparring (randori) and ultimately, competition. Thus the jiu jitsu student must familiarize himself with all three faces of body control of he or she is to make a deep study of the sport.

Inside the mind of Eddie Cummings as he walks out to another match: "Coach has been watching me train every day in fight camp. He knows my game inside out. I've memorized all the complex names and code words for the moves so I can react instantly when he calls for them. He knows my game better than I know myself - I will move exactly as he calls the moves and victory will be mine..." Inside the mind of John Danaher: "Dang...I forgot this kids name again...was it Eddie Bravo? No - that's that rubbery guy from California - different guy. Ummm...Poindexter? No. Damn...maybe someone in the crowd will know...what is his game? Never can remember...wait...I think he mostly does half guard passing...yes, that's it...ok, this should be fine..."

Building a culture of respect: One of the favorite moments of my coaching career occurred at the ADCC world championships. My student Garry Tonon squared off against the very talented Dillon Danis, student of the great Marcelo Garcia. The two had a rivalry and met in the first round of the tournament. After a fierce exchange of technique, Mr Tonon prevailed with a very powerful heel hook. In a gesture that made me far more proud than the actual victory, Mr Tonon immediately went over to check if his rival was alright, then went to bow and shake the hand of his great coach and mentor - showing his respect for all his wonderful achievements in the sport. I dare say that that bow and handshake made me more proud than all the leg locks, armlocks and strangles my students have performed put together. Respect for an opponent is the foundation of the martial arts. It is what distinguishes the martial arts from mere violence. If a man fights another with hate in his heart - it is a fight. If he does so with respect in his heart - he is a martial artist. Remember - in the end, whatever trivial differences there are between teams and schools, they are insignificant compared with the many similarities- there is so much more that unites us than separates us. Building a culture of respect is the basis of our enterprise. Photo: Tiago Molinos

Pre-match attitude - study in contrasts: Different athletes enter matches with very different mindsets. The important thing is that they be comfortable and natural. I try to go with what feels right for them and what have been the dominant themes of our fight camp, rather than any preconceived notion of what is right or wrong for an athlete to feel before competition. Garry Tonon and Eddie Cummings went through camp together in preparation for ADCC world championships, but you can see the difference in pre-match mindset. Garry is as always, relaxed and jovial. Eddie looks like...um...a serial killer who kills by leg lock? Photo by Tiago Molinos

Trying to explain to Eddie Cummings that ashi garami works just as well when wearing a gi and also that it can be used for many things other than leg locks...he looks deeply offended 😉

Olivier Taza - Learning the leg lock system: A very fine example of the speed with which my leg lock system can be learned and the effectiveness with which it can be applied was presented by the very talented and hard working Olivier Taza yesterday, when he won the sapateiro invitational grappling tournament. Mr Taza won all matches via leg lock submission, including an impressive win over 10th Planet black belt Nathan Orchard - remarkable given that Mr Taza only recently received his purple belt. Mr Taza's story is quite an instructive one. He lives in Montreal and trained at Tristar gym under my student, Firas Zahabi. I often send my students, Messrs Tonon, Cummings and Ryan to the gym at Tristar to assist in grappling training Mr Taza was so impressed by what he saw that he traveled to NYC for long stretches of time, training twice a day and thoroughly immersing himself in our game. Very soon he made tremendous improvements and in less than a year became a very different player. Mr Taza is the kind of student everyone likes - quiet and humble, studious and intelligent, yet with ambitions and the work ethic to fulfill them. Yesterday all those hours on the mat manifested themselves in perfect submission victories using the leg lock system he has worked so hard to learn. Here, Mr Taza and his good friend and training partner, Gordon Ryan, reflect on lessons after class

Teaching the room: On any given day of teaching jiu jitsu, there will always be massive variations in knowledge, ability and attributes on the part of the attending students. There will be older students, some with less dexterity and coordination, some from a different school - enough variation to make it a real skill to present a class from which everyone present can benefit. How is it possible to teach a class where both a neophyte and a world champion can witness the same move and both walk away with a sense of benefit? The first thing to realize is different people will benefit in different ways from the same class. As I teach a given move, one student may focus on the grip and set up elements and benefit from this. Another may see the tactical set up component and benefit from this. Yet another may learn from the mechanical elements of breaking. Don't try to teach everyone the same lesson - teach the move and let them take home their own lesson. As a teacher, I should be able to teach a well known move in such a way that students of very different abilities can all benefit. Many teachers make the mistake of trying to slog through vast amounts of detail when teaching. Indeed, people often measure the value of an instructor by this rubric. This, I believe, is mistaken - though I know such a view will be seen as heretical by many. Students will quickly forget details when presented en masse. Much better to present the most pertinent details ranked roughly in order of importance. You don't have to teach the move in its entirety in one lesson - if the student walks away from the lesson with one clear and memorable detail that he can apply in live training and which makes a tangible increase in his performance, that is excellent progress for one day - he is a step closer on his path to perfection over time. The very realistic goal of kaizen is perfection over time; not the very unrealistic goal of perfection in a day.

Gi or no gi? Teaching a mixed gi and no gi class: The best people in the sport switch effortlessly between the two. Ultimately the sport is about controlling and submitting the human body. Masters of jiu jitsu can easily make the necessary adaptations and stay focused on that goal regardless of what their partner is wearing. The day a jiu jitsu teacher claims his success or failure in a given match was due to whether or not his opponent was or was not wearing a jacket is a sad one indeed.

Every submission hold has its own character: we are involved in a sport where the submission hold is the pinnacle of techniques- the very soul of the sport. Accordingly, deep study of the main families of submissions is essential to your progress. Each lock and strangle has its own unique character and applicability- that is why it is common to see athletes who are very strong in some, yet weak in others. One could easily spend a lifetime of study on just five families of submissions and still not come close to the limit of what is possible. Typically athletes will develop a special affinity for four of five submissions, plus several more as back up in case of emergency. Depth of knowledge counts for more than breadth of knowledge in submissions and indeed, in most elements of jiu jitsu. Here Benson Henderson works on a variation of the Achilles lock with the squad. Drilling like this provides a great opportunity to deepen your understanding of the correct mechanics underlying the lock that will make the move work in the pressure of competition

Anybody can train when they feel like training - The real question is whether you can train when you don't feel like it: Eddie Cummings and I hammer out details and plans for his upcoming bouts. This constant pushing for better results comes at a price. You see the gym is empty behind us. A few hours previously it was packed with nearly eighty people in an afternoon class - now they are gone- but Mr Cummings remains. This pattern of extra effort beyond the norm is the distinguishing characteristic of all great enterprises. So often people ask me how my students became so adept at the skills they display in competition - if they could see the daily price they pay in time and effort their question would be answered before it even left their lips...

Competition intensity: The majority of training time ought to be concerned with skill acquisition. Accordingly, I often encourage my students to train in an experimental manner where the primary emphasis is on attaining and developing new skills. This is best done by reducing the intensity of training sessions to a level where thinking and learning can occur. It is a very different matter during contest preparation and match time however. Now the athlete operates to impose those skills on a maximally resisting subject. Opponents are often shocked at the intensity of a grappler highly skilled in submissions coming at them with bad intentions. Things get much more interesting when the intent changes from "I will pass your guard or sweep you into a pin and control you," to "I am coming to break or strangle you." Here, Eddie Cummings shows his competition intensity to win yet another EBI championship belt for the squad

Former adversaries, new friends: Georges St-Pierre and Jake Shields finish up a tough day of training with the squad. They fought in front of one of the biggest crowds in UFC history. Today they trained and laughed together in front of a crowded room. Both times it was a wonderful time to be around 😊

Garry Tonon has just informed me that the new super villain in Star Wars: the force awakens is a total panty-waist dork who disgraces the fine lineage of Darth Sideous, Darth Maul and Darth Vader with a lamentable display of overall wimpiness and utter lack of spine. Mr Tonon's assessment of Mr. Kylo Ren's combat value as "completely incapable of winning a novice division at NAGA, forget about beating a Jedi," leaves me inconsolable and distraught as caught on camera...

An early innovation in my jiu jitsu: when I was a blue belt in the early mid 1990's I made the observation that almost every strangle hold in our sport has an inverted or reverse variation, except (at that time) kata gatame (often called an arm triangle strangle). At the same time, my friend Shawn Williams came to me with a problem related to guard passing when opponents would scramble to their knees in a quasi front headlock position to avoid conceding pass points. At this time I was experimenting a lot with wrestling moves like three quarter nelsons and their applicability to jiu jitsu. This marriage of seemingly unrelated topics spurred me to try an inverted kata gatame as a counter to an opponent scrambling up to turtle position- I would break them down with a three quarter Nelson and enter this new strangle. Mr Williams told me it felt very effective - at that same moment I also came up with the idea of a front kata gatame (anaconda strangle), but I later learned that I could not claim originality with this move as it was common in the sport of wrestling to apply it as a strangle even though technically this was illegal - the gold medal winning Schultz brothers were famous for this. I showed the move to Renzo , who wanted a proof that it was effective - I performed it on a strongly resisting partner who of course did not know the move and promptly passed out. Renzo laughed, got up and got the same result when he applied it to another man - thus was born what I called "the inverted kata gatame" I went on to experiment over the months with many variations of entry and finish with considerable success. I showed it to my friend and student, Joe D'arce, who quickly became very proficient in its use, particularly out of guard passing scrambles. He competed in California and quickly defeated many opponents with it. The Californians had never seen this strangle and called the move "the D'arce" after Joe - something we both still laugh about to this day. Here my student, Chris Weidman - a true specialist in the technique, applies it brilliantly to render his opponent, Tom Lawlor, unconscious in a matter of seconds on his title run towards Anderson Silva

Stranglehold or chokehold? My long suffering students will attest that I often show a fastidiousness that can make me a rather unpleasant person to be around at times 😉😡😒 one mistake that is guaranteed to evoke a nasty reaction is the very common tendency for students of jiu jitsu to confuse strangleholds and chokes. It is of the greatest importance that students gain a deep understanding of the workings of the human body - this is an art - and your canvas is the human body - learn as much as you can about it and your jiu jitsu will improve. A choke refers to the act of obstructing the passage of air to the lungs. So for example, if you swallow food too clumsily, you can be choked. Strangulation refers to the very different action of cutting off blood to the brain, usually by constricting the carotid arteries in the neck. Chokes can take up to several minutes to render a well conditioned person unconscious. Strangles will do the same in around ten seconds. Due to the fact that the airways are in close proximity to the carotid arteries, most strangleholds will also incidentally have a choking effect and vice versa - but always it is the intention of the jiu jitsu player to strangle, rather than choke, an opponent due to the much greater efficiency of the former. Therefore, it ought to be standard practice to refer to our attacks to the neck as strangles rather than chokes (and please avoid the nonsensical phrase "blood choke") Here, young Nicky Ryan works on his strangles - a move he and his brother show great proficiency in, while his notoriously nit-picky and obsessive sensei looks on approvingly 😉

Tangled up in legs: "Ashi garami" is usually translated as "leg entanglement." It captures well the idea of two of my legs immobilizing one of my opponents legs in ways that make submission attacks and positional sweeps possible. There are many variations, each with distinctive properties that make them good for some purposes, weak in others. Here I work to control the legs with an ashi garami variation on Eddie Cummings - never an easy thing as Mr Cummings is himself a young master of ashi garami, having taken on with great attention and passion every lesson on the subject I ever taught him in a way that quickly took him to the top echelons of the leg locking world. In a situation like this even very small errors have have dramatic and devastating consequences - yet Mr Cummings displays the calm and technical nuance associated with success in this position.

Back attacks: The human body is set up well to deal with threats from the front, but does not cope well with threats from an angle. The best angle of them all from which to attack is directly behind an opponent. From here the attacker has considerable mechanical and tactical advantages that should enable him to prevail in most cases, other things being equal. One of the most important skills to develop then, is the ability to work your way behind your opponent and stay there long enough with sufficient control to do damage or finish the match. Jiu jitsu shows its fighting pedigree in awarding maximum points for getting to an opponent's back - in recognition of this fundamental fact about it's value in unarmed human combat. Interestingly, many other grappling arts, such as Judo and most wrestling styles, do not award points at all, or award relatively minor points, for attaining this most dominant of grappling positions. Here Georges St-Pierre works on his back attacks prior to his bout with the formidable Nick Diaz - a skill he used extensively to dominate the action in that memorable fight.

Precioussss...nice ashi garami my precioussss...damn...I need a vacation...gotta get out of this damn basement dojo...maybe work on my sun tan a little...😉😄

Tachi waza and Ne waza: Most of the main grappling styles styles of the world recognize the fundamental distinction between grappling in the standing position (tachi waza) and on the ground (ne waza). Usually any given style has a bias through the rule set towards one or the other. So for example, modern freestyle wrestling and Judo are mostly tachi waza sports (though each has a definite ne waza component) BJJ is a good example of the opposite extreme, it is almost entirely ne waza based. The general aim of most tachi waza styles is to get the opponent down to the floor. The general aim of most ne waza styles is to pin or submit the opponent on the ground. As a general trend today, the grappling sports are becoming more specialized as either predominately tachi waza or ne waza. The result has been good in some ways - a definite rise in skill level in certain areas due to increased specialization and time spent in limited scenarios. It has been negative in others - we are seeing athletes with incredible skill in specialized domains but equally incredible naivety outside of those domains. Remember always that tachi waza without ne waza is pointless - what is the point of putting someone on the ground if you cannot control him there? On the other hand, ne waza without tachi waza is useless - what is the point of refined ground technique if you cannot get him there in the first place? Nowhere is the marriage of tachi waza and ne waza more important than in mixed martial arts, where failure to integrate them adequately often has disastrous results. Here, Georges St-Pierre works on the crucial interface between standing and ground grappling with Garry Tonon.

So proud and happy to hear of the great victory of my friend and student, Travis Stevens at the Judo world masters tournament this weekend 😊. Travis used a tremendous mix of standing and ground grappling to sweep the field and take gold in this invitational only elite tournament. Here is an image of Travis that speaks volumes about his commitment to excellence in the sport. In a world of imposters and poseurs, here is the real deal - Travis Stevens - warrior of the mats

Solo movement drills: Some of the most impressive training lessons I learned came from watching great boxers go through their solo movement training - shadow boxing. They approached this part of their training with great seriousness. Indeed, it occupied a considerable part of their overall workout and was done with a commitment and sense of purpose that was deeply impressive to me. This stands in stark contrast to the rather lazy fashion in which most grapplers approach solo drills. Usually they are done in a very perfunctory way prior to partner drills before class as a warm up. There is none of the mindfulness, sense of technical perfection and most important - relevance to actual sparring - that was so evident in the shadow boxing of the great pugilists. This experience led me to develop grappling solo drills that were designed to improve movement in ways that would make a difference in live training just as quality shadow boxing improves the sparring of good boxers. Time invested in this project will serve you well - it will give you so much more than just a warm up. It will deepen your understanding of efficient movement in ne waza (ground grappling), reinforce good habits of posture and placement and enable you to workout effectively whenever you are alone. Here, young Nicky Ryan goes through his solo drills just prior to stepping on to the mat in competition

The two faces of jiu jitsu: Every aspect of jiu jitsu has two sides - a positive side where my intention is to enforce my game upon my opponent, and a negative side where I attempt to prevent my opponent doing the same to me. So for example, in a grip fighting exchange, I try to impose my grips upon my opponent, whilst simultaneously negating his attempts to impose his grips upon me. When I pin someone and look to transition from one pin to another, I aim to position and hold myself in a way that maximizes my ability to move freely around my opponent, whilst at the same time doing my utmost to inhibit movement in my opponent. This dual nature of enhancing my aims while undercutting and negating those of my opponent is a key element of victory. Note that one without the other is without value. If I only care to impose my game without shutting down my opponents, he can move as freely as me and the result will be uncontrolled scrambles leading nowhere. If I only seek to negate what my opponent does without any positive movement and attacks of my own. I will never amount to anything more than an annoyance to my opponent by slowing him down without ever actually presenting any danger to him Here, Eddie Cummings exhibits a fine example of this duality. He has attained a position where he can readily move his body in the appropriate directions to apply crushing force to the leg of 10th planet black belt champion, Nathan Orchard, while at the same time completely eliminating Mr Orchard's ability to move in a way that would allow escape. This creates a huge imbalance in movement potential that leads to decisive victory.

Empirical tests: Nothing furnishes proof of a theory or set of beliefs quite like a simple yet decisive empirical test. Jiu jitsu often allows for very decisive tests due to the nature of submissions. This often makes way for a very clear testing of the pros and cons of a given system versus alternative systems. Here Eddie Cummings quickly latches on to the leg of noted leg lock practitioner Reilly Bodycomb and secures a decisive win - validating the effectiveness of our system in a very clear empirical test.

Extreme pressure: Garry Tonon locks up a very tight inverted heel hook from cross ashi garami on the great Rousimar Palhares, himself a master of leg locks. The pressure of top level competition shows as Mr Palhraes grimaces and prepares himself to roll out of bounds to get a release- good tactical strategy on his part and showing excellent awareness of the geography of the mat - a key factor in world championship level grappling. Note the physical tightness of Mr Tonon's ashi garami - very necessary against such a powerful and skilled opponent. This was truly a clash to determine leg lock supremacy in the grappling world

From rivalry to friendship: The very nature of our sport is centered around competition and the ability to gain and enforce competitive advantage over an opponent. One of its greatest pleasures however, comes from the realization that however strong the fervor of competition might be, in the end, the sport as a whole is bigger than any temporary rivalry between ourselves and another person - for we are all ultimately united by the kingly arts of combat. Years ago my student Georges St-Pierre was matched to fight the formidable Jake Shields, who at that time had not lost a fight in almost eight years and who had crushed numerous UFC champions and contenders along the way to his title fight. The fight and the camp leading to it were as tightly contested as any, yet years later, Mr Shields came by to train and work on skills. It was a valuable reminder to me that friendship and camaraderie are more uplifting and lasting than rivalry and advantage. In the end; it is far more important to be a good human being than it is to be a good fighter. Skills in a competitive world and the great achievements they can bring us make us stand out from the crowd, but it is our humanity and empathy that bring us back. Jake and I share some stories from old campaigns after another tough session with the team

The essence of jiu jitsu: The ability to control greater size, strength and aggression with lesser size, strength and aggression: One of the defining characteristics of jiu jitsu and indeed, all the combat sports, is the ability to control and overcome greater size, strength and aggression with less. It is the quintessentially human action of using the ingenuity of our conscious minds to make up for the deficiencies of our body. Jiu jitsu is one of the few remaining combat sports that still permits open weight bouts where this essential feature can be tested. The finest example in recent memory was the clash between Garry Tonon and Rousimar Palhares - a man who was the very symbol of size, strength and aggression in our sport and who was in addition, highly skilled in submissions, particularly leg locks. Yet it was the much smaller, weaker and less psychologically aggressive Garry Tonon who dominated most of the action - winning all the submission exchanges in a thrilling encounter of psychological aggression versus tactical aggression that went the distance. It was a superb example of the essential nature of the kingly art of jiu jitsu

Many will look, but few will see: In all things, but especially in jiu jitsu, small details, often unseen or ignored, make the difference between success and failure. Cultivating a habitual reaching for perfection in performance, however difficult and frustrating that might be, is thus crucial to your advancement. This is so often a game of inches and millimeters and the consequences of even the smallest mechanical or tactical mistakes can be very costly indeed. I tell you in all honesty that it will be excellence in the performance of the unexciting, mundane aspects of jiu jitsu - not the pursuit of the exotic and showy elements, that will enable you to prevail when you need them most. Here I go over the minutiae of rear strangles with young Nicky Ryan and the ever observant and thus constantly improving, Eddie Cummings.

Position before submission: jiu jitsu students often use this phrase - some even go so far as to define the sport this way. It is a good way to express a valuable insight to a beginner, but at the higher levels, it is an over simplification. Positional dominance is one form of control and advantage, but it is only one among many forms of advantage. Indeed, such is the subtlety of the sport at international level that it is quite possible to give up to your opponent one form of advantage whilst retaining several different forms for yourself. In this way weakness can be feigned from a position of strength and an unwary opponent taken by surprise by an unforeseen attack. Here Garry Tonon gives away positional advantage to the very talented Jake Shields whilst hunting for other forms of advantage to launch attacks

Submission holds: The various submission holds are the most distinctive and revered element of jiu jitsu - a fact revealed by the point system of the sport. You can be losing a match by any number of points, but if you are able to lock in a successful submission hold, the match is yours. No other part of the sport is valued so highly. Each of the submissions has its own unique character, which helps explain why so many jiu jitsu players are very good at some, yet surprisingly weak with others. Gaining deep knowledge of the nature and application of each of the main submission holds is a huge part of your ultimate progress in the sport. Like a large and disparate family, they are all related, yet quite different from each other.
Among the main joint locks, the most basic distinction is among the linear locks and the twisting locks. Here I demonstrate a fairly standard variation of ude garami, commonly known as "Kimura" in BJJ parlance. This belongs in the category of twisting locks and is among the most important and effective of the upper body submissions. One of its great hallmarks is its versatility; being equally useful gi or no gi, in both standing and ground grappling, from either top or bottom positions, as both a means of submission and as a means of control, as either an end in itself or as a lead in to other techniques

Jiu jitsu is largely bound up with the skill of creating some form of preliminary advantage before launching an attack. One of the most important forms of advantage is balance breaking, or kuzushi. Kano showed his genius by making this the centerpiece of his Judo program in standing throws- but the concept is just as valuable in ground grappling. At the higher levels of the sport, the ability to break through tough defenses is essential to success- generating kuzushi is one of the best preambles to attacks - without it there is little chance of an attack succeeding and a high risk of a strong counter. Here I test the balance of Eddie Cummings as a prelude to a more serious attack.

Loneliness is a crowded room: Match time; Eddie Cummings goes through our final pre match preparations as he is about to go on stage. In the end, in a crowded arena, coming from a crowded gym and a crowded corner of coaches and team mates - the athlete goes out alone. Learning to understand the strengths and weaknesses of your own mind in these crucial moments is a large factor in your success or failure. As a coach I must be sensitive to the individuality of the athlete in these moments - each one must find their own way of coping. What works for Eddie Cummings will not work for Gary Tonon or Gordon Ryan. Many a man has melted in these last moments and found their stage performance fell far below their gym performance - finding a routine to prevent this is one of the most deeply personal and difficult aspects of professional grappling and fighting.

One of the great pleasures of living and teaching in NYC is the constant influx of talented visitors stopping by to work on their skills. Former UFC lightweight champion Benson Henderson stops by for a fun grappling session with the team. Training with new partners can be a valuable part of contest preparation, as it mimics some of the elements of competing against someone you have never grappled before and who comes from a training program very different from your own. Such practice forces one to adapt and improvise under stress in much the same way that will be required to succeed in competition

Pre-contest warm ups: Getting an athlete ready for competition is a long process. In truth the outcome of the match is decided long before the day of competition by the respective preparation of the two contestants. The match itself is almost like a postscript to what has already transpired in the dojo, in prefight strategizing and in the minds of the combatants during those lonely moments of reflection and forethought prior to the bout. Here I help get Eddie Cummings ready for a match as he runs through last minute drills with Garry Tonon shortly before stepping out on stage where all of that preparation will be tested.

The value of feedback: progress in jiu jitsu mirrors that of progress in science- it comes from experimental trial and error over time. Feedback from those trials and errors leads to a new set of theories which are themselves subjected to vigorous testing and improvement in the light of failures, problems and successes. Over time remarkable progress can be made. Gordon Ryan discusses feedback with me after training with regards our back attack system that proved so effective for him at EBI 6. On his way to win the championship three of his opponents were defeated from back position (the other via our leg lock system). Here we propose modifications and improvements based on his feedback.

In all of my teaching I always try hard to convey the spirit of relentless attacks leading to submission. An interesting benefit of this is that as the students knowledge of attacks grow, so too does their knowledge of how to defend them. The deeper and richer your knowledge of how to perform a given move, the more you understand about how to prevent your opponent from doing the same. Here Eddie Cummings uses his depth of knowledge in leg locking to expertly position and hold his body to thwart my attempt at a variation of a heel hook applied from cross ashi garami and patiently work his escape

Young Nicky Ryan, younger brother of Gordon Ryan, recently turned 15 years old. Don't let that sweet innocent face fool you - if you blink while rolling with him your eyes will open with you in a submission hold. When I roll with him I often feel my life flash before my eyes...big things ahead for this prodigy...the power of time, planning and discipline- put them together and watch what seemed impossible happen

Training pace: most jiu jitsu students always train at the same pace and often without a clear goal in mind for that particular session. Learn to work at different speeds and match the intensity to your goals. Very often technical progress is optimized by working particulars skills at a slower speed. If the goal is preparation for a competitive match, then intensity levels will need to be raised to those expected at match time. Here Ms Ottavia Bourdain and I engage in skill development in ashi garami variations

Some of my favorite coaching memories involve the fascinating and complex relationship between jiu jitsu and MMA. Morning training at RGA with UFC star Rafael Natal and WSOF standout Joao Zeferino 😊

Eddie Cummings demonstrates to a terrified reporter why his nickname is "Wolverine." Note the fierce facial expression and dangerous claws asserting territorial dominance over his domain...#theydon'tcallmewolverinefornothingmofo

The path to efficiency in all physical movement begins with posture. The iron law of posture is this: For any given physical task, there is a posture that maximizes your ability perform it. For all the major scenarios of jiu jitsu, you must find that posture and train it as a habit in your movement. Only then will you be able to express the ideal of minimal effort for maximal effect. Here, Brian Glick and Garry St-Ledger demonstrate fine standing posture as they prepare to engage in the standing position

Eddie Cummings passionately explains the mechanics of the five finger exploding heart punch to myself and Ms Ottavia Bourdain. In the background several victims of the deadly technique receive emergency medical treatment and last rites...normal stuff for Monday morning class 😉

Self and Society: combat sports such as jiu jitsu teach us much about the complex interplay between ourselves and the people around us. It is on the face of it, an individual sport. You go and engage your opponent alone and as such, learn valuable lessons about self reliance and individual accountability. On the other hand, the entire learning and preparation process is very much social. We must learn to fit in to a group and form strong bonds of trust, mutual benefit and loss and cooperation. Jiu jitsu is fought and expressed as an individual but learned and perfected as part of a group - thus it provides an excellent balance between our need to develop strong individuality and our need to be a positive part of a social structure - nowhere is this more clearly seen than in the aftermath of success in competition. Here Eddie Cummings enjoys the admiration of friends, fans and support team after another big win

Guess what Mr Cummings will be working on first in today's class...#teachmetotiemybeltbeforeilearnanotherheelhooksetup 😉

At Gordon Ryan's belt promotion ceremony...Garry Tonon has just informed me that Eddie Cummings does not appear to know how to tie his belt properly...like two truly horrible and nasty sensei's we are plotting methods of publicly humiliating him for his infraction...😉🙄😊

All the various grappling arts, no matter how disparate they may appear on the surface, share one thing in common - every match, whether in training or competition, begins with gripping. I have never met a world champion in any grappling style who was not a master of imposing his her her grip upon the opponent, while denying the opponent's ability to the same. The higher the level of the sport - the more gripping skills will determine the outcome of the contest. Here Eddie Cummings and I run through some generic gripping drills prior to another big match. Mr Cummings came to me with with virtually no gripping skills - in a very short time he recognized the importance of this much neglected element of study and now is able to impose dangerous grips with all four limbs on all of his opponents. He is a fine counter example to the common, but erroneous belief that grip strength is the basis of gripping for grappling - he grips very effectively with only modest physical strength

Sad to hear my friend Chris Weidman is injured and out of his rematch with Luke Rockhold. Our lives swing endlessly from highs to lows, often in response to events outside our control. The one thing we can control is our response to those events. Keep focused on your goals and try hard not to be distracted by the disappointments and sorrows of the current day, but lifted by the vision of a better tomorrow. Have the confidence of a man who knows that if he has climbed a mountain before, he knows he has it in him to do it again. Here is a photo from happier times - it always brings a smile to my face, I hope it can for you to 😊

A truly talented friend and student - world championship level judoka and BJJ black belt Garry St-Ledger - part of the ideal fusion of judo and jiu jitsu that will create greater grapplers in future generations. He helped me greatly during the time after my hip replacement when I could barely stand, let alone demonstrate a throw - thank you 😊 Let's move the grappling arts forward through unity, not hold them back with artificial and childish divisions

As competition gets closer the focus of training begins to change from skill development to physical and tactical preparation for a specific opponent - intensity levels rise as Eddie Cummings and Garry Tonon countdown to another big match

All strength is derived from unity. Unity of purpose, unity of direction and unity of sentiment- when a team of hard working, ambitious people move and work together great things become possible.

High level competition: The ultimate test of all those hours and years of gym training. The strain shows as Eddie Cummings gets ready to go out again to do battle with Mansher Khera, the outstanding student of the great Marcelo Garcia. Eddie won a tightly contested battle. Here we discuss strategy between rounds. Observe the composure and calm Mr Cummings displays after a very grueling 30minutes of action with another 10 to go. An impressive example to us all

This is the day Garry Tonon was confirmed to fight the very talented and dangerous Rousimar Palhares: I am trying to ask him if he really wants this fight despite the obvious size and strength disadvantage. The smile on his face tells you not only the answer, but also just how fearless and confident this young prodigy is. Famously he went on to dominate all the leg lock exchanges in a great match against the man widely considered to the best and most fearsome leg locker in professional fighting.

Look at these lazy good for nothing students sleeping in the middle of class!! Disgraceful!! 😉

Trying to explain to Mr Cummings that the human body is composed of many more joints than just the ankles and knees...he's not buying it

Trying to explain to Mr Cummings that the human body is composed of many more joints than just the knees and ankles...he's not buying it...

A reporter once asked me in an interview, "I heard that when you first came to America you had a low opinion of grappling arts. When was the eureka moment that changed your mind." My deadpan answer: "The first time I got taken down, pinned helplessly and punched repeatedly in the face" 😉

Photographic proof that Eddie Cummings does indeed know at least one upper body submission 😅 (many more to come in the future...)

I sometimes think I have the best job in the world - watching up close the best athletes learning and improving in the greatest sport I know...

Just a few months after this night, Gordon Ryan went on to beat everyone at star studded ebi6 - testimony to his hard work and learning over five short years 😊

Great day of light training with a truly talented group of students 😊